* 0211787
* Septins in Aspergillus nidulans: Organization of the Division Site and the Cell Surface
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Michelle Momany, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 475,325.00

All cells arise from existing cells. The doubling of contents and partitioning
of those contents to daughter cells must be carefully controlled in all
organisms. The septin family of proteins plays a central role in organizing
proper growth and division of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
likely plays a similar role in many other eukaryotes. Septin complexes appear to
function as scaffolds, recruiting and tethering other proteins to appropriate
sites. Among the proteins that localize to the yeast division plane in a septin-
dependent manner are enzymes responsible for cross-wall synthesis and cell cycle
regulators that appear to coordinate growth with nuclear
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most knowledge of septin function comes
from elegant work in the unicellular fungus S. cerevisiae, septins have also
been found in multicellular fungi and in animals. Five septin genes, aspA-aspE,
have been identified in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans. In this
multicellular fungus a single septin, AspBp, localizes to several different
structures (septa, branches, and conidiophores). AspBp localization is post-
mitotic at septa where the localization pattern changes from a single ring to a
double ring back to a single ring during septal development. AspBp localization
is pre-mitotic at branches where the localization pattern changes from a compact
patch to a diffuse collar as branches emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis for this research is that complexes at septa, nascent branches, and
conidiophores in A. nidulans contain different combinations of both septin and
non-septin proteins and that membership within the same complex will vary over
time as development proceeds. This hypothesis will be tested using a variety of
approaches. Mutant phenotypes and localization will be examined for all five
septins. Interactions among septins and between septins and other proteins will
be identified using genetic and biochemical methods. Selected non-septin
proteins that interact with septin complexes at septa will be localized. These
studies will exploit the ability to predict and manipulate the development of
septa, and to a lesser extent other structures, in A. nidulans. The proposed
studies will likely lead to a better understanding of septin function in
multicellular organisms and of basic processes in the development of filamentous
fungi.&lt;br/&gt;