* 0211572
* Transpolar Arcs and Hemispheric Asymmetry During Northward Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Judy Cumnock, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 07/31/2005
* USD 248,845.00

Understanding of the dynamics of the magnetosphere-ionosphere system, the
coupling between the two regions, and its dependence on interplanetary
conditions in particular, is of fundamental importance to almost every aspect of
magnetospheric and ionospheric physics. In this project, electric and magnetic
field and precipitating particle data from polar orbiting satellites such as
DMSP F12, F13, F14 and F15, are used while the Polar UVI instrument provides
measurements of auroral emissions. The SuperDARN radar array provides
ionospheric convection maps. Ace, Wind, and IMP-8 provide solar wind velocity,
density and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) measurements. Time periods are
utilized when Polar UVI provides a global view of the auroral distribution and
at least two DMSP satellites measure particle properties, electric fields, and
field-aligned currents in the upper ionosphere. Utilizing these data the
understanding will be improved of the occurrence of trans-polar arcs (TPAs) and
theta aurora in both hemispheres and the detailed plasma flows associated with
them. In particular, the existence of high latitude TPAs is one of the most
unusual features seen in the ionosphere and implies an unusual magnetospheric
topology. The electrodynamics of TPAs is directly related to how coupling occurs
between the solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere system during northward IMF.
Analysis of the unique data set described will provide insight into simultaneous
behavior and/or existence of TPA in both hemispheres and thus also into the
topology of the magnetosphere.