* 0211068
* Dendrimer-Encapsulated Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Richard Crooks, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2005
* USD 540,000.00

In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
Professor Richard Crooks and coworkers at Texas A&amp;M University will
synthesize and characterize dendrimer-encapsulated metal particles. The
potential advantage of these materials is convenient access to nanometer-sized
metal particles, on the order of 1-3 nanometers, having both high monodispersity
and good stability. These nanomaterials are to be prepared by a two step
process. First, the dendrimer is exposed to a metal ion-containing solution.
This results in complexation between the metal ions and ligands within the
dendrimer. The second step involves chemical reduction of the organic/inorganic
composite, which results in formation of an intradendrimer metal nanoparticle.
Each dendrimer acts as a discreet nanoreactor, and only those metal ions within
the dendrimer coalesce into the resulting nanoparticle. This means that in
principle every nanoparticle will contain the same number of metal atoms. This
is significant because at the present time there are few methods available for
preparing monodisperse metallic metal clusters in the 1-3 nm size range that are
both surface active and soluble in many solvents. This size range is interesting
for a number of reasons, but mainly because it is the range over which metal
atoms undergo a transition from atomic to metallic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monodispersed metal nanoparticles have many applications
to the technology sector. Applications include electronics, biomedical
applications, fundamental studies of catalysis, and chemical and biological
sensors. In addition to these broader impacts, this work invites many
collaborative research projects. Catalytic properties of the dendrimer-
encapsulated metal particles will be evaluated by colleagues at Trinity
University. Commercial applications will be evaluated with colleagues at the
Michigan Molecular Institute. Additional characterization of the nanoparticles
is to be done with synchrotron experiments to be performed in South Korea.
Finally, this proposal will support local high school students and
undergraduates to work on the project during the summers.&lt;br/&gt;