* 0211253
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Role of Clay Structures in Clay-Epoxy Nanocomposite
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Hassan El-Shall, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0211253&lt;br/&gt;Elshall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Hassan El-Shall and Dr. Charles
Beatty, both at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Mervat Hassan, the Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Cairo, Egypt. The three
investigators plan to perform a systematic study of the factors and conditions
that will lead to a significant improvement in the mechanical, thermal and
solvent resistant properties of epoxy/clay nanocomposite used to manufacture
tubesheet for high temperatures and chemically aggressive environments. Clay
nanolayers are more effective in improving mechanical properties, thermal
stability, dimensional stability and solvent resistance of the epoxy glassy
matrix. Basic understanding of the mechanisms involved and role of clay
properties are relatively unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will benefit researchers in academic and
industrial organizations in both countries. Polymers reinforced by low weight
percentages (1-10 wt.%) of nanoscopically dispersed organically modified layered
silicates are attracting the attention of researchers because of the
unprecedented suite of new and enhanced properties relative to the unfilled
resin. The PIs have considerable experience in studying minerals and have the
appropriate background to carry out this research. The subject is of particular
interest to Egypt where high value added products derived from inexpensive
starting materials are in great demand. This project is being supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;