* 0211493
* CSHL Conference on Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages; Madison, Wisconsin, August 20-25, 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,000.00

The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference, traditionally held at
Cold Spring Harbor and now being held in alternate years at the University of
Wisconsin in Madison and at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, is a central
forum for the presentation of new results in prokaryotic molecular genetics. On
the order of 200-400 participants attend, representing laboratories throughout
the world, and most present either short talks or posters. Its breadth makes it
an important focus for the exchange of information in this era of scientific
specialization. Topics covered include fundamental work on bacterial
replication, recombination, repair, transposition, transcription, control of
gene expression, translation, signalling, heat shock, protein folding and
secretion, cell development and division, and pathogenesis. For many graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, this is the first large meeting at which they
have an opportunity to speak. Due to its highly interactive nature, the meeting
provides an important opportunity for these young scientists to meet and talk to
the senior scientists they know from the literature. In response to the large
numbers of students who attend the meeting and the diversity of topics covered,
established and distinguished scientists are invited to chair each session. This
strengthens the meeting because each chairperson gives a short introduction in
which he or she summarizes some of the key facets of the field to be covered and
provides a conceptual framework for the major questions that the talks will
address. As an additional benefit, publicizing the judiciously chosen
chairpeople and session topics in announcements of the meeting, encourages the
submission of abstracts in exciting new areas and stimulates attendance by a
larger constituency