* 0211857
* Technology Development:  Novel Techniques for Discovery of Patterns of Gene Regulation Within Complex Eukaryotic Tissues.
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* David Galbraith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 03/31/2005
* USD 625,227.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel techniques for
measurement of global gene expression within eukaryotic organisms which will
permit analysis of the individual contributions of the different cell types
contained within complex tissues. &lt;br/&gt;The project comprises a series of
proof-of-concept experiments primarily using Arabidopsis thaliana. Two
strategies will be employed. The first is to label nuclei in a cell type-
specific manner using the Green Fluorescent Protein of Aequorea victoria
translationally fused to proteins that accumulate within the nucleus. This will
be done by producing transgenic plants in which the production of a nuclear
targeted form of GFP is under the control of cell type specific promoters. The
presence of specifically labeled nuclei will be verified by fluorescence
microscopy, and the individual fluorescent nuclei purified from cellular
homogenates using fluorescence activated sorting. RNA will then be extracted
from the nuclei and will be hybridized to DNA microarrays. Proof-of-concept will
first involve validation of the different technical steps of the strategy, using
promoters that are constitutively active, and then will involve analysis of
global gene expression within the cell types defined using promoters of known
cellular specificities. The second strategy is to label polyribosomes in an
analogous cell-type specific manner. This will be done through epitope tagging
of individual ribosomal proteins whose expression is regulated by promoters
having cell type-specific patterns of expression. Polyribosomes will then be
prepared and the associated mRNA employed for microarray hybridization. Proof-
of-concept experiments, as before, will involve validation of the technical
aspects of this strategy with constitutive promoters, followed by use of
promoters having defined cellular specificities to chart global gene expression
patterns within these cells. &lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of this project
are three-fold: a molecular toolkit (reagents, recombinant DNA molecules, plant
lines), the associated descriptions of how to use this toolkit for examination
of gene expression within living organisms, and the results of the experiments
that are done to validate the methodology. All outcomes will be freely
disseminated to the scientific community in a timely manner. The molecular
toolkits will be provided to interested individuals on request. The descriptions
of the methods and the results from the experiments will be posted to the
project website and, as appropriate, will be published in the scientific
literature. The methods are designed to be entirely general in scope, and should
be transferable to other eukaryotic organisms, including those of other than the
plant kingdom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
propose to distribute all recombinant clones to the academic community
&lt;br/&gt;free of charge. Clone recipients would be expected to pay
transportation &lt;br/&gt;charges for express carriers. Should specific clones
prove inordinately &lt;br/&gt;popular, we reserve the right to institute nominal
fees for their &lt;br/&gt;distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Property issues will be handled according to the requirements &lt;br/&gt;of the
two institutions. Negotiations are currently underway between the
&lt;br/&gt;relevant technology transfer officers to establish an appropriate
mechanism &lt;br/&gt;for development of intellectual property which might
develop from the &lt;br/&gt;research. It is expected that UA and UCR will enter
into an &lt;br/&gt;interinstitutional agreement (IIA) at the appropriate time
for the &lt;br/&gt;commercialization of IP. As UA is the lead institution on the
NSF grant, it &lt;br/&gt;is also expected that UA should be the managing
institution for purposes of &lt;br/&gt;commercialization. An IAA template is
being developed based on an existing &lt;br/&gt;UC document. Relevant features
are a 50:50 split of inventions (to &lt;br/&gt;simplify procedures), and a
minimal time for delay of publications to &lt;br/&gt;permit patent protection to
be sought (currently envisaged to be 60 days).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We shall
employ common standards for acquiring and archiving all microarray
&lt;br/&gt;data as described at: &lt;br/&gt;http://plantgenome.sdsc.edu/Awardees
Meeting/Bioinformatics_and_Databases/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;