* 0211391
* LTREB:  Long-term Research in Environmental Biology: Microevolution in the Fast Lane
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Michael Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 57,608.00

0211391&lt;br/&gt;Bell&lt;br/&gt;LTREB&lt;br/&gt;Integrating pattern and process
has always been a crucial but frustrating objective for&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary
biology. Analysis of rapid evolution in extant populations provides a unique
means&lt;br/&gt;to integrate evolutionary pattern and process. To that end,
annual samples from the Loberg Lake,&lt;br/&gt;Alaska population of threespine
stickleback fish, Gasterosteus aculeatus, will be used to study&lt;br/&gt;rapid
evolution. This population was founded by a natural invasion of anadromous
(i.e., sea run)&lt;br/&gt;stickleback after the native stickleback population
was exterminated in 1982. It has been&lt;br/&gt;sampled annually since 1990, and
lateral plate phenotypes have been scored in all samples.&lt;br/&gt;Lateral
plates are modified scales that form a single row of armor on each side of the
body.&lt;br/&gt;Lateral plate morphs (i.e., complete, partial, low) and low
morph-plate number are heritable,&lt;br/&gt;subject to strong natural selection,
and exhibit extensive adaptive geographic variation in western&lt;br/&gt;North
America. &lt;br/&gt;This study will document maximum evolutionary rates, the
trajectory of evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;change, and patterns of transient
polymorphism. These patterns can be integrated with known&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary
mechanisms. The increasing frequency of low morphs and their declining
mean&lt;br/&gt;plate number can be explained by natural selection in many
similar populations. Based on the plate phenotypes of the original Loberg Lake
stickleback population before it was exterminated and comparison to other lake
stickleback populations, lateral plate&lt;br/&gt;divergence should continue in
the Loberg Lake population until the low morph is fixed and mean&lt;br/&gt;plate
number declines to about five per side. This LTREB award will support continued
annual sampling of the Loberg Lake population.&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide
an unusually detailed account of rapid phenotypic evolution with implications
for divergence during speciation and post-glacial adaptive radiation of
threespine stickleback. It will complement ongoing research in paleontology,
functional morphology, natural selection, genetics, phylogeogaphy, and
developmental evolutionary biology of G. aculeatus. It will prolong a long
series of annual samples in which rapid evolution of plates and other traits and
trait correlations can be studied.