* 0211774
* EEP:  The Teaching Challenges of Engineering Faculty: Insights from a Model Instructional Development Program
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Robin Adams, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2006
* USD 374,973.00

The instructional development program of the University of Washington provides a
rich context for learning about the challenges that faculty face in efforts to
enhance their teaching, and how to help faculty face these challenges. This
project will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Document the unique instruction-related
concerns/questions of engineering faculty and the types of responses that
fulfill these concerns.&lt;br/&gt;2. Document the complexities associated with
designing and executing instructional development services in the context of
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;3. Document cultural factors important for engineering
instructional development.&lt;br/&gt;4. Share this information with others
interested in supporting faculty efforts to enhance/modify their teaching
(including campus level instructional developers, workshop designers, national
reform groups, and even faculty themselves).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
take advantage of these opportunities through a combination of research and
website development activities. Specifically, we propose to conduct research on
successful instructional development efforts through a combination of debriefing
interviews and case study observations. The results of this study will be
available to engineering educators and other programs through an innovative
user-centered website -&lt;br/&gt;the Engineering Teaching Source. The content
of the website will be derived from the insights gained from the debriefing
interviews and case study observations. The design of the website will emphasize
multiple paths by which faculty / instructional developers can find
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed research will provide insight
into the needs of faculty as they change their teaching practices and provides
the engineering education community with this insight through the design and
publication of the Engineering Teaching Source. This work will benefit all who
are interested in helping engineering faculty address teaching challenges,
including instructional developers in campus-wide centers, those who create
workshops for engineering faculty, those funding and running systematic reform
efforts, and faculty&lt;br/&gt;themselves. This work will complement the
spectrum of efforts to enhance the teaching of engineering by focusing on the
people most pivotal to the teaching - the faculty
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;