* 0211639
* Quantum Chemical Evaluation of Inter- and Intra-molecular Interactions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Kenneth Merz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 325,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to use modern quantum chemistry to provide
accurate and unique insights into inter and intramolecular interactions in
biomolecular systems, using a continuum representation for the solvent. The
linear-scaling semi empirical divide and conquer algorithm coupled with standard
Poisson-Boltzmann theory will be applied to biologically relevant problems to
study inter and intramolecular interactions in proteins. Classical MD
simulations and single point QM calculations will be carried out to estimate the
value of the dielectric constant of a protein. The Poisson-Boltzmann charge
transfer approach for the incorporation of charge transfer effects will be
further developed. Experimental information generated on coiled-coil and salt
bridge interactions in proteins and peptides will be used to validate the
approach. Given the advances in computer hardware and in numerical algorithms
for the solution of the Schrodinger equation, quantum chemistry can now
realistically contribute at the all-atom level to our understanding of
macromolecular structure and function. Modern quantum chemical approaches offer
several advantages over classically based methods: (1)The electrostatic
representation is more accurate because environmental, conformational,
polarization and charge transfer effects are explicitly included unlike
classical models. (2) There is no need to define the dielectric constant because
dielectric relaxation is explicitly included in QM models. (3) The ways in which
quantum chemical methods can be improved have been thoroughly documented (i.e.,
inclusion of correlation and improvements in the basis set).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad impact on the development
of novel quantum mechanical approaches that can be applied to important
biological problems. The research project will train students in formal theory,
computer programming, biological structure and manuscript
preparation/publication. The students will also have the opportunity to interact
with other biological group at Penn State and at other universities in the USA
and abroad. Indeed, each student will be required to attend at least one
national or international meeting per year to present his/her results in either
a poster or oral format. A quantum bioinformatics database (QDB:
http://qbiodb.chem.psu.edu/) has been created, which will aid in the
dissemination and analysis of results from this work. This work is funded
jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;