* 0211215
* Transition to Maize Agriculture Along the Pacific Coast of Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Douglas Kennett, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 186,354.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Douglas Kennett and his colleagues
will conduct two field seasons of archaeological and paleoenvironmental research
on the Pacific coast of Mexico. The primary scientific aim of this work is to
study the transition to maize agriculture in two different coastal settings-one
in the state of Chiapas and the other in Guerrero-between 7,500 and 2,700 years
ago (BP). and the impacts that the emergence of intensive agriculture had on
local environments in each area. The most recent biogeographical and genetic
studies indicate that maize evolved from a wild grass (teosinte) in the Balsas
River Valley, which runs from the central highlands of Mexico to the Pacific
Ocean. A domesticated form of maize appears to have spread out of the Balsas
River Valley as early as 7,500 BP. One of the hallmarks of Middle American
civilizations, maize agriculture was well established in a variety of different
environments by 2,500 BP. Recent work in Middle America indicates that the
processes involved in this transition were complex and spatially variable. At a
minimum the sequence of events included: 1) initial domestication of maize; 2)
adoption of maize by foragers living in a wide range of habitats; 3) subsequent
experimentation leading to agricultural development or stability of mixed
subsistence strategies; 4) ultimate emergence of more intensive agricultural
strategies in certain locations; and finally 5) spread of agricultural economies
via adoption or population movement/replacement. In an evolutionary sense, the
initial adoption and use of key domesticates by foraging populations living in
different environments was a crucial part of the ultimate development of
agrarian life in Middle America.

To study the process of adoption and development this multidisciplinary project
employs: 1) archaeological survey and excavation of sites dating to this
transitional interval, 2) off-site sediment coring, and associated
geomorphological/pollen studies, to detect the initial introduction of maize
into each area and to track vegetation changes and impacts to the landscape
associated with intensified agriculture. The emergence of agriculture is one of
the most significant transitions in the cultural evolution of our species. Its
spread around the world was, and continues to be, a complex process and
archaeological evidence from different parts of the world indicates that the
details of this transformation varied greatly, particularly the types of
domesticates adopted and the resistance of foraging populations to use them.
Reconstructing the foraging strategies that were in use in a variety of habitats
prior to the spread of key domesticates, like maize, will provide us with a
better understanding of the primary mechanisms underlying this fundamental
economic transition.