* 0211105
* Environmental Justice: An Examination of Interaction Between Environmental Justice Activists and Opponents
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Dorceta Taylor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2004
* USD 81,994.00

SES-0211105&lt;br/&gt;Dorceta E. Taylor&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental justice advocates oppose locating
facilities (like incinerators, landfills, waste-treatment plants, and chemical
factories) in minority communities in the U.S. They maintain that such
facilities expose minorities to disproportionate environmental risks, hazards,
and dangerous working and living conditions that, in turn, lead to impaired
health. Economic conditions are important too because activists frequently
operate in low-income, minority communities with high unemployment. The
environmental justice movement has been opposing corporations for two decades,
very little is known about the dynamics of the movement or its potential for
social change. Hence, this study will examine (a) the relationship between the
environmental justice movement and their main targets of influence or opponents
- mainstream environmental groups, the government and corporations; (b) the
range and effectiveness of movement tactics used by environmental justice
activists; (c) how movement opponents adapt and respond to the tactical
innovations of activists; and (d) the relationship between resource mobilization
and movement insurgency.&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine environmental justice
activism and government and corporate responses to it from 1980-2005. This time
frame captures the full period of American environmental justice activism
allowing the PI to track the rise of the environmental justice movement. The
study will use a multi-method approach to data collection and analysis. The
study has three basic components: (a) a newspaper event history analysis of
environmental justice issues, (b) an analysis of environmental justice
organizations' accounting of the activities they have been engaged in, and (c)
an examination of the amount of funds organizations receive from foundations and
government (environmental) agencies. The researcher will use Lexis/Nexis, OCLC
Firstsearch and Proquest to find relevant articles that appear in local,
regional and national newspapers, journals and magazines. Newspapers will be the
primary source of the event history analysis. However, other sources -- like
published case studies -- will be used for contextual information on particular
issues. . A database will be established to record the structure, ideology, and
actions in which organizations report they have been engaged. This database will
be compiled from surveys organizations listed in the People of Color
Environmental Groups Directory (1994, 2000), from websites and information
gathered from funders. The unit of analysis is the environmental justice
movement. Though organizational-level data is being collected, analysis will be
made at movement level. &lt;br/&gt;This study will provide valuable information
on institutional and tactical interactions between the environmental justice
movement, its opponents and supporters. It will also provide valuable data that
will help us better understand how environmental justice organizations and
corporations frame issues, develop mobilizing strategies and cope with
conflicts. The study uses social movement theory to examine environmental
justice movement dynamics. It expands the boundaries of prior environmental
justice research by seeking to examine both activist and corporate claims and
government actions. The study has the potential to answer questions of
significant import as the researcher examines the relationship between
environmental justice, corporate and government actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;