* 0211718
* RUI: Physical Properties and Spectroscopy of Glasses Related to Intermediate Range Order
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 189,000.00

This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI) project. It is funded by
the Ceramics Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program. The glass science
research focuses on the existence and effects of, "intermediate-range-order" in
oxide glasses. It will involve undergraduates in a variety of projects: (1)
Development of new solution chemistry for glass formation that avoids carbon
dioxide retention and allows fabrication of glasses with high homogeneity and
with extraordinarily high alkali concentrations. (2) Development of novel
glasses in binary vanadates, borates, bismuthates, and various ternary systems
through rapid cooling. (3) Determination of the relation between elasticity and
other physical properties and the intermediate-range-order present. (4)
Exploration of packing as a universal measure of glass structure using computer
simulation or experiments to achieve random mixing of constructed clusters of
atoms in shapes hypothesized for glass. (5) Neutron scattering, NMR, FT-Raman,
FTIR, ultrasonic velocity of sound, and Brillouin light scattering will be used
to detect intermediate-range-order. In particular, high-field NMR will be used
for the first time to determine the intermediate site origins of tetrahedral
boron atom in selected borate glasses and crystals. (6) Finally, students will
help optimize a state-of-the-art twin roller-quenching system for glass
fabrication. High school students and teachers will also participate in this
work as a way of motivating these students to pursue careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI)
project. It is funded by the Ceramics Program and the Condensed Matter Physics
Program. At least 12 undergraduates and several high school students and
teachers will participate in significant, publishable glass science research
projects. The determination of intermediate range order (clusters of atoms) and
the impact of this order on a variety of physical properties are the main
scientific goals. Novel glasses will be formed using rapid cooling and new
chemical methods. The atomic structure will be determined using various
spectroscopies. Properties such as density, optical absorption, and thermal
effects will be measured and compared to structure. Students will be involved in
instrument enhancement as well. All participants will receive training and
encouragement to pursue careers as scientists: In the past 15 years, more than
100 students have been trained to do high level research at a school of ca. 1100
students. In support of these goals, the project includes active collaborations
with major research centers in the US, Europe, and Japan: Rutherford-Appleton
lab near Oxford, England and the Institute Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France
(Neutron scattering); Indiana University and Iowa State University (NMR); Iowa
State University and NHRF, Athens, Greece (Raman and infrared spectroscopy);
Fudan University (Shanghai) second harmonic generation; Sojo University, Japan
(ultrasound); Tsukuba University, Japan, (Brillouin and Raman Light Scattering);
Rostock University, Germany, (x-ray diffraction). &lt;br/&gt;