* 0211150
* Conductive Polymer / Superconductor Nanocomposite Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* John McDevitt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 390,000.00

This research program targets the design, preparation and characterization of
novel conductive polymer / cuprate superconductor nano-composite assemblies.
These hybrid structures will be generated in such a manner that the electrical
communication between the two component conductors is maximized with the goal of
fostering the flow of supercurrent into the polymer over macroscopically large
distances. Novel low temperature transport measurements completed with
superconductor / polymer / superconductor nano-bridges will allow for the
exploration of the low temperature electron-transfer phenomena and proximity
effects that occur in such hybrid systems. This new program will target
experiments in the following four areas: a) molecular engineering of conductive
polymer compounds for cryogenic applications; b) direct observation of polymeric
proximity effects using scanning probe methods; c) supercurrent flow through
polymer / superconductor nano-bridges; and d) suppression of superconductivity
in conductive polymer coated ultra-thin high-Tc films. Through this highly
interdisciplinary program, a series of scientists will be trained in the
important emerging area of hybrid electronic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
integration of electronically conductive polymers into functional
superconductor-based structures is leading to a variety of new sensors and
devices which may exhibit enhanced sensitivity and selectivity that is not
currently available with the conventional devices. This interdisciplinary
program targets the preparation and characterization of a new class of
conductive polymer / high-Tc superconductor nano-composite assemblies. In
addition to the important knowledge base that will be derived from these
studies, it should be emphasized that this program possesses an important
educational component. Indeed, through this highly interdisciplinary program a
series of scientists will be trained in the important emerging area of hybrid
electronic materials with enhanced processibility, molecular tunability and
interesting sensor / display capabilities available with such polymeric
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;