* 0211659
* Functional Genomics of Phytophthora-Plant Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Sophien Kamoun, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,928,581.00



Plant pathogenic microbes have the remarkable ability to manipulate biochemical,
physiologc al and morphological processes in their host plants. These
manipulations are achieved through a diverse array of virulence and avirulence
factors that an either promote infection or trigger defense responses.
Oomycetes, such as Phytophthora, downy-mildews and Pythium, form a unique branch
of eukaryotic plant pathogens with an independent evolutionary history. Among
the oomy etes, Phytophthora spp. cause some of the most destructive plant
diseases in the world, and are arguably the most devastating pathogens of dicot
plants. or example, Phytophthora infestans, the Irish potato famine pathogen,
causes late blight, a disease that results in multibillion-dollar losses in
potato and tomato production and is considered a significant threat to global
food security. Structural genomics studies of Phytophthora are well under way
within the framework of the Phytophthora Genome Consortium. However, despite
their economic impact and singular phylogeny, oomycetes remain relatively
understudied at a molecular level and key molecular events modulating basc
pathogenicity and plant response remain poorly understood. The overall obje tive
of this project is to use the technology of virus-mediated gene expression to
carry out high throughput fun tional screening of P. infestans genes in plants.
The specific objectives are to: 1. Perform high throughput functional expression
screening of P. infestans DNAs in tomato and tobacco using a potato virus X
(PVX)-based vector to identify DNAs that indu e resistance responses, disease-
like symptoms and/or altered disease susceptibility. 2. Characterize the
selected P. infestans DNAs and the encoded proteins with regards to primary
sequence, gene expression, biological activity, and cellular localization during
infection. 3. Characterize the molecular and cellular responses of tomato and
tobacco to the sele ted P. infestans DNAs. The transient nature of the PVX
expression system and the use of a recently developed Agrobacterium binary PVX
vector will allow functional analysis of pathogen genes at an unprecedented high
throughput rate. The functional screening will unravel a battery of novel
Phytophthora genes that trigger a variety of cellular and molecular responses in
plant cells and will firmly establish functional connections between pathogen
genes and plant processes. The knowledge gained from these studies will provide
significant insight into key molecular processes regulating an economically
important pathosystem and will provide novel tools for improvement of disease
resistan e in crop plants. Information and material generated from this project
will be made freely available to the s ientific community through an interactive
website that will include an annotated database of the selected DNAs and
corresponding phenotype and expression data. The project will also offer
outstanding opportunities for interdis iplinary training and outreach activities
in functional genomics and bioinformatics revolving around the use of
spectacular functional assays, historically and economically important disease
pathosystems, and challenging concepts on the interaction between plants and
microbes. Deliverables: 1. Libraries of P. infestans cDNAs in virus vectors,
including collection of Phytophthora genes that trigger various cellular and
molecular responses in plant cells 2. Phenotypic and expression analyses of
tomato and tobacco treated with Phytophthora effectors. 3. Phytophthora
Functional Genomics Database (PFGD). Contact Information for Deliverables: 1. S.
Kamoun (kamoun.1@osu.edu) 2. Mark Waugh (mew@ncgr.org)