* 0211418
* Topics in Nonlinear Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Marine Carrasco, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2005
* USD 139,562.00

This project contains three areas of research: the Generalized Method of Moments
(GMM) with an infinity of moment conditions; Nonparametric estimation of a
density when data are observed with measurement error; Parameter stability and
unit-root tests against nonlinear alternatives. First, the project extends GMM
with a continuum of moments to account for time-series and correlated moment
conditions. An important application is the estimation of continuous-time models
used in finance. While in such cases the likelihood does not have a closed-form
expression, the characteristic function is often known or can be estimated via
simulations. The characteristic function gives rise to a continuum of moment
conditions which, if fully exploited, permit efficient estimation of the model.
Special attention is devoted to the characterization of the moment conditions,
which allow efficiency to be obtained in Markovian models. These results will
also improve our understanding of how well efficiency can be approached in non-
markovian cases.&lt;br/&gt; The second part of this project proposes a new
nonparametric estimator of the density when data are measured with an additive
error. The method consists in inverting an integral operator. It is shown that
by imposing weak restrictions on the model, the estimator can achieve much
faster rates of convergence than the usual estimators. The first two parts of
this project draw from the statistical literature on integral operators and
inverse problems. This research will highlight the usefulness of operator theory
and contribute to make it popular in econometrics.&lt;br/&gt; Third, new methods
are developed for testing when a nuisance parameter is not identified under the
null hypothesis. This problem arises frequently in macro or financial
econometrics. For example, in the presence of transaction costs, the real
exchange rate is expected to behave in a nonlinear fashion. A natural
specification is then a threshold model. In this context, testing whether the
purchasing power parity holds consists in testing the null hypothesis of a unit
root versus a stationary threshold alternative. The project proposes a test and
derives its asymptotic distribution. This test should positively impact
empirical work, as it is more powerful than existing tests. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;