* 0211267
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:   Development of Microarrays for Evaluating Phylogenetic and Functional Diversity of the Microbial World
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Syed Hashsham, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 25,000.00

0211267&lt;br/&gt;Hashsham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description:&lt;br/&gt;This
award is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Syed Hashsham, Assistant
Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan and Dr. Essam Zaki, Genetic Engineering &amp;
Biotechnology Research Institute (GEBRI), Mubarak City of Scientific Research,
Alexandria, Egypt. They plan to develop a microbial diversity microarray that
will encompass the key elements of microbial biodiversity in both functional and
phylogenetic sense. There is a need for such a comprehensive microarray in areas
such as diagnostics, air, water, food, animal, and plant safety, soil and root
ecology, and waste treatment. Approximately 1,000 oligonucleotide probes will be
designed using available sequences in existing phylogenetic and structural gene
databases. For selected organisms and functions, probes will also be designed to
detect single nucleotide polymorphisms and to differentiate among strains
relevant to human health. Additional probes targeting large phylogenetic and
functional groups in a nested manner will also be included. This latter set of
probes will be helpful in exploring the extant of the uncultured microbial
world. Specificity and sensitivity of gene probes, and quantification of
molecular data will be the three key aspects of this work. The potential of the
array will be evaluated in describing and differentiating biodiversity of water
bodies of different level of perturbation such as the Nile River, Lake Michigan
and remote springs at Yellowstone National Park. Hypotheses related to stability
of microbial communities in response to perturbations will be tested, and links
between stability and biodiversity will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the genetic
composition and ecology of native bacterial populations have been constrained by
their dependence on culture-based methods. Several mixed microbial communities
have been analyzed by various molecular methods. These methods are generally
non- quantitative, may differentiate only 20-30 populations, may only give a
coarse pattern of fingerprint (instead of diversity), and may not give any
functional information. The proposed development may lead to the broader
application of the microarray technology in the future. It is expected that a
transfer of microarray technology to Egypt will be accomplished, leading to
potential use in local applications. Dr. Hashsham's work in sites in Egypt will
expand the environments for testing of the microbial diversity array. The
project will give graduate students of Dr. Hashsham, who are supported from
other sources, an opportunity to engage in international research collaboration.
This collaborative project will help the career of Dr. Hashsham, who is a recent
Ph.D. graduate, and will help enhance Egypt's research in the area of
biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;