* 0211314
* New Mexico CETP Follow-On Funding
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Patrick Scott, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

The purpose of this project is to conduct a comprehensive summative evaluation
of the results and impact of the Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher
Preparation in New Mexico (NMCETP) for a period of three years. Accountability
&amp; Development Associates, Inc. (ADA), a private consulting firm in
Albuquerque that has been assisting this CETP with evaluation expertise since
1998, is continuing to provide their expertise in this phase of NMCETP
operations. The project is focusing on the impact of NMCETP on teacher quality
and student learning in K-12 classrooms with the assistance of facilitators at
New Mexico State University and the University of New Mexico. The New Mexico
teacher induction/mentoring programs are in place, but locating, observing, and
longitudinally tracking NMCETP graduates will be very labor intensive because
they are located in dispersed, often rural, areas across the fifth largest state
in the US. For purposes of this evaluation an NMCETP student will be defined as
any who has 1) completed a degree at one of the NMCETP-participating four-year
institutions, 2) been certified to teach, 3) secured a teaching position in New
Mexico, and 4) taken at least one NMCETP new or reformed course as a part of
pre-service education. These graduates will serve as the NMCETP treatment group.
Data analysis will be structured to allow for comparisons across groups as well
as those students who completed more than one NMCETP reformed courses. Control
group participants will be matched demographically as closely as possible to
treatment group participants, but will not have experienced NMCETP teacher
preparation programs. A reformed course is defined for NMCETP as a course that
has been changed or developed in mathematics, science, and education designed to
strengthen the backgrounds of pre-service teachers by modeling best
instructional practices and teaching pedagogies. Inquiry-based, hands-on
methodologies were touchstones of these reformed and/or new courses. Two
fundamental areas of inquiry will be the basis of the continuation evaluation:
1) post- preparation mathematics and science teacher quality, and 2) mathematics
and science teacher preparation program sustainability. ADA will use instruments
developed by the Center for Applied Research and Educational Improvement at the
University of Minnesota for the Core Evaluation. ADA has participated in
evaluation meetings in Minneapolis hosted by the Core Evaluation staff, and
piloted some of the Core instruments with modifications to capture the
complexities of NMCETP, which has met the needs of each participating campus in
different ways.