* 0211816
* Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-Nuclear Coupling, Time Resolved Dynamics, and Magnetic Perturbations of Biomolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Paul Champion, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2008
* USD 740,000.00

The objectives of this research are to achieve a better understanding of the
optical properties of biological molecules, both in and out of equilibrium, and
to apply this knowledge to elucidate their mechanism of action. Resonance Raman
scattering and its time domain analog, femtosecond coherence spectroscopy (FCS)
will be used to probe the electronic and nuclear structure/function
relationships in heme proteins like myoglobin, hemoglobin and cytochrome c.
Related techniques such as electronic absorption, pump-probe kinetics,
fluorescence, infrared, nuclear resonance vibrational (NRVS) spectroscopy, and
magnetic field perturbations will also be used to characterize samples and aid
in the assignment of the low frequency motions revealed using novel FCS
techniques developed in the prior award period. Picosecond methodology will be
developed using synchronized self-modelocked Ti:sapphire lasers to carry out
both time resolved resonance Raman scattering and to extend the range of kinetic
studies into the ns regime. Dynamic absorption lineshapes will be measured using
broad-band continuum techniques so that time dependent resonance conditions can
be properly incorporated into the analysis of vibrational relaxation obtained
from the Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman scattering. Theoretical advances in
understanding the absolute magnitude and phase of the resonant FCS signals will
be exploited to eliminate non-oscillatory background signals and allow improved
detection of low frequency modes. Phase and amplitude excitation profiles will
be carried out to reveal inhomogeneities and anharmonicities associated with the
low frequency motions. Low temperature measurement techniques will be developed
so that FCS experiments can be carried out as a function of the sample "glass"
transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a broad impact that underlies
the field of protein dynamics that is crucial to our basic understanding of
living systems. This work involves the development of state-of-the-art laser
based spectroscopy that is applied to biomolecular systems. Instrumentation and
theoretical development will enhance the infrastructure for doing time-resolved
protein dynamics research by producing an effective FCS system that expands the
use of this experimental technique by making it routinely accessible. These
studies are significant not only in their relationship to the biological
sciences, but also in their connection to our understanding of basic light-
matter interaction associated with complex systems in the condensed phase.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in cutting edge optical and
biological techniques that benefit society through the enhancement of the human
resource infrastructure. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;