* 0211109
* Collaborative Proposal: Landscape Reconstruction in Zacatecas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Ben Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 56,084.00

This project will produce new information about climatic changes and human
impacts along the Northern Frontier of Mesoamerica, A.D. 500-900, a period when
civilization touched areas previously populated by small farming villages and
bands of hunter-gatherers. In Guanajuato, Jalisco, Zacatecas, and Durango,
Mexico, large ceremonial centers sprang up, surrounded by clusters of
population. One such population cluster around the site of La Quemada,
Zacatecas, is the scene for this study. Between A.D. 500-900, a large community
dominated the valley and its tributaries with a monumental ceremonial center,
roadways, extensive terrace systems, and over 200 villages along the Malpaso
River. &lt;br/&gt;Professor Ben Nelson and doctoral candidate Michelle Elliott
of Arizona State University, along with Professor Christopher Fisher of Kent
State University, will collaborate with geologist Roberto Molina of the National
Autonomous University, to collect plant remains, sediments, magnetic samples,
and charcoal for radiocarbon dating and to create a geological map of the area.
They and other scientists will analyze the samples to test hypotheses about
changes in vegetation, erosion, floodplain characteristics, and fires that
occurred before, during, and after a period of intensive human settlement around
La Quemada. They will recover this information by cutting trenches in the
floodplain as well as by surveying the landscape to record landforms and parent
materials that may have contributed to the accumulation of sediments and soils
in the floodplain. Their goal is to reconstruct the history of that accumulation
and its relationship to human occupation.&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists have long
suspected that the changes in the environment played a role in civilization's
fluctuations in this region. They hypothesize that colonists settled the
frontier during a period of increased rainfall and that several centuries later,
a climatic reversal led to the region's abandonment. Since Pedro Armillas
formulated this "arid margin" hypothesis, archaeologists have learned a great
deal the settlements centered on La Quemada. Recent research has clarified many
aspects of this occupation, but the information is inadequate to address the
arid margin hypothesis. The collected materials will allow systematic evaluation
of this hypothesis with several independent classes of data, including pollen,
phytoliths, macrobotanical remains, magnetic susceptibility, sediment
characterization, and radiocarbon assays.&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists have not
investigated ancient environmental change in any part of the Northern Frontier
in such a comprehensive way. To the north of the study area, studies of desert
streams in the American Southwest indicate precipitation flux for this period;
to the south, lake deposits contain evidence for potentially related events.
Experience shows, however, that events in one valley or lake cannot be readily
predicted from those in another. This study will provide information that will
ultimately allow evaluation of human-environmental interactions on a long time
scale over a wide region. The investigators plan to communicate their findings
not only to people in their own profession, but to a range of ecologists,
geologists, geographers, government officials, and interested community
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;