* 0211924
* Insertional Mutagenesis Tools for Functional Genomics in Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2006
* USD 856,532.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice, the second plant genome to be
completely sequenced, has a relatively small genome of about 430 million base
pairs. While rice is also amenable to genetic studies and transformation and is
a model system for genome studies of the cereals, it is also an important crop.
Currently, there are few tools for identifying the functions of sequenced genes
for rice that are readily available to the research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most effective approaches to deciphering gene
functions is through gene disruption by DNA insertions. In this project, we will
develop efficient transposon tagging strategies for large-scale insertion
mutagenesis in rice. Stable insertion lines will be generated containing random
insertions of the maize En/Spm transposons in japonica rice cv. Nipponbare,
which is the cultivar selected for the International Rice Genome Sequencing
Project. A publicly accessible database for reverse genetics containing
sequences of DNA flanking insertions will be established, and the sequences will
be linked to the rice genome database and the rice genome physical map. Overall,
this project should develop a valuable resource for functional genomics in rice,
as well as other cereals.&lt;br/&gt;