* 0211842
* Functional Genomics of Root Growth and Root Signaling under Drought
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Hans Bohnert, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2007
* USD 4,840,829.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Henry T. Nguyen NguyenHenry@missouri.edu
(Principal Investigator current)&lt;br/&gt;Julia Gross (Co-Principal
Investigator current)&lt;br/&gt;Hans J. Bohnert (Co-Principal Investigator
current)&lt;br/&gt;Robert E. Sharp (Co-Principal Investigator
current)&lt;br/&gt;Gordon K. Springer (Co-Principal Investigator
current)&lt;br/&gt;Daniel P. Schachtman (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Georgia Davis (Co-Principal Investigator current) &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
roots of plants play vital roles in water and mineral acquisition which are
essential for plant growth and development. Under conditions of drought, roots
can adapt to continue growth while at the same time producing and sending "early
warning" signals to shoots which inhibit the plant growth above ground. A "Plant
Root Genomics Consortium" has been formed and is dedicated to root genetics and
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;The broad aim is to develop an understanding of the
molecular mechanisms used by plant roots to acquire water and minerals from the
soil, to elucidate the role roots play in adaptation to drought conditions, and
to transfer this knowledge to crop improvement through biotechnology. This
project focuses mechanisms of root growth maintenance and root to shoot
signaling under water deficits. The research approach is interdisciplinary
encompassing whole plant physiology, genetics, genomics, and
proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are to identify the genes and
biochemical networks: controlling the mechanisms of root growth and root to
shoot communication under drought through four specific
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Characterization of the transcript profiles in
elongating and non-elongating regions of roots under water deficit in sensitive
and tolerant maize lines, an abscisic acid (ABA)-deficient mutant and near-
isogenic lines differing in ABA accumulation. (2) Characterization of the
changes in protein profiles, especially cell wall proteins, in the different
root regions to identify factors associated with root growth maintenance and
tolerance to water deficit. (3) Investigation of the production and transport of
root signals to provide a better understanding of root to shoot signaling under
drought. (4) Development of genetic and genomic resources for further
investigations of root growth and signaling in the field.&lt;br/&gt;This
knowledge will lead to novel approaches for improving drought tolerance in maize
through genetic and metabolic engineering of root functions. All materials will
be made publicly available. A Plant Root Genomics Web site will be maintained
and integrated with the maize genome database (MaizeDB) at the University of
Missouri-Columbia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;