* 0211711
* Eyewitness Identification: Debiasing the Effects of Composites and Surveillance Images
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Gary Wells, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2006
* USD 329,998.00

The advent of forensic DNA testing has helped establish the fact that mistaken
eyewitness identification is the largest factor contributing to jury convictions
of innocent people. As a result, the system-variable approach to eyewitness
identification research, which is designed to reduce mistaken identifications
without harming accurate identification rates, has started to have considerable
impact in the legal system. In spite of considerable progress in recent years,
little is known about how the "paths" through which innocent people become
suspects in lineups can bias identifications toward the suspect and how to
debias these situations (reduce mistaken identifications) without lowering the
chances that the witnesses will identify the actual culprit. Two important
"paths" through which innocent people become suspects are the use of composite
drawings and the use of surveillance images. Both paths guarantee some
propensity for eyewitnesses to identify an innocent suspect if that person
became a suspect based in part on the image. It is hypothesized that the
dominant recommendation of eyewitness researchers for selecting lineup fillers
is not sufficient to debias lineups when either the image-similarity or the
composite-similarity paths are operating. This research will test various
debiasing techniques. The methodology will use films depicting a terrorist event
(12 versions involving 12 different culprits) that will be shown to over 2000
people individually who will then be asked to identify the terrorist from a
lineup and state their certainty. Innocent suspects will substitute for the
terrorist in half of the lineups. Innocent suspects will be selected based on
verbal descriptions, composite drawings, or surveillance images. Debiasing
techniques will include methods of selecting lineup fillers, the use of the
sequential lineup, and the use of a new technique called the phantom lineup. In
addition to traditional analyses, Bayesian information-gain analyses, which
assess both the incriminating and exonerating value of a give lineup procedure,
will be used to assess the effectiveness of the debiasing procedures. The
results of this work will help clarify eyewitness scientists' basic
understanding of the processes of false recognition and false certainty. In
addition, the results will inform law enforcement about procedures that can be
used to create unbiased and informative lineups under conditions in which
surveillance images and composite drawings could otherwise bias those results.