* 0211480
* Chemical Defenses Against Floral Enemies: Costs and Benefits of Toxic Nectar to Nectar Robbing, Pollination, and Plant Fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Lynn Adler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2005
* USD 327,964.00

ADLER - 0211480&lt;br/&gt;In natural systems, organisms face simultaneous direct
and indirect interactions with mutualists and&lt;br/&gt;antagonists, yet our
understanding of the relative importance of these competing pressures
in&lt;br/&gt;shaping the evolution of phenotypic traits is still rudimentary.
For example, flowering plants may&lt;br/&gt;face the dilemma of attracting
pollinators while discouraging floral enemies, such as nectar&lt;br/&gt;robbers.
Because robbers are competing with pollinators for the same resource (e.g.,
nectar), it may&lt;br/&gt;be particularly difficult for plants to evolve
defensive mechanisms that are effective against&lt;br/&gt;antagonists without
also deterring mutualists. The goal of the proposed research is to
determine&lt;br/&gt;how a ubiquitous but poorly understood floral trait, toxic
nectar, influences interactions with both&lt;br/&gt;nectar robbers and
pollinators, and how these simultaneous interactions shape selection on
this&lt;br/&gt;phenotypic trait.&lt;br/&gt;Toxic nectar, or nectar that contains
secondary compounds, is a widespread trait that may confer&lt;br/&gt;resistance
to floral robbers, but at a potential cost to pollinator attraction. Currently,
the costs and&lt;br/&gt;benefits of toxic nectar are unknown. In addition to
resistance traits, plants may cope with&lt;br/&gt;antagonists via tolerance. The
concepts of resistance and tolerance have traditionally been used
in&lt;br/&gt;reference to herbivores; however, nectar robbers, like herbivores,
have profound effects on plant&lt;br/&gt;fitness and plants are likely to use
resistance and tolerance as defensive mechanisms against&lt;br/&gt;robbers. The
proposed research will extend resistance and tolerance concepts to a wider range
of&lt;br/&gt;plant-animal interactions through an examination of the role of
nectar traits, such as nectar toxicity&lt;br/&gt;and production, as mechanisms
of resistance and tolerance to nectar robbing.&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this work is
to understand the ecological role of toxic nectar within the context
of&lt;br/&gt;interactions between mutualists (pollinators) and antagonists
(nectar robbers), and to determine the&lt;br/&gt;extent to which resistance and
tolerance mediate the impact of nectar robbers on plant genotypes.&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed will experimentally manipulate nectar toxicity in Gelsemium
sempervirens,&lt;br/&gt;a perennial vine with documented alkaloids in its
nectar, to determine the impact of toxic nectar on&lt;br/&gt;the community of
insect pollinators and robbers as well as on male and female plant
reproduction&lt;br/&gt;and offspring success. In addition, this study will
manipulate nectar robbing and pollination in&lt;br/&gt;genotypes of G.
sempervirens with known variability in nectar toxicity to determine the direct
and&lt;br/&gt;indirect effects of nectar robbing on plant fitness, genetic
variation in resistance and tolerance to&lt;br/&gt;nectar robbing, and costs of
toxic nectar in the absence of nectar robbing. The research
combines&lt;br/&gt;manipulative field experiments with observations to address
four main questions: 1) Is there&lt;br/&gt;genetic variation in nectar toxicity?
2) Does toxic nectar benefit plants by increasing resistance to&lt;br/&gt;nectar
robbing without reducing pollinator attraction? 3) Does nectar robbing reduce
plant fitness&lt;br/&gt;directly or indirectly, and do plant genotypes vary in
their resistance or tolerance of nectar robbing?&lt;br/&gt;and 4) Is there a
cost of toxic nectar in the absence of robbing?&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here
is novel in that it integrates the costs and benefits of resistance
associated&lt;br/&gt;with a ubiquitous but poorly understood floral trait, toxic
nectar, in the context of joint forces of&lt;br/&gt;selection exerted by both
mutualistic and antagonistic floral visitors. This work extends an
existing&lt;br/&gt;conceptual framework and provides empirical insight into the
diversity of roles a single floral trait&lt;br/&gt;can serve, from attraction to
defense. Consideration of the broader context in which
organisms&lt;br/&gt;evolve is fundamental to our understanding of how multiple-
species interactions shape genetic and&lt;br/&gt;biological diversity at
ecological, microevolutionary, and macroevolutionary scales.&lt;br/&gt;