* 0211102
* EARTH STORY:  Exploratory Research for Visualizations about Geology for a Large-Format Film on the History of the Earth -- A Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Irwin Shapiro, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

The Educational Broadcasting Corporation (WNET) is researching and testing an
experimental, short-format television broadcast and Web project entitled
"Science InSight." The goal of this experimental research is to determine if
short-format television segments can successfully increase Americans'
understanding of -- and interest in -- new research in science and technology
and, if they can, which of several possible formats is likely to be most
successful. During this research and development phase, WNET will test the
viability of the project model and develop and refine the model for use in a
selected group of media venues such as the forthcoming PBS weekly public affairs
program,"Public Square." The specific activities to be undertaken in the
research phase include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-assembling an expert board of up
to six advisors with expertise in science, science journalism and
media;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-producing three, experimental, short-format,
"program concept" video segments of varying lengths for use as science
information pieces in other media programs;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-conducting
formal and informal testing and evaluation of these test formats for appeal,
credibility, clarity and comprehensibility of style and content; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-identifying additional key potential distribution
partners from television media, print, Web and science centers
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;