* 0211863
* Dissecting Phytophthora Resistance In Soybean Using Expression Profiling and Analysis of Quantitative Trait Loci.
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Anne Dorrance, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2008
* USD 6,764,462.00

Some plant disease resistance genes (major resistance genes) confer high levels
of resistance against particular pathogens. These genes have been well studied
over the past decade. Major resistance genes, however, are generally effective
only against specific strains of a pathogen, and so become ineffective in the
field when new pathogens strains appear. In contrast, partial or quantitative
resistance is effective against all strains of a pathogen, albeit providing a
lower level of protection. Multiple genes confer partial resistance, each making
minor contributions, complicating the study of these genes. As a result, less is
known about how they operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to understand the mechanisms of quantitative resistance of soybean against the
oomycete pathogen Phytophthora sojae, which is one of the most damaging soybean
diseases. Oomycetes are fungus-like organisms that are actually most closely
related to brown algae such as kelp and diatoms. Phytophthora pathogens attack
thousands of plant species, including many important crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two approaches will be combined to identify and
characterize quantitative resistance genes. First, genetic crosses between
soybean cultivars differing in their quantitative resistance to Phytophthora
will be analyzed to identify genetic loci (called quantitative trait loci or
QTL) in soybean that contribute to resistance. Second, the expression levels of
thousands of soybean and Phytophthora genes during infection will be assayed
using hybridization microarrays to determine the mechanisms of resistance
contributed by different quantitative resistance loci. Pathogen gene expression
patterns will be analyzed to determine the impact of plant defense mechanisms on
the pathogen. Overall, it is anticipated that this research will result in new
insights into plant defense mechanisms, new genetic and genomic resources for
soybean researchers and breeders, and new statistical tools for analysis of gene
expression data.&lt;br/&gt;