* 0211801
* Characterization of a Novel Regulatory Protein Required for Cytokinesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Denis Larochelle, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/2007
* USD 335,070.00

This project is concerned with the mechanism whereby a cell divides into two. In
general, cell division in animal cells ("cytokinesis") results in the production
of two daughter cells that are nearly identical to each other. The process of
cytokinesis ensures that the newly duplicated nuclei, along with half of the
cytoplasm, are equally partitioned into the resulting daughter cells. This
process occurs at a very specific time in the cell cycle, and at a very specific
location, usually the equator. However, how the timing and location of
cytokinesis are regulated at the molecular level has remained largely unknown.

Dr. Larochelle has generated mutant Dictyostelium discoideum vegetative cells
and screened these cells for defects in cytokinesis. This approach had been used
successfully in the past to identify racE and lvsA, two unique genes that are
required for normal cytokinesis. Dr. Larochelle has now isolated a new cell line
that is defective in cytokinesis due to a disruption in a novel gene, which is
the focus of this research project.

The specific aims of this research are to characterize the specific cytokinesis
defect that results from the disruption of this novel gene, determine the
location and mechanism of how the encoded protein functions in cytokinesis by
conducting a careful analysis of the various domains that compose this protein,
identify and characterize proteins that interact with this novel protein, and
provide training for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as high school
students and teachers, in the areas of cell biology and molecular biology. By
making use of the ease with which one can manipulate the Dictyostelium genome,
coupled with the Dictyostelium genome sequencing project, the experiments will
combine molecular genetics with cell biology to dissect the exact nature through
which this newly identified gene regulates cytokinesis. The potential to
identify additional proteins that participate in the control if this important
cellular event is suggested through the presence of multiple signaling domains
(a phosphatase domain, a rho-related domain, two kinase domains, and eight WD-40
repeats) in the newly identified protein. These domains will be examined in
isolation and coupled with neighboring domains, as well as through deletion
analysis, to dissect their role in cytokinesis regulation. Preliminary results,
in which one of the kinase domains was over-expressed in wild-type cells,
resulting in a cytokinesis defect, is a promising indicator that this approach
will be successful. Because Dictyostelium is easily cultured and is highly
amenable to molecular genetic manipulation, while at the same time exhibiting
the same cellular behaviors observed in cells from higher eukaryotic organisms,
it is ideally suited for the training of budding scientists in the areas of cell
and molecular biology. The development of a strong research program, in an
atmosphere where high school, undergraduate, and graduate students interact with
each other and faculty on a daily basis, will provide unique training
opportunities for all participants.