* 0211366
* Mathematical Studies of the Dynamics of Excitable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* James Keener, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 229,448.00

Keener&lt;br/&gt;0211366&lt;br/&gt; The investigator uses mathematical models
and analysis to&lt;br/&gt;study the dynamics of several physiological systems in
which&lt;br/&gt;excitability is a common and fundamental feature. The three
broad&lt;br/&gt;problem areas to be investigated are&lt;br/&gt; 1) The
initiation and dynamics of cardiac arrhythmias;&lt;br/&gt; 2) The dynamics of
defibrillation;&lt;br/&gt; 3) The dynamics of autoimmune disease.&lt;br/&gt;The
study of these problems involves the development and use
of&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated mathematical models and tools, including
advanced&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods such as immersed boundary methods,
bifurcation&lt;br/&gt;theory and dynamical systems theory, and asymptotic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;These tools are used to give theoretical understanding to
problems&lt;br/&gt;of border zone and ischemia related cardiac arrhythmias,
APD&lt;br/&gt;instabilities and their relationship to the onset and
development&lt;br/&gt;of reentrant arrhythmias, mechanical alternans deriving
from&lt;br/&gt;instabilities of the calcium handling system or
crossbridge&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, the success or failure of defibrillation,
and&lt;br/&gt;oscillatory autoimmune responses. Serious attention is given
to&lt;br/&gt;obtaining agreement between theoretical results and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;findings. To that end collaborations with
experimentalists&lt;br/&gt;examine gap junction coupling of rabbit myocytes, the
effect of&lt;br/&gt;hypertrophy on excitation-contraction coupling through
the&lt;br/&gt;sodium-calcium exchanger, the effect of mutations on the
delayed&lt;br/&gt;rectifier potassium channel that lead to increased
proclivity&lt;br/&gt;for fatal arrhythmias, and the role of mimicry in
oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of cystic fibrosis in mice.&lt;br/&gt;
Excitability is one of the most important features enabling&lt;br/&gt;signalling
in physiological systems. It is crucial to the&lt;br/&gt;operation of nerves,
muscle, the heart, the immune system, and&lt;br/&gt;blood clotting as well as
numerous gene regulatory networks. The&lt;br/&gt;specific goal of this project
is to gain an improved theoretical&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how the normal
function of systems that rely on&lt;br/&gt;excitability can go awry, exhibiting
pathological behaviors, and&lt;br/&gt;how these pathological behaviors might be
controlled or&lt;br/&gt;prevented. The behaviors that are studied here are the
result of&lt;br/&gt;interwoven interactions of simpler behaviors, resulting
in&lt;br/&gt;complex behaviors that defy understanding through intuition
or&lt;br/&gt;simple means. The investigation therefore focuses on
the&lt;br/&gt;development and analysis of mathematical models of
these&lt;br/&gt;behaviors in the belief that substantial new and
important&lt;br/&gt;insights can be gained, and new hypotheses formulated that
are&lt;br/&gt;not apparent from phenomenological descriptions. While
this&lt;br/&gt;project has as its main focus several problems relating
to&lt;br/&gt;abnormalities of the cardiac cycle, it extends far beyond to
many&lt;br/&gt;areas of physiology where common principles are involved.
The&lt;br/&gt;project includes a significant training component for
students.&lt;br/&gt;