* 0211792
* GOALI: Molecular Modeling of Confined Nano-Phases and Nano-Porous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2008
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2008
* USD 399,419.00

Keith E. Gubbins - North Carolina State University

"GOALI: Molecular Modeling of Confined Nano-Phases and Nano-Porous Materials"

The aim of this project is to use novel molecular simulation methodologies to
obtain realistic molecular models of nanoporous materials, and to use these to
derive new and more accurate characterization methods and to predict the
behavior of adsorbed nano-phases. The emphasis will be on activated carbons and
carbon nanotubes. Impact: Activated carbons are the most widely used industrial
adsorbents, but are among the most difficult nano-structured materials to
characterize experimentally. Carbon nanotubes have potential applications in
many new technologies, including use as nano-reactors and for fabrication of
nano-structured materials (nano-composites, nano-wires, one dimensional
crystals, etc.). Broader aspects of the project include the training of two
graduate students in modern, multi-scale molecular simulation methods, the
inclusion of new methods and applications in an interdisciplinary graduate
course taught at NC State University, and dissemination of the results via
publication in scientific journals and the group web-site. The methods to be
developed could benefit society by providing basic understanding for development
of new nano-structured materials, nano-devices, sensors and nano-reactors.

This is a GOALI project involving university-industry collaboration between
researchers at North Carolina State University and at Westvaco's Charleston
Technical Center. Westvaco will provide samples and characterization data for a
series of industrial carbons prepared under different activation conditions and
from different precursors, as well as advice on the direction of the research.

Studies will be in three areas:

1. Molecular simulation protocols are developed for the construction of
realistic molecular models of carbon nanotubes and of activated carbons prepared
from a range of precursors and with a variety of activation methods. For
activated carbons, methods based on a hybrid Monte Carlo method that matches the
model to experimental structural data, subject to constraints imposed by the
multi-body intermolecular potential, will be used.

2. Existing materials characterization methods for the pore size distribution,
surface area, and micropore volume are tested using simulated nitrogen
adsorption and heat of adsorption in these model materials. Improved
characterization methods that incorporate network effects (connectivity) are
developed.

3. Freezing and melting phenomena of host nano-phases in these materials are
studied, with particular emphasis on the effect of confinement on freezing
temperature, new surface- and confinement-driven phases, and the detailed
structure of the phases. An understanding of such phenomena is central to the
fabrication of many new nano-structured materials.