* 0211029
* Disordered Oxidic and Non-Oxidic Mesostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Thomas Pinnavaia, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 2,186,700.00

This renewal team award made to Michigan State University by the Advanced
Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry is to study oxide and non-oxide
mesoporous structured materials. With this award, Professor Pinnavaia and a team
of other senior scientists with expertise in complementary research activities
in synthetic inorganic chemistry, theoretical and experimental condensed matter
physics, structural modeling and electronic structure calculations, and charge
transport and thermal transport characterization will study the following: the
oxide mesostructured materials; aluminosilicate mesostructure assembly from
zeolite seeds and fragments with intrinsic acidic and hydrothermal stabilities;
preparation of organofunctional mesostructures, wherein more than half of the
framework metal atom centers are linked to accessible and reactive organic
groups; mesostructure carbon replication for optically active monoliths using
phase transfer assembly techniques with mesostructured silica as templates; and
related experimental and theoretical studies for the assembly mechanisms and to
elucidate the fundamental relationships between structure and performance
properties of disordered oxidic mesostructures. This team will also study
different chalcogenide mesoporous materials that act as the "inside-out"
versions of array of quantum dots, narrow-gap semiconductors, biological iron
sulfide clusters; and other electronically active, mesoporous chalcogenide
solids with highly ordered pores yielding a variety of new materials with novel
shape-selective redox, optical and electrical properties. The synthetic
approaches will be complemented by characterization, modeling and theoretical
calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, a team of scientists with
expertise in synthetic inorganic chemistry, theoretical and experimental
condensed matter physics, structural modeling and electronic structure
calculations, and charge transport and thermal transport characterization will
study oxide and non-oxide mesoporous materials. Active industrial collaborations
for potential applications of these materials as catalysts will be part of these
research activities. In addition, this highly collaborative effort will bring
together materials scientists, chemists, condensed matter physicists and
structural and theoretical scientists, and will provide educational and research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral associates
and visiting scientists.