* 0211010
* Effects of Species Composition and Environmental Context on Redundancy Within a Functional Group: A Test With Freshwater Mussels
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Caryn Vaughn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2006
* USD 279,785.00

Species that are believed to play the same functional role in ecosystems are
often placed in&lt;br/&gt;functional groups, types or guilds, and redundancy of
ecological function is predicted to be highest&lt;br/&gt;within such groups. The
concept of functional groups composed of interchangeable,
redundant&lt;br/&gt;species is appealing because it simplifies the study and
management of ecological systems.&lt;br/&gt;However, there are problems limiting
the applicability of this concept. The degree of redundancy&lt;br/&gt;among
species assigned to many functional groups or guilds is unknown and we do not
understand&lt;br/&gt;the degree to which the functional roles of species change
with environmental context. The vast&lt;br/&gt;majority of our knowledge of
species roles and how they are influenced by the environment
comes&lt;br/&gt;from studies of short-lived, terrestrial plants. We now need to
broaden our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;species roles in other equally important
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater systems, and streams in particular, are
losing biodiversity at a higher rate than&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial or marine
systems, but few studies have examined functional redundancy in
these&lt;br/&gt;systems. Freshwater mussels are a functional group of long-
lived, benthic, burrowing filter-feeders&lt;br/&gt;that are thought to play an
important role in stream ecosystem function. Within this
functional&lt;br/&gt;group, the potential for redundancy in ecological roles
should be high because species have similar&lt;br/&gt;life histories, typically
occur as speciose assemblages, and there is little evidence for
differences&lt;br/&gt;in microhabitat or resource preferences between species.
However, we have almost no quantitative&lt;br/&gt;information on either the
overall importance of mussel assemblages to stream function or the
roles&lt;br/&gt;of individual species. In recent years, many mussel populations
have undergone a drastic decline.&lt;br/&gt;In order to predict how this loss of
both species and overall mussel biomass will impact stream&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems,
we must quantify the effects of both overall mussel abundance and individual
species&lt;br/&gt;on ecosystem processes, and we must understand how these
relationships may change with&lt;br/&gt;environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address the
following questions: (1) What is the overall importance of&lt;br/&gt;the mussel
functional group to stream ecosystems? What ecological processes do
mussels&lt;br/&gt;perform in streams? How do these processes relate to overall
mussel abundance/biomass? (2)&lt;br/&gt;Are species within the mussel functional
group ecologically redundant? Do mussel species vary&lt;br/&gt;in their
performance of ecological processes? Do ecological effects of mussel species
within an&lt;br/&gt;assemblage vary based on species composition and/or
abundance? (3) How are the overall&lt;br/&gt;importance of the mussel functional
group and effects of species roles within the group influenced&lt;br/&gt;by
environmental context? Are the ecological effects of the overall mussel
assemblage and of&lt;br/&gt;individual species constant or do they change with
environmental conditions? A series of&lt;br/&gt;complementary laboratory stream
and field enclosure experiments will measure the ecological&lt;br/&gt;function
of single and multi-species assemblages of mussels under varying abundance
and&lt;br/&gt;environmental conditions. Laboratory stream experiments will focus
on ecological processes&lt;br/&gt;performed by mussels (eg. filtering rates,
nutrient excretion) and field enclosure experiments will&lt;br/&gt;examine the
effects of mussels on the rest of the benthic community. Small-scale
laboratory&lt;br/&gt;experiments and analyses will quantify the potential
contributions (eg. nutrient excretion and&lt;br/&gt;biodeposition rates) of
different mussel species to streams under differing conditions,
and&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms underlying differences in ecological function between
species (eg. gill morphology,&lt;br/&gt;behavior). Finally, experimental results
will be combined with quantitative information from an NSF-funded mussel
biodiversity inventory to make predictions about mussel functional role
and&lt;br/&gt;redundancy in different stream systems.