* 0211430
* Collaborative Research: Spatially and Temporally Explicit Breeding Structure Analyses for a Tropical Dry-Forest Tree Species, Enterolobium cyclocarpum
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Peter Smouse, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 160,000.00

0211430&lt;br/&gt;Smouse &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes to natural landscapes can
have profound effects on population densities and spatial distributions of
organisms, greatly modifying natural breeding patterns. Two novel genetic
analyses will examine spatial and temporal variation in the breeding patterns of
natural and human-modified populations of the tropical dry-forest tree,
Enterolobium cyclocarpum, located in Guanacaste Province, Costa Rica. The
availability of seed collections dating from 1995 provides a unique temporal
dimension to these analyses. Studies of the pollination ecology of this species
will supplement the genetic analyses allowing more informed interpretations of
the genetic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has several broader
impacts. First, it will determine if human-induced habitat modifications
significantly modify breeding patterns of tropical trees to such an extent that
natural levels of genetic diversity can't be maintained. Second, temporal
analyses will demonstrate whether studies of a few reproductive events
adequately describe breeding patterns of a long-lived tree. These comprehensive
studies should also assist the development of effective landscape management
plans that consider the spatial extent of natural breeding populations. Finally,
comparisons of the two genetic analyses should determine whether the less
resource-demanding approach dependably estimates breeding parameters. If so,
this could provide a major breakthrough for landscape-level studies of pollen
movement patterns in a wide variety of plant species.&lt;br/&gt;