* 0211778
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Domestic Violence and the 'Family Man': Courtroom and Community Narrative About Domestically Violent Fathers in Rural, Urban and Suburban Settings
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Francesca Cancian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Paul J. Wahlback
* 06/30/2003
* USD 12,000.00

This study examines narratives about domestically violent family men within
three civil courtrooms situated in three geographically, racially, and
economically diverse counties in Northern Kentucky. This research explores
comparative narratives about domestic violence, family, and fatherhood in order
to determine the ways in which the "domestically violent family man" may be
differentially constituted by geographic location, race, and class. This study
pays particular attention to the role of the legal institution in producing and
reproducing these narratives through an examination of the power that legal
institutional discourses have in shaping definitions of gendered identities,
such as "domestically violent father." More specifically this study asks: What
are people within and who encounter the legal arena saying about the
intersections of domestic violence, family, and fatherhood? What are the
processes by which visitation decisions are given to or denied from domestically
violent fathers during protective order hearings, and what does this say about
how the legal institution and society conceive of the intersections of domestic
violence, family, and fatherhood? This research is comparative and will utilize
a multi-method ethnographic approach to data collection including participant
observation, content analysis of courtroom hearings, and open-ended interviews.
The broader impacts of this research include informing the training and teaching
received by those working with domestic violence in the legal arena about child
witnesses to domestic violence and domestically violent fathers.