* 0211655
* Nonlinear Dynamics of the Primary Visual Cortex
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* David McLaughlin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 203,800.00

McLaughlin 0211655 The investigator and colleagues have been developing a
biologically constrained large-scale computational model of the "front-end" of
the cortical visual system -- the primary visual cortex (V1). To date, their
work has focused upon local properties of individual cells within the large-
scale network -- properties such as orientation selectivity and simple vs
complex cellular dynamics. In this project, they scale up to a more global model
of V1, reaching scales large enough to study some elementary optical illusions
of psychology and psychophysics. This involves several square millimeters of
lateral cortical area, together with a multi-layered architecture -- with
emphasis given to cortical dynamics. First, a "coarse-grained mixed
representation" is derived mathematically and tested numerically -- a
representation that combines spatially coarse-grained (local) mean firing rates,
representing local background cortical operating points, with an idealized
representation of a sub-network of individual point neurons embedded within this
background and retaining the detailed firing patterns of individual neurons.
These two components interact with each other -- with the coarse-grained local
operating points influencing the responses of the individual neurons, and vice
versa. Second, the global mixed representation is used to study specific
dynamical phenomena in visual cortical processing: (i) the layer-specific
"dynamics of orientation selectivity" (as measured by reverse time correlation
methods); and later (ii) "bistability in figure-ground assignments" (as detected
in psychology and psychophysics experiments). In both cases, the phenomena
involve extensive lateral regions of V1, its layered structure, and (likely in
the case of figure-ground assignment) other cortical regions. And in both cases
the work involves close interaction with the experimental work of neural
scientist Robert Shapley. Today, through new biological experiments combined
with the power of modern scientific computation, scientists and applied
mathematicians are making significant strides toward understanding the human
brain. Visual perception and the cortical processing of visual information
provide important starting points. By focusing upon the "front end" of the
cortical visual system, McLaughlin and his colleagues develop computational
models of the visual cortex that are strongly constrained by biological
experiments. In this project the investigators develop computationally efficient
numerical methods that permit scale-up of the models to global representations
of the primary visual cortex -- reaching cortical scales large enough to study
some elementary optical illusions of psychology. This work requires the direct
interaction of applied mathematicians, computational scientists, and neural
scientists -- and involves theoretical, computational, and experimental
components.