* 0211458
* Robust Output Sensitive Algorithms for Subanalytic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* J Maurice Rojas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2005
* USD 198,560.00

The investigator aims to complete the nascent theory of&lt;br/&gt;output-
sensitive algorithms in real algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;Output-sensitive in
this context means that the complexity of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying algorithm
depends mainly on intrinsic geometric&lt;br/&gt;parameters, e.g., the number of
connected components of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying solution set, as opposed to
extrinsic parameters like&lt;br/&gt;the degrees of the input polynomials. Such
algorithms are faster&lt;br/&gt;than the traditional methods of computational
algebra by a factor&lt;br/&gt;exponential in the dimension, but have so far been
discovered&lt;br/&gt;only in various isolated contexts. So a unified
algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;approach has a broad impact. Furthermore, the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;approach takes numerical conditioning into account from
the&lt;br/&gt;outset, thus providing algorithms that are certifiably
precise&lt;br/&gt;even when applied to approximate data. Another novelty is
that&lt;br/&gt;the underlying theory applies in the even broader arena of
real&lt;br/&gt;and p-adic analytic functions. The algorithmic aspects of
p-adic&lt;br/&gt;analytic functions are almost completely unexplored, so
a&lt;br/&gt;secondary focus of this project is to elaborate and apply
this&lt;br/&gt;new theory to equation-solving over finite fields and
motivic&lt;br/&gt;integration.&lt;br/&gt; The investigator combines advanced
techniques from numerical&lt;br/&gt;analysis and algebraic geometry to provide a
new approach to a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problem occuring in many applications:
solving&lt;br/&gt;analytic inequalities. For example, finding the
optimal&lt;br/&gt;allocation of resources in a large organization (e.g., an
army,&lt;br/&gt;an airline, or a large business) has long been known to reduce
to&lt;br/&gt;solving linear inequalities. From a different direction, it
is&lt;br/&gt;known that the complexity of certain neural net
architectures&lt;br/&gt;(which are useful in training automated bomb-sniffers
and pattern&lt;br/&gt;recognition systems) depends critically on understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;solutions of nonlinear polynomial inequalities. Both
these&lt;br/&gt;examples are special cases of analytic inequalities, and
this&lt;br/&gt;project provides new algorithms for their solution that
are&lt;br/&gt;magnitudes faster than current algorithms. Furthermore,
these&lt;br/&gt;new algorithms provide certifiably precise solutions ---
a&lt;br/&gt;feature which is especially important when facing
uncertain&lt;br/&gt;physical data. Another novel aspect is the
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator's recent discovery that the underlying
techniques&lt;br/&gt;apply to an even broader context, which can provide new
solutions&lt;br/&gt;to many problems in the design of cryptosystems.