* 0211345
* Emerging Party Systems in Post-Soviet Societies: How Developed Are They?
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Arthur Miller, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2005
* USD 59,216.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent political science literature
reflects a growing controversy regarding the formation of political parties and
party systems in post-Soviet societies. The eventual outcome of the controversy
holds implications for a basic understanding of how party systems form and the
role parties play in developing democracies. The substantive debate is focused
on the question of whether or not the political parties that have emerged in the
newly independent states of the former Soviet Union exhibit the types of
political characteristics that allow us to conclude that they constitute a
competitive multi-party system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two distinct camps have
emerged on either side of this query. One set of scholars, drawing upon
traditional theories of party formation, argues that the formation of
institutionalized party systems in post- Communist states will be a long and
arduous process because these societies lack previous multi-party socialization.
They see the current post-Soviet parties as ephemeral, lacking a firm foundation
in policy differences, thus reflecting nothing more substantial than a fan club
for the party's leader. On the opposite side of the argument, research from the
early to mid-90s reveals a rapid rise in the proportion of post-Soviet citizens
who identify with a political party and who vote for the party with which they
identify. Other work also shows the development of party factions within the
parliaments of the newly independent states. Collectively this research supports
theories of endogenous party formation which suggest that parties, partisan
support and possibly even party systems can form relatively quickly in response
to contemporary political events and issue or ideological polarization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study provides the first comparative data on
Russia and Ukraine that incorporates directly comparable evidence on the level
of institutionalization currently attained by party organizations, parties in
the electorate and the parties in government. What this proposal seeks is
funding for cleaning, documenting, analyzing and releasing four recently
collected data sets that deal with political parties as organizations (based on
surveys with party activists) and as parties in the electorate (based on
comparable surveys with ordinary citizens). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These data,
once they are cleaned and documented, would provide the very first comprehensive
examination of party organizations in post-Soviet societies. The data will
provide a benchmark for any future studies of party development in these new
democracies. In addition, when combined with the survey data on ordinary
citizens and parliamentary members this study promises to provide the most
defmitive answer to the party formation debate outlined above. Moreover, the
study promises to shed new light on the question of whether or not political
parties function in a manner that provides a link between ordinary citizens and
their elected representatives. Many other substantive questions could also be
addressed with these data when they are released to the general academic
community for secondary analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;