* 0211211
* Sixth International Conference on the Electrical Transport and Optical Properties of Inhomogeneous Media; July 15-19, 2002; Snowbird, Utah
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 37,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0211211&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kenneth Golden&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;Title: Sixth International Conference on the
Electrical Transport and Optical Properties of Inhomogeneous
Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Sixth
International Conference on the Electrical Transport and Optical Properties of
Inhomogeneous Media" (ETOPIM 6) will be held in Snowbird, Utah, July 15-19,
2002. The conference will mark the 25th anniversary of the first ETOPIM
conference, which was held in Columbus, Ohio, in 1977, and will be the second
ETOPIM conference held in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrical transport
and optical properties of composites and inhomogeneous media are of fundamental
importance to a broad range of highly interdisciplinary problems throughout
science and engineering. Photonic crystals and band-gap structures,
semiconductors, porous media and rocks, conducting polymers, electrical activity
in the heart and brain, composites with negative index of refraction,
electrorheological fluids, optical networking, smart slime molds, optimal design
of composite microstructures, imaging in geophysical, medical and industrial
applications, transport in nanostructures, and the role of sea ice
microstrucural and optical properties in polar biology and climate, are all
examples of such problems. ETOPIM 6 will address a broad array of active areas
in the physics and engineering of inhomogeneous materials and expand the
coverage of previous ETOPIM conferences to include problems of current interest
in the biological, geophysical and mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is expected to have over 100
participant, representing 22 countries throughout Europe, Asia, Africa, the
Middle East, Oceania, as well as North and Latin America. Within the USA, 21
states will be represented. The program will consist of more than 30 invited
lectures, about 60 contributed papers, and 20 posters. Most of the talks,
invited and contributed, will be in series. Parallel minisymposia have been
scheduled to focus on mathematical methods in homogenization, porous media and
percolation problems in hydrology, and experimental results on random lasers and
conducting polymers. Through planned activities at the conference as well as
recruiting, the conference organizers will try to maximize the participation of
younger researchers, from postdoctoral associates to graduate and undergraduate
students, provide career development opportunities for them, and encourage
interactions between junior and senior researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;