* 0211750
* Microarray/Mutation Studies to Identify New Virulence Genes in Erwinia Chrysanthemi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Donald Cooksey, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 111,621.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantial empirical evidence indicates that pathogenic
bacteria express virulence genes at high levels only when they infect a host.
Indeed, it is likely that pathogens that can exist in various alternative
ecological niches express unique gene sets in all of them. Using microarray and
in vivo expression technique (IVET), the gene expression pattern of a plant
pathogenic bacterium, Erwinia chrysanthemi, grown in its leaf host as compared
to growth in laboratory culture medium was studied. These results have offered
powerful insights into new pathogen genes that are important for virulence. In
particular, a substantial number of class III virulence genes were upregulated
in planta. The class III genes do not appear to be directly involved in damaging
the host, as is the case with class I and II virulence genes, but are probably
important in adapting the pathogen to survive and grow in the host environment.
Mutations in several of the plant upregulated E. chrysanthemi genes were
constructed. Mutations in a putative class I virulence gene encoding a
previously unidentified peptide synthase, and two novel class III virulence
genes, all greatly reduced virulence of the bacteria on host African violet
leaves. The objectives of this project are to: (i) continue screening of host
upregulated genes by IVET; (ii) perform systematic mutation and virulence assays
of host upregulated genes obtained from IVET and previous microarray assays; and
(iii) identify virulence genes regulated by the pathogenicity gene cluster hrp
of E. chrysanthemi by functional cloning in E. coli cells carrying the cloned E.
chrysanthemi hrp gene cluster. These cross-complementary approaches are expected
to identify new genes important for bacterial virulence on plant hosts.