* 0211342
* Taro farming, cultural survival, and wetlands conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Eric Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 05/31/2004
* USD 18,000.00

RConflicts over natural resources and land allocation issues are intensifying
worldwide. Such conflicts present obstacles to both environmental conservation
efforts and to political stability. In the Hawaiian Archipelago, conflicts over
the use and management of wetland areas have reached an all-time high. While
decades of agricultural, commercial, and residential development have threatened
critical wetlands, biologists have found that endangered waterbirds are
attracted to wetland areas that have traditionally been farmed for taro. The co-
investigator, an environmental anthropology doctoral student from the University
of Washington, will work with 52 taro farmers on the Hawaiian Island of Kaua'i,
investigating the connection between taro farming and endangered waterbirds. The
research focuses specifically on the economics of taro farming, the value of
taro farming as a wetlands management alternative, and the value of
environmental knowledge developed over generations by taro farmers. The research
will involve household interviews, weekly data collection on farm statistics and
waterbird counts, a traditional environmental knowledge survey, focus group
discussions, and participant observation. These research methods are designed to
document traditional environmental knowledge employed in watershed management
and the economic profitability of taro farming. This will provide an estimate of
the per-unit cost for taro farmers managing wetlands for endangered waterbird
protection. If taro farming is indeed as environmentally valuable as is claimed,
it may provide the state of Hawaii, and other regions throughout the moist
tropics, with a means of promoting both human and environmental well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;