* 0211012
* The Third Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) Annual Meeting, June 29-July 2, 2002  in Ithica, NY
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* William Prothero, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/28/2003
* USD 170,814.00

This award supports the third DLESE Annual Meeting. This meeting will be held at
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York from June 29 to July 2, 2002. The annual
meeting will be preceded by a two-day preparation and planning meeting. This
Annual Meeting will provide DLESE the opportunity to both demonstrate advances
in the library's development and develop and strengthen ties between current and
new collaborators in collections building, tool development, resource discovery,
metadata and controlled vocabulary development efforts. The meeting will
establish a platform where both the developers and library users will have
opportunities to discuss a variety of issues. The developers will be able to
demonstrate their new library functions, the users will be able to provide
important feed back to the developers, and both developers and users will learn
from their peers about potential uses, and make suggestions for critical
improvements needed to make the library a stronger and more attractive
learning/teaching environment for students/teachers from all levels of
educational activities. The meeting will incorporate efforts to address issues
such as diversity/underrepresented populations, academic recognition,
pedagogical assessment and evaluation, sociological effects of electronic
community collaboration and the development of mechanisms to provide guidance
and support in designing new instructional materials that support
teaching/learning about the Earth system. The Annual Meeting provides an
opportunity for leaders representing these diverse interests in Earth system
education to meet as a community and to work together to shape DLESE as a
resource that serves our needs. The conveners will invite 115 people to the
meeting. The invited people will represent a broader community including
teachers from K-12 schools, college and university professors, and researchers
in both earth and information technology sciences. The maximum number of
participants will be limited to 200 for both logistical and practical concerns.