* 0211287
* Dissertation Research: Social and Environmental Consequences of Land Tenure among Marin County Ranchers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* William Durham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,599.00

Public sentiment toward private use of federal lands has become increasingly
contentious in the United States, particularly in the West where agriculturists
rely heavily on both private and federal lands to maintain viable operations.
This research focuses on understanding how ranchers' use of private and federal
lands affects the strategies they choose in the face of external economic,
political, and cultural threats. In so doing, it asks how land tenure affects
environmental use patterns, the social structure of ranching communities, and
economic decisions made by agriculturists. Research will be conducted on Point
Reyes National Seashore (PRNS) and in a nearby portion of private land in Marin
County, California. The student will examine the ways in which land tenure and
landscape valuation variously promote and discourage ranch longevity and
environmental integrity. Free listing, structured surveys, in-depth interviews,
and daily work diaries will be used to elicit information on the land use
practices, economic circumstances, and perceptions and values regarding the land
for two matched sets of ranchers in Northern California: 1) ranchers using
primarily the federal lands of PRNS, with 2) a matched set of ranchers across
Tomales Bay, who primarily use private lands east of Tomales Bay. Network
analysis will be used to contrast social interactions within each community.
Historical analysis of ranch boundaries, former neighbor interviews, and
personal and county economic data and tax records will be used to examine
economic strategies. The research will test the hypothesis that land tenure
shapes productive strategies; in so doing, it contributes to property theory by
exploring the effects of private and federal tenure on resource management. The
research also shows the relevance of a developing body of theory on cooperation
to a complex, market-integrated agricultural society. &lt;br/&gt;