* 0211238
* Conference: The Gordon Research Conference on the Molecular Basis of Microbial One-Carbon Metabolism; July 7 - 12, 2002, New London, Connecticut
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Joseph Krzycki, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Neil E. Hoffman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 5,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on the Molecular Basis of Microbial One-Carbon
Metabolism will be held this coming summer. This will be the third such meeting
to be held as a Gordon Research Conference, but it is the eleventh in a twenty-
seven year old tradition. This meeting brings together a diverse group of
researchers who study a wide variety of microbes from the Eucarya, Archaea and
the Bacteria that are unified by their metabolism of one-carbon compounds, and
thus often use common genes and enzymes. The C-1 compounds metabolized by these
organisms are of global environmental impact and many are of industrial
interest. The pathways studied have implications for studies in evolution,
structural biology, enzyme mechanism, gene regulation, ecology, and applied
biology. With recent advances in the biochemical, molecular biological, genetic,
and genomic techniques used to examine C-1 utilizing microbes that have greatly
augmented recent fundamental discoveries, the field is robust, and this vigor is
reflected in the diverse selection of speakers representing different
disciplines interested in microbial C-1 metabolism. &lt;br/&gt; Previous year's
conferences have been resounding successes, and have provided impetus and
inspiration to both the established scientist and to those who are still in
training. The dedicated nature of the conference to microbial C-1 metabolism
provides a otherwise unavailable opportunity for the attendees to meet and
interact with those sharing similar interests from around the globe. The
auspices of the GRC provide an excellent environment in which the interaction of
younger and more established scientists is fostered, and concerted efforts have
been made by the organizers to have junior scientists share the main speaking
platform with more seasoned workers. Partial funding for the conference is
sought which will be used to establish a fellowship fund for those younger
scientists who otherwise might lack the means to attend the conference. In
addition, support is needed to in part defray the registration costs of speakers
and discussion leaders.&lt;br/&gt;