* 0211872
* Functional Genomics of Host-Virus Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Savithramma Dinesh-Kumar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2008
* USD 3,363,177.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between eukaryotic
viruses and their hosts are characteristic of most&lt;br/&gt;host-pathogen
relationships that have co-evolved. The outcomes of virus-host interactions are
genetically pre-determined. To produce disease, viruses must enter the host,
multiply locally in host tissues, spread from the site of entry, and overcome or
evade host immune responses. Plants have evolved various anti-viral defense
strategies to clear viral infection. On the other hand, viruses have evolved
counter-defense strategies. Therefore, it is important to understand molecular
mechanisms of how viruses evade the host's antiviral
defenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Tobacco Rattle Virus-based virus induced gene
silencing (VIGS) system will be used to identify suppressors of viral resistance
and susceptibility factors. In addition, a functional proteomics approach will
be used to study virus-host interactions. The knowledge gained from these
studies will help to combat infectious plant diseases. Protection of crops from
disease can significantly improve agricultural production. Application of a
plant's own defense mechanism can lead to more effective protection against
plant pathogens. Control of pathogen-induced diseases using cellular genes that
function in the disease resistance signaling pathway may provide tremendous
agricultural benefits and serve the environment by offering an alternative to
pesticide use to prevent disease. Tools and information developed in this
project will be made available to the scientific community. These resources will
assist in the efforts to improve economically important plants like tomato,
potato and
pepper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available now:
pTRV1, pTRV2, pTRV2-GATEWAY, pTRV-NbPDS, pTRV-tomPDS &lt;br/&gt;VIGS system.
Contact savithramma.dinesh-kumar@yale.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available by
9/03: 250-300 sequence verified pTRV2-tomato EST clones &lt;br/&gt; 1000-1500
sequence verified pTRV2-Nb-cDNA Agrobacterium&lt;br/&gt; TMV-TAP
vector&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;