* 0211313
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Jason Lawrence, Lawrence, Jason S
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this Post-Doctoral Research Fellowship in the Behavioral and Social
Sciences is to determine the developmental processes involved in White
children's knowledge and use of the stereotype that alleges Black Americans have
low academic ability. Four experiments will be conducted to determine how the
stereotype influences White children's perceptions and attributions of their
Black peer's academic ability. Experiment 1 will test whether White children
over 9 years of age judge a Black student as lower in ability than a White
student with the same performance. However, to allow us to tease apart whether
participants' judgments are due to stereotyping or due to ingroup bias, the
participants will also make judgments of basketball shooting ability of Black,
Asian, and White American children. Experiment 2 will determine whether White
children of all ages may attribute Black students' academic failures and White
students' academic successes to internal factors such as ability. It will also
investigate whether White children over 9 years of age explain away Black
students' academic successes and White students' academic failures by
attributing these performances to external factors such as task difficulty or
internal unstable factors such as effort. As in experiment, participants will
make the same kinds of judgments of Black, Asian, and White Americans'
basketball shooting ability. Experiments 3 and 4, were designed to determine
whether White children over 9 years of age incorporate teacher feedback that
suggests that a Black student has lower ability than a White student, but ignore
teacher feedback that suggests that a Black student has higher ability than a
White student.