* 0211004
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Soil-Borne Resources on the Structure and Dynamics of Lowland Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Kyle Harms, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 38,981.00

Despite current interest in tropical forests as key components of the global
carbon&lt;br/&gt;cycle and as centers of biodiversity,we remain largely ignorant
of the inter-relationships&lt;br/&gt;among forest attributes
(e.g.,dynamics,diversity,structure),and the physical properties&lt;br/&gt;of the
environments in which these forests grow.In recent years datasets have
become&lt;br/&gt;available describing growth,mortality and recruitment of
approximately 10%of the&lt;br/&gt;global diversity of tropical tree
species.These data result from the development of a&lt;br/&gt;network of large-
scale forest dynamics plots coordinated by the Center for
Tropical&lt;br/&gt;Forest Science (CTFS),and established using methods identical
to those used to survey&lt;br/&gt;and census the 50-ha Forest Dynamics Plot on
Barro Colorado Island (BCI),Panama.&lt;br/&gt;Just as data from the BCI plot
have played a prominent role in our understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;community-
level consequences of ecological processes played out at local scales,we
will&lt;br/&gt;show how these plots now provide an unprecedented opportunity to
examine a venerable&lt;br/&gt;question in tropical ecology:How do soil-borne
resources influence the variation in forest&lt;br/&gt;structure and demographic
turnover rates observed among plots,and among habitat types&lt;br/&gt;within
plots?&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this objective we propose three sets of
measurements.At nine plot&lt;br/&gt;sites we will characterize variation in
soil-moisture availability through the year and&lt;br/&gt;throughout the plots
using a hydrological model (TOPMODEL).This model predicts&lt;br/&gt;soil-
moisture saturation deficit based on rainfall,stream-flow data and local
topography.&lt;br/&gt;Second,at five plots currently lacking soils data we will
sample soil-chemical properties&lt;br/&gt;within standardized,topographically-
defined habitat types.Third,at the same plots we&lt;br/&gt;will perform seedling
growth experiments using mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal&lt;br/&gt;pioneer
species to assess plant-availability of soil nutrients for each habitat
type.These&lt;br/&gt;measurements will allow us to address questions at two
spatial scales.At the among-plot&lt;br/&gt;scale we will be able to ask how stem
density and basal area,as well as community-wide&lt;br/&gt;patterns of
growth,mortality and recruitment,correlate with moisture availability and
soil&lt;br/&gt;fertility.At the within-plot scale we will ask whether species
exhibit specialization to&lt;br/&gt;particular hydrological niches,and whether
habitat types differ in soil fertility,in&lt;br/&gt;turnover rates,and in local
species richness.Resolution of these broad questions&lt;br/&gt;concerning
correlations among soil-borne resources and characteristics of the
vegetation&lt;br/&gt;will in turn permit us to refine future hypotheses aimed at
understanding the mechanistic&lt;br/&gt;basis for interspecific variation in
demographics and distribution.&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the first
standardized large-scale measurements of the&lt;br/&gt;environmental context
within which tropical forests grow.Our trans-continental approach&lt;br/&gt;to
testing questions of ecosystem function and community organization has rarely
been&lt;br/&gt;attempted,but it will be essential if we are to improve our
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;biogeographic and biophysical limits to our
ecological generalizations.Understanding&lt;br/&gt;how variation in water and
nutrient availability determines forest structure,composition&lt;br/&gt;and
dynamics,and potentially influences local diversity through niche
partitioning,will&lt;br/&gt;be essential to predicting future vegetation
responses to climate change and will also&lt;br/&gt;provide a first step in
guiding management to protect forest diversity.Wide dissemination&lt;br/&gt;and
application of the results of this project is ensured by the active
participation of in-&lt;br/&gt;country collaborators,and by data sharing through
CTFS.