* 0211078
* Generation of a Pristine Sapphire Surface by Oxidation and Solid State Conversion of a Sputtered Al Coating
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2007
* USD 600,000.00

This project consists of an in-depth investigation into the mechanisms behind a
novel method for generating a pristine sapphire surface. The process is named
AGOG, representing the three processing steps: Al thin film deposition on
sapphire, Growth of an aluminum Oxide layer, and grain Growth to produce a
single crystal surface. Processing conditions at each step in the AGOG process
will be varied systematically and correlated to the resulting changes in surface
structure. The effect of Al film microstructure and thickness on oxidation
behavior will be determined. Sapphire of (0001), (11-20), and (01-12)
orientation will be used to identify the effect of interface conditions on the
Al to alumina phase transformation. Studies of phase transition behavior will be
carried out concurrently with oxidation/heating rate experiments. Once a
polycrystalline alumina layer has been created, solid-state conversion
processing conditions will be examined. Finally, strategies for eliminating
hillock growth during the initial oxidation step will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sapphire, the single crystal form of alumina, is
utilized in many important commercial applications where the quality of the
final surface finish is critical. One example is the recent use as a substrate
material for high-power blue light emitting diodes (LED's) and laser diodes.
These devices are required for a large number of applications including full
color electroluminescent displays, and read-write laser sources for high-density
information storage on magnetic and optical media. The successful commercial
production of blue LED's also offers the potential for bright, white light
sources derived from solid state devices. Advantages over conventional
incandescent and fluorescent sources include far higher energy efficiency and
increased reliability. Sapphire is also widely used for visible and midwave
infrared (IR) airborne windows and radomes for guidance systems. Currently, the
surfaces of sapphire components are finished by a combination of mechanical and
chemical polishing. The final polishing steps are time-consuming, and typically
make up a significant fraction of the total cost. The AGOG process is a
potentially more cost-effective method for achieving a high quality surface
finish in sapphire.&lt;br/&gt;