* 0211133
* Special Semester Program on Automorphic Forms, Shimura Varieties and L-functions; January 1-May 31, 2003, Fields Institute, Toronto, Canada
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Freydoon Shahidi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The theory of automorphic forms is a wide and deep subject touching many areas
of mathematics, such as number theory, harmonic analysis and geometry.
Langlands' program is an ambitious plan to develop the theory of automorphic
forms in a systematic way. It opened a new frontier in Mathematics, and has
given new insights and techniques in solving old problems. In fact, the solution
of Fermat's last theorem by Andrew Wiles is one of the achievements of the
Langlands' program. There have been many exciting new developments in the theory
recently: the global Langlands correspondence for GL(n) over a functiona field
by L. Lafforgue, using the ideas of Drinfeld; the local Langlands correspondence
for GL(n) over a p-adic field by M. Harris and R. Taylor, using Shimura
varieties, and by G. Henniart, using L-functions; Langlands' functoriality for
symmetric cube of cusp form of GL(2) by H. Kim and F. Shahidi, and symmetric
fourth of cusp form of GL(2) by H. Kim, using The Langlands-Shahidi method and
the converse theorem of Cogdell-Piatetski-Shapiro. It is an ideal time to have a
special program in automorphic forms to review these new developments. These
have far-reaching applications in classical number theory. Especially,
Langlands' functoriality of symmetric cube and symmetric fourth have direct
applications to analytic number theory. In fact, one of the goals of the program
is to bring experts in automorphic forms and analytic number theory to find
applications of automorphic forms in analytic number theory, vice versa.

One of the most important mathematical ideas of the second half of the 19th
century is that an analytic formula often encodes discrete information. For
example, one might want to count the number of solutions of a particular
equation, but discover that the solutions are very hard to find. On the other
hand, one might want to count the number of solutions to a sequence of equations
and have the answers as a sequence. Mathematicians call these kinds of problems
'discrete'. The functions that appear in calculus, and for which calculus works
so well, are not 'discrete', but 'analytic.' Amazingly, the right kinds of
analytic functions often provide the answers to the discrete problems. An
L-function is a type of generating function formed out of data associated with
either a geometric object that is related to number theory or with a kind of
'analytic' function, called an automorphic form, which are determined by groups
of linear transformations. These L-functions provide the right kinds of analytic
functions. In the past thirty years, the study of these examples of L-functions
has been systematized into a branch of number theory. In recent years many
people have found new ways that L-functions encode discrete information, though
there is still much to be discovered. The chief purpose of this program is to
bring together experts in analytic number theory, automorphic forms, and
geometry so that we may find more of the ways that arithmetic information is
encoded by L-functions.