* 0211730
* Biochemistry of the Anaerobic Dehalogenation of Chlorinated Aromatics
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Stephen Ragsdale, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 09/30/2006
* USD 435,000.00

This study looks at a genus of microbes, Desulfitobacteria, that can detoxify
halogenated organic pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). PCBs
are listed as a "dirty dozen" persistent organic pollutant (POP) that, although
banned, remain in the environment and cause lasting damage to animal health and
the environment. The long-term goal is to help achieve the aim of a 2001 United
Nations treaty to phase out and eventually eliminate these POPs. Thus a better
understanding of how to accelerate the natural biodegradation of such compounds
would be of significant value to society. Through a process known as
dehalorespiration, these microbes biodegrade halogenated compounds while gaining
metabolic energy. When Desulfitobacteria sense the presence of a halogenated
compound, they produce a host of proteins that enable them to remove the
chlorine substituent, which is the first step in its detoxification. A manifold
of techniques are used to study dehalorespiration, including enzymology,
molecular biology and genetics, spectroscopy, and electrochemistry. The first
objective of this project is to elucidate the catalytic mechanism of the
dehalogenase enzyme, which removes the chlorine substituent. To achieve this
aim, each of the steps in the dehalogenase catalytic cycle will be elucidated
and the role of the metal cofactors (vitamin B12 and the iron-sulfur clusters)
will be determined. The second objective is to study the transcriptional
regulatory protein (CprK) that controls when and how much of the
dehalorespiration proteins are produced. When CprK binds dilute solutions of the
halogenated compound, it attaches to a specific DNA regulatory sequence and
accelerates the rate of production of the components of the dehalorespiration
system. Interactions between the transcriptional regulatory protein (CprK) and
the xenobiotic and between CprK and the DNA sequence will be studied. This
project also includes plans to promoting teaching, training and learning; to
enhance the University of Nebraska research infrastructure; and to broadly
disseminate the research results.