* 0211186
* US-UK-Ireland Cooperative Research:  Establishment and Persistence of Introduced Codium Fragile on Atlantic European Shores
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Cynthia Trowbridge, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2005
* USD 30,180.00

0211186 Trowbridge

This three-year award for cooperative research on the invasive alga, Codium
fragile ssp. Tomentosoides, involves field surveys and experiments at Lough
Hyne, Ireland, the Channel Islands, the English Channel Coast and Atlantic
French Coast. Cynthia D. Trowbridge of Oregon State University, Colin Little of
Bristol University, William F. Farnham of University of Portsmouth, and Alan
Critchley of Degussa, Texturan Systems Research Centre, will conduct research on
ecological mechanisms inhibiting or facilitating invasion of Codium fragile.
This macroalga is a widely distributed temperate seaweed that has spread across
geographic regions and international boundaries.

The investigators propose to conduct field surveys of invaded regions and field
experiments testing causal mechanisms. They will document community attributes
of the French and English shores to determine whether the invasive agla
establishes itself primarily in disturbed communities. In the intertidal
community of Lough Hyne, they will explore inhibiting and facilitating
mechanisms, such as high cover of intertidal seaweed, high densities of fauna
grazers, and low nutrient levels. The U.S. investigator brings to this
collaboration expertise in the genus C. fragile and marine zoology. This is
complemented by Dr. Farnham's expertise on introduced macroalgae, Dr.
Critchley's expertise macroalgae biology, and Dr. Little's experience in
intertidal communities. Insights into causes and conditions conducive to seaweed
invasions could prevent future spread and impact coastal management practice.