* 0211860
* Startup and Transients in Millisecond Chemical Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Lanny Schmidt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2005
* USD 222,180.00

Short contact time chemical reactors have great promise for conversion of light
alkanes into useful chemicals with greater efficiency, lower cost, and less
pollution. Important applications of this technology are conversion of natural
gas to liquid fuels and reforming of alkane fuels to hydrogen for fuel cells.
Implementation of this technology requires characterization of the processes and
mechanisms. Steady state behavior is fairly well understood, and the previous
grant characterized performance and mechanisms of these processes. However,
transients must be characterized to develop lightoff protocols and to further
understand the mechanisms of alkane oxidation in short contact time chemical
reactors.&lt;br/&gt; We have a systematic program to examine the transient
behavior of short contact time chemical reactors. This research has two major
objectives: (1) use of transient experiments to further characterize the
mechanisms of these processes and (2) the development of methods for fast
lightoff and transients in applications such as fuel processing for small fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt; Experiments will involve mass spectrometric and temperature
measurement of responses to step changes in feeds and isotope switching. We will
examine carbon and oxygen formation and removal on the catalyst by titration
with flowing gases. Startup transients will also be examined by ignition with
different gas mixtures that react either catalytically or homogeneously to
attain rapid heating to ignition temperatures. Other experiments will involve
periodic forcing of composition at different frequencies, gas-liquid reactions
at short contact time, and reactions involving flash vaporization of fuel using
fuel injectors. We will also develop capabilities to examine time dependences
and bifurcation behavior in startup and extinction of fast coupled exothermic
and endothermic processes in the catalytic wall reactor.&lt;br/&gt; These
experiments will be analyzed by computational fluid dynamics using elementary
step models to simulate temperatures and coverages in startup and with
transients. This will lead to more fundamental elementary step models and
characterization of bifurcation behavior in these systems that will be essential
in developing new short contact time chemical processes.&lt;br/&gt; Fuel cells
will not be practical unit fuel reforming methods and fast lightoff strategies
are developed, and this research will be a key ingredient in these
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;