* 0211691
* Wild Rice Population Dynamics and Nutrient Cycles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,06/30/2007
* John Pastor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 553,068.00

Populations of plants and animals typically undergo regular oscillations or
boom-and-bust cycles in nature. Ecologists have long been interested in the
causes of these oscillations. Ecological theory predicts that any delay in a
population will cause it to oscillate. Most of the processes that have been
proposed as causes of delays are purely population processes, such as delays in
birth rate. But if the recycling of limiting nutrients between decaying plant
material (litter) and live plants is delayed, this could also cause a population
to oscillate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wild rice is an interesting wetland plant
species whose populations have long been known to oscillate. Wild rice is an
annual plant and so the population must meet all its nutrients requirements for
growth from the release of nutrients in decaying litter from previous years.
Almost all the nutrients wild rice needs for growth are taken up in a brief
window in spring-early summer of the year. But litter from the previous year
decomposes so slowly that it does not even begin to release nutrients until at
least the end of summer or not even until the second year of decay. We
hypothesize that this delay in the recycling of nutrients through decaying
litter causes wild rice populations to oscillate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides
being ecologically interesting, wild rice is an important staple food for
members of Minnesota's Ojibway (Chippewa) tribe. Wild rice harvesting is a
defining feature of Ojibway society. Ojibway culture includes legends of wild
rice spiritual ceremonies conducted during harvest time. Wild rice approaches
sacred food status and band members identify wild rice as a symbol of what it
means to be Ojibway. The Ojibway tribe manages over a dozen wild rice lakes in
northeastern Minnesota for wild rice production in as natural a manner as
possible. Therefore, what causes oscillations in wild rice production is of
interest, culturally and scientifically, to tribal members as well as to a wider
scientific community. This research will involve close collaboration with
members of the Fond du Lac band of Ojibway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of
delays in nutrient release on wild rice population dynamics will be tested by
the following three-pronged approach: (1) making long-term observations of wild
rice productivity, seed production, and nutrient availability in sediments in a
series of wild rice lakes; (2) manipulating litter, nutrient inputs, and seed
vs. seedling establishment in large mesocosms (stock tanks) and measuring total
productivity and nutrient uptake, mean plant weight and nutrient uptake,
seedling emergence, and nutrient availability; and (3) constructing and testing
a computer model of wild rice nutrient uptake, productivity, litter decay, and
seed production and emergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited
from the tribal community college to assist in this work. This project will
assist tribal biologists in addressing problems of natural resource management
of significance to Ojibway values and show tribal students the potentials of a
career in the environmental sciences. The tribe is anticipating that the results
of this study will provide critical information for its development of nutrient
criteria specifically for wild rice waters, and for improving management
decisions from a better understanding of nutrient cycling in wild rice
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;