* 0211168
* Prehistoric Maize in the Northern Andes: Pollen and Diatom Analyses of the Lake San Pablo Core, Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2004
* John Athens, International Archaeological Research Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 26,923.00

Before the time of Columbus in 1492, maize was "the grain that civilized the New
World." Prehistoric maize farming societies were found throughout much of the
vast continental areas of North and South America except in the most extreme
environmental zones, and truly advanced social systems occurred in a number of
areas. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. J. Stephen Athens seeks to
contribute to an understanding of how and why maize rose to such importance
during prehistoric times by analyzing lake sediment cores from northern highland
Ecuador. This northern South American study region, situated in a temperate
valley surrounded by presently and previously active volcanoes, is known for its
high agricultural productivity and the traditional dependence on maize by its
past and present indigenous populace. The study cores are expected to contain
long Holocene records of maize pollen preserved in the sediments. The deepest
appearance of distinctive maize pollen grains in the cores will indicate, along
with radiocarbon dating, when it was first introduced to the region. Combined
with other regional studies, this information will help signal not only the
timing, but the path of the spread of maize south from Colombia and, ultimately,
southwestern Mexico, its apparent place of origin 7000 to 8000 years ago. In
addition, the study of diatoms, which are the microscopic remains of certain
types of unicellular algae having silica shells, will serve to document the rise
and fall of lake levels, in effect providing a long term proxy record of
regional rainfall. This will help to determine the specific environmental
conditions under which the introduction and adoption of maize agriculture
occurred in the mountains of northern highland Ecuador, as well as changing
climatic conditions that prehistoric agriculturalists may have had to confront
through time. Related questions of interest this study will seek to address
include 1) whether or not the appearance of maize coincides with the earliest
appearance of agriculture in the northern highland region of Ecuador, or if
maize actually post-dates initial agriculture; 2) the trajectory of the
prehistoric intensification of maize cultivation over time; 3) the change of the
natural landscape of the highland valley to a virtually entirely man-made
landscape; and 4) an evaluation of the possible effect of major volcanic ash
falls on the ecology and environment of the inter-Andean valley and the time
required for recovery (e.g., is there evidence that humans abandoned the valley
for a significant period following major eruptions?).

The significance of the research is that it will advance our understanding of
the history of the single most important New World agricultural domesticate,
contributing to a baseline of information for the spread of maize from
Mesoamerica and its adoption by indigenous prehistoric societies in the northern
Andes. Information on the history of maize in the northern Andes heretofore has
been sketchy at best, and there have been very few detailed studies of its
history of use at any single location. In addition, the study will provide a
long term perspective on climatic fluctuations, the natural environment, and
human ecology in a region that is presently densely populated. Such information
may contribute to the development and guidance of a variety of public policy
issues besides being of scientific interest to several disciplines.

