* 0211377
* Dissertation Research:  Aboriginal ecosystem management as a socio-natural system
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Benjamin Orlove, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2004
* USD 8,982.00

Fire is a powerful resource management tool, perhaps the oldest to be used by
humans. Through the use of fire to open up forests and woodlands, establish
grasslands and encourage the establishment of species beneficial to human
survival, humans have modified ecosystems such that they have become dependent
upon anthropogenic fire for maintenance. This dissertation research project
studies the socio-natural system of fire that has resulted from the repeated
actions and reactions of both social and natural processes in Western Australia.
The student, a human ecologist from University of California, Davis, will
explore the relationship between Australian Aboriginal management practices and
the distribution and abundance of vegetation communities and kangaroo
populations in the Kimberley region of tropical Australia. Analysis of the
Aboriginal human-nature interaction will focus on the interactions between three
components of the socio-natural system: resource use, management practice and
reproductive biology. A two-fold approach to analyzing Aboriginal ecosystem
management with fire will be carried out, using both ethnographic and ecological
research methodologies. This research will document indigenous land management
in a contemporary context while situating that context historically. Fire
encapsulates the Aboriginal relationship with land, yet Western settlers and
land management agencies heavily circumscribe fire practice. Improving fire
management is a priority both within and beyond Australia, and this research
contributes to that need.

