* 0211620
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  A Low Cost Video and Image Compression Framework
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Magdy Bayoumi, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 25,190.00

0211620 Bayoumi

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project by Dr. Magdy
Bayoumi, Director, The Center for Advanced Computer Studies (CAS) at University
of Louisiana, Lafayette, Louisiana and Dr. Samia Mashali, Professor of Computer
Engineering at the Electronics Research Institute (ERI), Cairo, Egypt. They plan
to focus on the development of novel algorithms, methods, and a
hardware/software prototype for compressed-domain feature extraction using an
existing wavelet coder infrastructure. Specifically, these investigators will
develop algorithms and techniques for calculating texture and shape attributes
from images and videos compressed with the JPEG2000 and motion-JPEG2000
compression standards. The novelty of the proposed method lies in its employment
of a wavelet-based approach as opposed to the standard DCT methods, the
addressing of texture and shape features which have received limited attention
in the literature, and the emphasis on hardware solutions to further enhance the
computation and memory reductions achieved with compressed-domain techniques.

Scope: The necessity of compression for storage coupled with the need to
efficiently process the compacted data has led to a great need for compressed-
domain methods in which data can be processed without decoding. The U.S. PI is
well known in the area of VLSI Signal processing and has done work in
architectures wavelet and other transforms. He and his students have
demonstrated how to extract textual features for wavelet-compressed images. The
project will involve training of students at the University of Louisiana and
ERI. It will help ERI develop a video compression laboratory that will benefit
industrial sectors in Egypt and other countries in the Middle East. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.