* 0211192
* Symposium: Recent Advances and New Directions in Mechanics, Continuum Thermodynamics, and Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Chi-Sing Man, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hans G. Kaper
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0211192&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chi-Sing Man&lt;br/&gt;Insitution:
University of Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;Title: Symposium: Recent advances and new
directions in mechanics, continuum thermodynamics, and kinetic
theory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A symposium
entitled&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Recent Advances and New Directions in Mechanics,
Continuum Thermodynamics, and Kinetic Theory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;will be held
at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, in
conjunction with the 14th U.S. National Congress on Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics, June 23-28, 2002. The symposium will focus on current problems in
three areas: rational mechanics, continuum thermodynamics, and kinetic theory,
as they are practiced today in the spirit of the late Clifford Truesdell. The
objectives of the symposium are&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (1) highlight recent
advances in the three topic areas;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (2) provide the
opportunity for communication and collaboration between senior and junior
investigators;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (3) educate young researchers and advanced
graduate students and expose them to the forefronts of current research;
and&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; (4) shape new directions of research among
investigators who value an emphasis on foundations, structure, and logical
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Journal of Elasticity and the Physical
Science of Solids" has dedicated a special volume to the papers of the
symposium. The publication of a hard-cover book is also planned. Details about
the symposium can be found on the web at
http://www.ms.uky.edu/~mcsxyh/ctsymp.htm.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;