* 0211208
* New Multicomponent SMB/Chromatographic Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Phillip Wankat, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 07/31/2005
* USD 296,068.00

This project is developing a number of improved simulated moving-bed (SMB)
systems for both binary and ternary separation problems. Selective partial
withdrawal (removal of product during only part of the cycle) and dual product
withdrawal (use of two product lines for the same product) are analyzed for both
the raffinate and extract streams for 3 and 4-zone SMB systems. Detailed
computer simulations are used to optimize flow rates. A number of additional new
SMB cascades are being devised in the course of the research. These new cascades
are designed to result in better separations while using less or the same amount
of desorbent. This research uses detailed simulations to delineate binary
separation problems for which the new SMB cascades have lower desorbent use
and/or higher productivity than a standard 4-zone SMB while obtaining the same
product purities. The most promising candidates are selected for experimental
confirmation. Since ternary SMB separations are becoming increasingly important,
particularly in the pharmaceutical industry, a number of new ternary SMB
cascades are also being examined for both complete separation of the ternary
system and for the case where only one product is desired from the ternary feed.
SMB cascades for quaternary feeds will also be analyzed. Adsorption simulators
are being introduced into graduate-level chemical-engineering courses.

Simulated Moving Bed (SMB) adsorption systems have proven to be the most cost
effective method for doing large-scale chromatography for binary separations and
have been commercialized for a number of separations such as p-xylene
purification, separation of fructose and glucose, and, most recently, optical
isomer separations. SMB systems are considered to be expensive separation
techniques, with costs dominated by desorbent use and productivity. If
successful, this research will conclusively prove that desorbent use and
productivity can be significantly improved compared to current 4-zone SMB
technology. The new cascades being developed for binary separations will
significantly increase the productivity without increasing desorbent use, while
the new cascades being developed for ternary separations will significantly
increase the productivity and decrease desorbent use. These new designs will
have a significant impact on the design of SMB systems for industrial
separations and hence on product cost.