* 0211975
* MAP Kinase Phosphatase and Cell Fate in the Drosophila Eye
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Kevin Moses, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2005
* USD 381,000.00

Perhaps our greatest remaining scientific challenge is to understand the
biological basis for human consciousness. To approach this we need knowledge of
neurophysiology, systems neurobiology and the emergent properties of the human
brain as a whole. However, an important component is also to understand neural
development, which involves the progressive unfolding of genetic information
during development, through systems of signals between cells. This investigator
uses a simple system which is technologically accessible to model the
development of the nervous system: the developing eye of the fruit-fly
Drosophila melanogaster. The fly eye is comprised of about 800 similar facets.
Four days after fertilization, patterning begins when an indentation (called the
morphogenetic furrow) begins at the back of the future eye and sweeps forward to
the front edge. A new column of precisely spaced cell clusters is laid down
every two hours, and these found the eye facets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
investigator, and others, have found that the furrow involves the interaction of
a small number of molecular signals. One positive and one negative signaling
protein act together, ultimately to control the activity of a crucial, central
enzyme in the target cells: MAPK. A simplified view is that the instruction of a
cell to be a neuron is the activation of MAPK. Recently, this investigator has
used NSF funding to show that the two signals can integrate at the point of MAPK
activity, through negative feedback via an enzyme that inactivates MAPK. Four
questions will now be pursued: 1) How does the negative signal control the
inactivating enzyme? 2) Does this enzyme act on MAPK alone? 3) Does this enzyme
act in other developmental processes? 4) Does the new enzyme interact with other
pathways?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Beyond his scientific work, this investigator
makes service contributions to his field (organizing conferences, peer review
for NSF, NIH and twenty different journals) and trains PhD students and post-
doctoral fellows. His wider contributions include mentoring high-school and
undergraduate students and a high-school teacher. He also participates in a
program to co-train post-doctoral researchers in teaching as well as research,
in partnership with local historically black colleges.&lt;br/&gt;