* 0211197
* Dissertation Research: Global Capitalism and the "Caring Corporation": Copper Mining and Community Development in Sumbawa, Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Webb Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 3,910.00

0211197&lt;br/&gt;Keane / Welker&lt;br/&gt;Indonesia is home to one of the
largest Moslem populations in the world. This dissertation research by an
anthropology and history student at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
examines corporate-sponsored community development in the region surrounding a
copper mine controlled by Newmont, a U.S. corporation in Sumbawa, Indonesia. The
objectives of this research are to trace the political, economic and social
transformations taking place due to the corporation's presence and development
activities, and to investigate how social actors work out moral understandings
of these transformations and allocate resources through kin relations and
notions of development, corporate responsibility, Islam, and abstract rights.
Methods include participant observation with corporate personnel and local
Sumbawans, structured observation of corporate meetings with community leaders
and other intermediaries, archival research, and structured household
interviews. The student will examine the relationship between development
workers' and villagers' understandings of and support for four projects dealing
with housing, farming, environmental rehabilitation, and health. The research
will advance our understanding of traditional Moslem culture's relation to
development, will shed light on a major phenomenon of global capitalism -
corporate social responsibility, as well as contribute to the training of a
young social scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;