* 0211081
* Dissertation Research:  "Revitalizing" Salvador:  Race, Gender, Black Women and Community Organizing in Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Edmund Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 9,200.00

This dissertation research project--to be conducted in Salvador de Bahia,
Brazil, by a cultural anthropology student from the University of Texas
(Austin)--tests hypotheses regarding the roles of women in neighborhood
political movements, and how the forms of participation affect the relative
success of their activities. The project examines the efforts of emerging
neighborhood movements to block or change the course of urban renewal projects
that are intended to enhance leisure tourism but do so at the expense of black
residential communities. As a theoretical foundation, the researcher draws from
feminist theory, critical race theory, and recent work in urban politics. The
research focuses on the participation of black women as major actors in these
social movements and their role in grassroots mobilization. Data collection
strategies include ethnographic interviews, surveys, participant observation,
GIS-based mapping and archival research. The results of this study will
contribute to the body of theory regarding black women's organizing, race
relations in Brazil, and urban space. The student has established a
collaborative affiliation with the Department of Human Sciences at the
Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana, thus enhancing cooperation in the
international scientific community. Additional broader impacts of the project
include its direct responsiveness to concerns expressed by the World Bank and
Inter-American Bank about the status of "Afro-Latinos" in economic and political
development.