* 0211067
* GOALI:  Investigation by Ultrasonic Methods of the Very long Life Fatigue Behavior of Structural Aluminum and Magnesium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Allison, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2006
* USD 360,631.00

This project investigates the long life fatigue behavior of cast aluminum and
magnesium structural alloys that find application in automotive and other
technologies where lightweight materials are required. An objective of the study
is to develop accurate models of crack initiation and short crack growth that
can be used for predicting fatigue life. Very long lifetimes will be achieved in
a practical timeframe using ultrasonic fatigue in which cyclic loading is
applied at frequencies of approximately 20 kHz. The proposed method is far more
cost effective than the conventional techniques that are extremely time
consuming. The proposed program will examine the fundamental mechanisms
responsible for the presence or absence of endurance limits in this important
set of alloys. A significant effort will be focused on the potential use of
ultrasonic fatigue techniques as a viable alternative or replacement for more
conventional testing methods, especially where critical fatigue lives are in the
very long life regime. This proposed GOALI program would continue a successful
collaboration between the University of Michigan and the Ford Research
Laboratories (FRL) of Ford Motor Company. The co-PI will co-advise a PhD student
on this project. The educational impact of this work lies in close contact of
the graduate students with the industrial counterpart through summer internships
as well as the research direction by the co-investigator from
Ford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an opportunity to graduate
research students and university personnel to work with industrial counterparts
at the Ford Motor Company in developing cast aluminum and magnesium alloys with
very long fatigue life. The results of the study will benefit not only
automotive industry but also technologies that require lightweight fatigue
resistant metallic alloys. The research will establish new techniques of
characterizing very long fatigue lifetimes that find many practical applications
by taking advantage of the expertise and facilities at the academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;