* 0211139
* In-Situ High-Temperature Ferroelastic Phase Transformations in Oxide Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Waltraud Kriven, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 339,313.00

A compact, thermal-image furnace has been developed in conjunction with
synchrotron radiation to collect in situ high-temperature powder diffraction
data on selected oxide ceramics in air up to 2400 C. The experimental data is
analysed and compared with theoretical predictions by the Rietveld
crystallographic, profile fitting technique. The ultimate aim of this research
project is to investigate detailed mechanisms of crystal structure changes
involved in ferroelastic phase transformations in selected materials, using in
situ synchrotron XRD, hot stage optical microscopy and TEM techniques.
Specifically, phase transformations involving negligible or zero volume changes,
but possibly some unit cell shape changes will be focused upon. Phase
transformations in tantalum oxide (Ta2O5) and lanthanide tantalates (LnTaO4), as
well as lanthanide aluminates will be studied. In this manner, the structure-
property relationships of the materials could be better understood and tailored
for application, e.g., in toughening mechanisms, large force actuation and shape
memory ceramics. Preliminary studies will be made on some of the mechanical
properties of key ferroelastic materials&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This objective of
this project is to undertake in-situ high-temperature studies of phase
transformations in oxide ceramics, using our newly-invented, thermal-image
furnace, capable of 2400 C in air, in conjunction with synchrotron radiation.
The emphasis is on oxide materials exhibiting polymorphic phase transformations,
especially of a ferroelastic nature, at elevated temperatures. This is inline
with our on-going research efforts in identifying potential materials with new,
energy absorbing mechanisms, which have applications in the design of tough,
high-temperature composites. Furthermore, as a result of domain rearrangement by
ferroelastic mechanisms, potential applications are possible in large force
actuation and shape memory behavior.&lt;br/&gt;