* 0211307
* Early Nasca Craft Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Kevin Vaughn, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 76,395.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Kevin Vaughn will conduct
three seasons of archaeological research in the Southern Nasca Region (SNR) of
the south coast of Peru. The focus of the project will be understanding the
production, distribution, and use of one of the most finely made classes of
pottery in the Precolumbian Americas associated with the Nasca culture (ca. A.D.
1-750). For nearly a century archaeologists have studied Nasca polychrome
pottery from museum collections, however relatively little work has focused on
how the pottery fit into the wider sociopolitical and economic contexts of Nasca
society. In short, research into what can be referred to as the craft economy of
Nasca has been limited. Based upon preliminary evidence from recent fieldwork it
appears that the pottery, although a "craft" in archaeological terms, is not one
that fits easily into traditional models of craft specialization proposed by
archaeologists. Although polychromes appear to have been reserved for
individuals of high status in some contexts, recent work suggests that much of
the pottery was available to all members of society regardless of their status.
Despite this recent research, fundamental questions remain about this craft
economy. Specifically, where was the pottery produced and in what contexts, how
was it distributed and/or exchanged, to what extent was it used regionally, and
how was this craft economy related to emerging leadership in Early Nasca
society? This project is designed to address these questions in three seasons of
fieldwork in the SNR. In order to determine the regional availablity of raw
materials useful to ancient potters, the first season will consist of a material
survey in the SNR to locate clays and mineral pigments used for the production
of Nasca pottery. The elemental composition of these materials will then be
determined through instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) and matched
with compositional data generated from previous analysis to determine if the
production of pottery was restricted to a certain area of the region and
controlled by emerging elites, or if production was dispersed and not
controlled. Focus in the remaining two seasons will turn to evaluating
polychrome distribution and use. This will consist of evaluating seven Early
Nasca habitation sites through mapping and excavations. The data collected in
these seasons will determine how widely polychromes were circulated from the
production zones that are delineated in Season #1. Data will also be collected
to assess the quantities of polychromes used at residential sites, whether this
was limited to elites, or if polychromes were available to everyone, and how
this varied across the region. It is hypothesized that the farther away from the
regional core of Nasca society, the greater the importance that polychromes had
in tying local elites to increasingly exotic goods. The proposed research will
add to our understanding of why crafts are important in pre-industrial
societies, and how craft economies articulate with emerging leadership in these
societies. This research will also increase our understanding of how Nasca
polychromes fit into the wider sociopolitical and economic domains of Nasca
society.