* 0211576
* Gordon Research Conference on the Science of Adhesion; Tilton, NH; August 11 - 16, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Manoj Chaudhury, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2003
* USD 4,000.00

This award provides partial support of the Gordon Conference on the Science,
which will be held at Tilton School (NH) during the period August 11-16, 2002.
This conference is held every two years in summer, which to the true spirit of
Gordon Conference, creates a lively environment to bring up cutting edge ideas
and iron out controversial issues pertaining to adhesion science. The 2002
conference will composed of nine sessions, with two to three speakers in each
session. In tune with the tradition of this conference, promising junior
scientists have been invited along with established scientists from academia,
government labs and industries as oral presenters and discussion leaders. The
conference will consist of 21 oral presentations that will deal with the
interfacial, rheological and mechanics aspects of adhesion by highlighting the
relevance of fundamental adhesion science in solving technologically important
problems in coatings, structures, electronic, biological and MEMs devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers intend to invite more junior faculty
members, graduate students and postdocs to participate in the conference by
presenting their research results in the poster session that will run throughout
the conference. In order to facilitate quality discussion quality discussions
attendance to the conference will be restricted to 120 attendees, aiming to
attain broad representation across the diverse participants in the field of
adhesion science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;