* 0212092
* Skin Lipids and Cutaneous Water Loss Among Larks Along an Aridity Gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Joseph Williams, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 322,949.00

Title of Proposal: Skin lipids and cutaneous water loss among larks along an
aridity gradient. Principal Investigator: Dr. Joseph B. Williams, Dept
Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210.

A major evolutionary event that shaped current vertebrate life was the
transition from water to land. During this transition, animals evolved skin that
reduced water loss. With the later development of the ability of maintain high
body temperature, called endothermy, problems of water loss were exacerbated
because high metabolic rates are associated with increased water losses from
respiratory passages and by excretion. With high rates of energy expenditure and
water loss, endotherms make poor candidates for living in deserts, regions of
high ambient temperature, low rainfall, and low plant growth. Yet despite this,
birds occupy the driest deserts in the world. Recent work has indicated that
arid-adapted larks have a reduced total evaporative water loss, the sum of
respiratory water loss and water loss through the skin, compared with mesic
relatives within the same family. Desert birds could reduce their total
evaporative water loss by decreasing their water loss through their skin.
Research suggests that the barrier to water vapor diffusion in vertebrates
resides in the non-living outer layer of the epidermis. This proposal outlines
an integrated study designed to advance our understanding of the interplay
between environment, water loss through the skin, skin structure, lipid
composition of the outer layer of the epidermis, and the effect that increased
cutaneous water loss has on behavior and/or survival in a natural setting. The
comparative method and controlled experiments varying temperature, water vapor
content of the air, and hydration state will be used to examine adaptation of
the avian skin to desert conditions and the role of reversible phenotypic
plasticity on water loss through the skin. Variation in physiological phenotype
may also result from differences in environment during development. Experiments
are planned that shed light on how variation in the water content of the air
during development influences cutaneous water loss in adults. Characterization
of the potential for both short-term and evolutionary change within populations
will be of crucial importance in predicting changes in distribution and the
probability of extinction with the rise in temperature of the earth as a result
of global warming.