* 0212486
* Physiological and Molecular Causes of Genetic Variation/Covariation Inendocrine Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Lawrence Harshman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 372,000.00

Although a tremendous amount of information is available on physiological,
biochemical, and molecular aspects of endocrinology, very little is known about
the evolution of endocrine regulation. Genetically-based variations in endocrine
traits provide the raw material upon which natural selection acts during the
initial stages of adaptive evolution. Thus, a key step in understanding the
evolution of hormonal control is the characterization of genetically-based
variation in endocrine regulators within species. The goal of the present multi-
disciplinary study is to identify the variable molecular and physiological
factors that cause genetically-based variation in the enzyme juvenile hormone
esterase (JHE) in a cricket species. JHE degrades and regulates the key insect
hormone, juvenile hormone, and has been the subject of intensive study in the
Principal Investigator's laboratory during the past 15 years. This proposal has
three primary research objectives. First, using both in vivo and in vitro
approaches, the following hypothesis will be tested: genetic variation in the
concentration of or tissue sensitivity to neurohormones causes genetically based
variation in JHE activity and tissue distribution. Experiments will largely
involve assessing the effect of extracts or implants of neural tissue derived
from high- or low- JHE activity genetic stocks on JHE activity and related
endocrine traits in the same vs alternate lines. Second, the role of variation
in JHE messenger RNA abundance as the cause of genetically-based variation in
JHE activity will be tested. JHE mRNA abundance will be compared between high
and low activity lines using Northern blots employing a probe derived from a
recently obtained, nearly full-length JHE cDNA. Third, the high and low JHE
activity lines will be crossed and backcrossed to determine the degree of co-
segregation among (1) JHE activity and associated endocrine traits, (2)
molecular correlates of these traits (JHE mRNA level), and (3) potential
regulators of these traits. This research will simultaneously provide important
new information for several different areas of biology. This will be the first
study to identify the molecular and physiological causes of genetically-based
variation in an endocrine regulator in natural populations. This project will
result in the first detailed synthesis of endocrine physiology, molecular
biology, and quantitative genetics. Finally, these studies will constitute the
first investigations of genetic variation in neuroendocrine regulation in
natural populations and will set the stage for subsequent identification of
these regulators and the genes that encode them.