* 0212225
* engage1st - Creating First Generation Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Judith Hector, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 374,781.00

This proposal describes a collaborative program between East Tennessee
Community Colleges and the University of Tennessee (UT) College of Engineering
(UT_COE called engage1st to widen the pipeline of incoming first year
engineering students from under-represented populations and to provide an
intervention program that supports success for these students. The participating
community colleges are Northeast State Technical Community College, Pelissippi
State Technical Community College, Roane Community College, and Walters State
Community College. Engage1st has the goal of attracting and graduating students
with merit but not opportunity to engineering from those groups under-
represented in the UT-COE. Data shows that students in engineering at UT are
from families having an engineer in the immediate family or from locations where
engineers live and work - overwhelmingly suburban locations and specific high
schools. These students enter engineering having a model and an expectation of
being an engineer and being successful at UT. Under-represented students are
those from high schools in the institutional service area where there has not
been a supply of engineering freshmen. Students in this target audience come
from rural, urban, and inner-city settings and include Caucasians, African-
American, and Hispanic men and women. Engage1st has four components: 1)
recruiting of students while in high school, 2) academic preparation of students
at community colleges for engineering school, 3) adaptation of students into the
University academic and social setting, and 4) industry support for these
students from their home counties thru summer internships and scholarships. The
aim of the program is to provide a model for being an engineer and to foster the
expectation of success in engineering at the University to create new first
generation engineers. Students will be recruited as high school juniors and
encouraged to take SMET preparatory courses as seniors. After high school, the
students will attend a local community college for one year where they will take
English and Chemistry, Trigonometry, Pre-Calculus and computer programming
toward their BS in Engineering. Students will intern in their home county the
following summer. Students will begin at UT in the engage freshman-engineering
program and will live together and be taught as cohorts of 20 in Calculus and
engineering classes. Students return to their home counties to intern the summer
after their freshman year. In year 3, students enter their sophomore classes as
mainstream engineering students. Affiliated programming and scholarships support
the students throughout the program. The intellectual merit of this program lies
in the redefinition of the engineering education entry problems and combination
of existing expert resources as a solution. Engage1st combines the expertise of
the community colleges in remediation of fundamental skills with the innovation
of teaching freshman engineering in engage to academically deliver mainstream
engineering sophomores at the conclusion of two years. These students must be
taught to problem solve, and they need encouragement and the confidence from the
community college year to move to UT. The broader impacts of the program are in
workforce development of technical expertise in a manner that will, in time,
increase the number of engineering graduates. This program develops first
generation engineers (implying a new source of engineers in future generations)
and does it by creating a pipeline into engineering in populations where there
are not existing role models. Economically, this program starts to create that
technical staff and to develop a technical career track for a future workforce.

