* 0212789
* Studies of Brightness, Brightness Contrast and Lightness: Methods and Modeling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Barbara Blakeslee, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,501.00

Brightness is a fundamental quality of vision. A central problem in brightness
perception is understanding how and when the visual system is able to separate
the physically invariant reflectances of surfaces from their potentially
changing illumination. The luminance distribution falling on the photoreceptor
array, and the neural activity this engenders, is the algebraic product of the
reflectance of objects in the environment and their illuminance. The recovery of
surface reflectance and illuminance information from the raw luminance signal is
thus an ill-posed problem, in that there are myriad combinations of illumination
and reflectance that can potentially give rise to a given intensity
distribution, and in the absence of additional information there is no
algorithmic solution. We know from everyday experience, however, that the visual
system solves the inverse problem in a satisfactory manner much of the time. The
heuristic used by the visual system must, therefore, involve the use of
additional sources of information and/or assumptions. Indeed, much of the
current debate among researchers in brightness and lightness perception, and the
focus of this research project, centers on discovering the mechanisms the visual
system uses to solve this problem. &lt;br/&gt;A careful examination of the work
of Arend and Spehar [(1993) Perception &amp; Psychophysics, 54, 446-468] makes
it clear that lightness defined only as perceived reflectance is under-
specified, since it refers to three very different types of achromatic judgments
that are not comparable. This is a direct result of the fact that, in its
heuristic solution to the inverse problem, the visual system uses different
strategies to estimate surface reflectance in different situations. The fact
that lightness judgments are based on different information under different
conditions, and that the various definitions of the term lightness refer to
either all or only a subset of these different types of lightness judgments, has
created confusion in the literature. Thus, "lightness" data generated in one
study may or may not be comparable or relevant to what other investigators study
using the same name. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments are designed to resolve
large discrepancies in the literature over the effects of perceived illumination
and the effects of perceived depth on lightness perception. It is hypothesized
that these discrepancies are the result of different studies tapping different
types of lightness judgments. To definitively resolve this issue we will obtain
brightness, brightness contrast and lightness judgments for a set of critical
stimuli. A clear distinction between inferred-lightness judgments (cognitive
judgments of target lightness) and lightness judgments based on brightness or
brightness contrast (sensory-level judgments of surface color or contrast) is an
essential step in critically evaluating models of brightness and lightness
perception. These data will be compared to predictions of both a multiscale
filtering model of brightness perception [Blakeslee &amp; McCourt (1999) Vision
Research, 39, 4361-4377] as well as to an anchoring model of lightness
perception [Gilchrist et al. (1999) Psychological Review, 106,
795-834].&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research and education by
involving undergraduate students as much as possible in every phase of the
research process. Effort will be made to involve students from underrepresented
groups, such as females and Native Americans. In addition to the benefits
conferred on society by expanding knowledge of basic sensory processing, the
present research will be of broad applicability to any area impacted by the
interface between sighted humans and machines of all
descriptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;