* 0212674
* Legume-Rhizobium Interactions that Maintain Mutualism
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Robert Ford Denison, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* William E. Winner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 210,000.00

The importance of legume plants to nitrogen budgets of many natural and
agricultural ecosystems depends largely on their interactions with rhizobia,
soil bacteria that can live inside root nodules and convert nitrogen gas into
"fixed" nitrogen that their plant host can use. Rhizobia vary in costs and
benefits to their hosts. Why do many, but not all, rhizobia use plant
photosynthate (carbohydrates) to fix nitrogen that mainly benefits their hosts,
rather than hoarding that photosynthate to support their own future survival and
reproduction? This is especially puzzling since each plant typically hosts
several competing strains of rhizobia. Strains that fix nitrogen may increase
host photosynthesis, thereby increasing the pool of available photosynthate, but
if all strains share in this collective benefit then selfish strains that hoard
photosynthate should displace those that fix more nitrogen. Why hasn't this
happened? Preliminary data appear to show that plants can monitor individual
root nodules and cut off resources (including oxygen) to those that fix little
or no nitrogen. Mathematical models show that such plant "sanctions" would be an
effective deterrent to rhizobial "cheating," but additional research is needed
on the mechanisms of plant sanctions and on their effects on survival and
reproduction of rhizobia. Various experiments will expose some nodules to a
nitrogen-free atmosphere, while allowing other nodules on the same plant to fix
nitrogen. Noninvasive monitoring of nodule physiology and methods to count
rhizobia are working well, and we also plan to measure resource levels in
rhizobia. The importance to soil populations of rhizobial release from nodules,
relative to increased reproduction of rhizobia already in the soil, will be
determined using rhizobia expressing two different fluorescence genes. DNA
fingerprinting of rhizobia collected from nodules in the field will test the key
hypothesis that mixed nodules (containing two or more strains) are rare.
Although details will differ, our research may be relevant to any system in
which cooperation can break down, such as expulsion of algae by bleaching
corals.