* 0212901
* How Bacteria Colonize Ticks: The Role of Antimicrobial Peptides
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Daniel Sonenshine, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 09/30/2007
* USD 440,063.00

Ticks are vectors of a number of important diseases, and with mechanisms for
controlling ticks often less effective than those for controlling insects, these
arachnids may be more of a health problem for humans and wildlife than insects.
The long term goals of the these studies are to aid in the development of
mechanisms for preventing transmission of disease-causing microbes from the tick
to its next host, and to exploit differences between tick genera to develop
control measures for the spread of infectious diseases or to control the
microorganisms themselves.&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses the fundamental issue
of the tick response to bacterial infection and also addresses the question of
why some microbes have been able to successfully colonize blood-feeding
arthropods and become the agents of vector-borne diseases. Specifically the
proposal examines the hypothesis that Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick)
expresses a robust antimicrobial response following bacterial challenge. In
contrast Ixodes scapularis (deer tick) and Amblyomma americanum (Lone Star tick)
do not appear to express this response, at least to the same microbes. The
proposed studies will provide information on how and why these ticks respond
differently to assorted microbes. &lt;br/&gt;This project will concentrate on
one fundamental mechanism by which blood-feeding arthropods resist infection by
invading microbes. This is the use of antimicrobial peptides, in particular the
defensins, a key component of an organism's innate immune response. The project
will use ticks because they harbor and transmit a greater variety of microbes
than any other arthropod group. Many arthropods possess a well-developed immune
system that rejects most invading microbes, however, little is known about the
immune system in ticks. More precise knowledge is needed to understand the
limitations in the tick's immune system that have encouraged the ability to
harbor such a variety of microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;Ticks of the genus Ixodes
tolerate a greater diversity of microbial species than other tick genera. Other
genera, including Dermacentor and Amblyomma are noted for their association with
one, or at most two specific types of microbe. Most Ixodes spp. that are
microbe-tolerant are generalists, feeding on a diverse array of hosts ranging
from cold-blooded vertebrates to almost any type of bird or mammal. It is
proposed that these tick generalists have a less efficient immune system that
facilitates colonization by a diverse array of invading microbes. It is
hypothesized that differences in the tick innate immune mechanisms are important
determinants of their ability to function as vectors of pathogenic agents. By
using the Lyme disease-causing spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, and a non-
pathogenic bacterium, Rickettsia montana, and comparing the response to these
microbes in Ixodes scapularis (the vector for B. burgdorferi), Dermacentor
variabilis (host for R. montana) and Amblyomma americanum (vector for
Ehrlichia), the role of defensin will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis
will be explored within four aims, concentrating on the tick defensin, varisin.
The aims are: (1) Characterize the tick defensin gene (vsnD) from D. variabilis.
(2) Determine in which tissues of the adult tick the varisin gene is expressed,
and whether the defensin is expressed by nymphs, perhaps giving an indication
that defensin is important throughout the various life stages of the tick. (3)
Determine whether other tick genera (Ixodes and Amblyomma) have and selectively
express a defensin gene in response to different bacteria. (4) Compare the
response of the different ticks to Rickettsia montana, an intracellular organism
normally found in D. variabilis. &lt;br/&gt;Results of these studies will
improve our understanding of the role of defensin in the innate immune response
of ticks following challenge with various microbes. Elucidation of this
critically important defensive system will provide information regarding the
reason some of these ticks transmit disease-causing microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;