* 0212702
* Conformation and Dynamics of Complex Polysaccarides
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* C. Allen Bush, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The oligosaccharides and polysaccharides of the cell surface have complex
structures encoding information which controls cellular interactions. The
information is decoded by binding to proteins such as lectins which is often
complex and multivalent and may also involve cooperative interactions between
protein and carbohydrate binding sites. The solution conformation and the
dynamics of the oligosaccharide ligands, which can have a significant influence
on the free energy of binding, is poorly understood and will be studied in this
project by physical methods including computational molecular modeling and NMR
spectroscopy. The model proposed for flexibility in complex oligosaccharides and
polysaccharides will be useful for interpretation of protein-carbohydrate
binding equilibria and will serve as a basis for interpretation of the dynamic
properties of high molecular weight polysaccharides. The glycosidic linkages
joining the comparatively rigid pyranoside chairs in complex, branched
oligosaccharides have highly varied stereochemistry with some linkages being
relatively rigid and others highly flexible. &lt;br/&gt;In this research,
examples of relatively rigid oligosaccharides will be selected from the Lewis
and blood group oligosaccharides while oligosaccharides and polysaccharides
isolated from the cell walls of the viridans streptococci, S. mitis and S.
oralis will be models for more flexible oligosaccharides. In addition to
traditional nuclear Overhauser methods, NMR experiments involving heteronuclear
scalar coupling across the glycosidic linkages will be studied both in natural
abundance samples and in samples prepared with biosynthetic incorporation of
stable isotopes. The recently introduced method of residual dipolar coupling of
oligosaccharides partially oriented in dilute liquid crystal solutions is
capable of giving abundant and very precise experimental information on the
conformation of rigid oligosaccharide epitopes and new methods for treating
flexible oligosaccharides will be used which will lead to greatly improved
models for conformation and dynamics of the hinges which join more rigid
domains. The experimental results will be interpreted with computer molecular
modeling calculations including molecular dynamics simulations and Monte Carlo
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support training in structural
biochemistry for graduate and undergraduate students who will learn modern
nuclear magnetic resonance experiments and computer molecular modeling methods
along with aspects of the analytical and physical biochemistry of complex
carbohydrates. The PI's department has an especially strong tradition in
training of under represented minority students, both at the graduate and
undergraduate level.