* 0212326
* Focal Rings and Filopodial Emergence in Neuronal Growth Cones
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Kathryn Tosney, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 336,711.00

0212326&lt;br/&gt;Tosney&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axon Guidance &amp; Neural
Plasticity &lt;br/&gt;Oral preferred, Poster is OK
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THREE FUNCTIONALLY DISTINCT ADHESIONS IN
FILOPODIA &lt;br/&gt;Tosney, K.W., K. Balazovich and M. Steketee, MCDB
Department and Neuroscience Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109&lt;br/&gt; Filopodia are sensory and motile structures, vital for the
motility and guidance of growth cones. Growth cones can advance but cannot
respond to guidance cues if bereft of filopodia, the tips of their filopodia are
specialized for signal reception, and adhesion of just a single filopodial tip
to a cue can alter discrete elements of motility as well as axonal trajectory.
Individual filopodia were analyzed with correlated optical recording, electron
microscopy and immunolabeling, to elucidate the role of filopodial adhesions in
motility and guidance. &lt;br/&gt; We report that, contrary to common belief,
all substrate adhesions are not created equal. Individual filopodia develop
adhesions at three sites, and these adhesions differ distinctively in function.
Tip adhesions suffice to signal. Basal adhesions lie at filopodial bases and
along internal actin bundles, associate with a novel organelle, the "focal
ring," and function in filopodial emergence and dynamics. Shaft adhesions lie
along filopodial shafts, lack a focal ring, and control the extent of lamellar
("veil") advance. When present, shaft adhesions inhibit veil advance. Veils are
unaffected by basal adhesions, but stop advancing as they encountered shaft
adhesions. Veils readily advance along filopodia lacking shaft adhesions, but
not along filopodia displaying shaft adhesions. This relationship is not due to
veils removing adhesions as they advance. Reducing adhesion with antibodies
decreases the proportion of filopodia with shaft adhesions and coordinately
increases veil advance. Of particular interest, guidance cues can act by
targeting shaft adhesions. When a filopodial tip contacts an inhibitory cue, the
signal induces shaft adhesions and coordinately abolishes veil advance, whereas
contact with a permissive cue prohibits shaft adhesions and coordinately
promotes veil advance. Cues that target shaft adhesions produce systematic
changes in veil advance and thereby modulate axonal trajectory. &lt;br/&gt;
Individual growth cone filopodia thus develop three functionally distinct
adhesions that can help regulate both motility and navigation. These adhesions
also have structural and compositional distinctions. For instance, basal and
shaft adhesions differentially associate with Rho GTPases, basal adhesions with
Rac1 and shaft adhesions with Cdc42. We are currently testing the hypothesis
that one way in which Rac1 and Cdc42 control motility is by selectively inducing
adhesions that differ in function. &lt;br/&gt; Supported by NIH-21308 and
NSF-0212326.&lt;br/&gt;