* 0212141
* Integration of Axial and Appendicular Function in a Model Mammalian System
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* David Carrier, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 12/31/2006
* USD 361,437.00

Vertebrate biologists have often studied the axial and appendicular
musculoskeletal systems as though they were independent entities. Increasingly,
however, evidence is emerging that provides a clear illustration that an
atomistic approach to the musculoskeletal system can be misleading. For example,
recent attempts to 1) document and understand a possible mechanical constraint
on simultaneous running and breathing in ectothermic tetrapods; 2) document the
extent to which locomotion interferes with venous return to the heart; 3)
unravel the nature and causes of back injury and pain in humans; and 4) identify
and test possible locomotor and ventilatory functions of the epaxial and
hypaxial muscles have been limited by our understanding of how the extrinsic
appendicular muscles load the trunk. If we seek to understand the function and
evolution of the vertebrate musculoskeletal system, it is clear that we cannot
examine the axial and appendicular systems separately.&lt;br/&gt;The work
outlined in this proposal will monitor muscle activity under controlled
manipulations of locomotor forces to determine: 1) how the extrinsic muscles of
the pectoral and pelvic limbs load the axial musculoskeletal system during
steady state locomotion, and 2) how the axial muscles stabilize the trunk
against the locomotor loads imposed by the extrinsic appendicular muscles. The
rationale of the method is that changes in a particular aspect of the locomotor
forces must be met by correlated changes in the recruitment of the muscles
responsible for the locomotor force. Hence, correlated changes in locomotor
force and muscle recruitment are interpreted to reflect a functional role for
the muscle being examined. &lt;br/&gt;At a fundamental level, the information we
gain from this work on dogs will be applicable to tetrapods in general and to
mammals. First, the basal running gait of tetrapods was a trot. Although there
is much variation in body configuration, level of work produced by the axial
musculoskeletal system, and integration of running and breathing, the basic
mechanics of trotting appear to be largely uniform across tetrapods. Hence, an
understanding of the interaction and function of the axial and appendicular
muscles of trotting dogs should also provide insight to that of other groups of
tetrapods as well. Second, bounding gaits such as the gallop characterize the
locomotion of mammals. Improving our understanding of how locomotor forces are
transferred between the limbs and trunk and how the trunk is stabilized during
galloping in dogs can be expected to provide insight to mammalian body design
and locomotion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;