* 0212908
* Regulation of the Chloroplast ATP Synthase Rotary Motor
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Mark Richter, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2005
* USD 431,850.00

The F1-ATPase is a tiny molecular rotary motor driven by binding and hydrolysis
of ATP in one direction and by trans-membrane proton flux in the other
direction. Preliminary studies using single molecule fluorescence
microspectroscopy demonstrate that a hybrid ATPase assembled from recombinant F1
subunits from photosynthetic organisms is capable of generating sufficient
torque to propel large (1-2 micrometer) actin filaments through solution in a
manner similar in most respects to its bacterial counterpart. Remarkably,
rotation can be driven either by hydrolysis of CaATP or MgATP yet calcium,
unlike magnesium, is known to be an ineffective co-substrate for proton coupled
ATP hydrolysis or ATP synthesis. The fact that CaATP hydrolysis can drive the
fully cooperative catalytic process without being coupled to proton movement has
suggested a new catalytic model in which MgATP/ADP binding to the enzyme induces
a special conformation of the enzyme which is required for proton coupling but
not ATP hydrolysis. This project has the following two specific aims to test the
new model and to identify the dynamic events leading to torque generation: 1. To
identify the specific interactions between the gamma and epsilon subunits and
the core hexameric alpha3 beta3 structure of the F1-ATPase that define the
intermediate states of the catalytic sites involved in the catalytic cycle and
its regulation. This will be addressed using a combination of site-directed
mutagenesis and biochemical approaches; 2. To determine the magnitude and
direction of relative movements of the gamma and epsilon subunits during
catalysis and regulation of the F1-ATPase using real-time single molecule
fluorescence microspectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photosynthetic ATP
synthase has several unique properties which separate it from its mitochondrial
and bacterial counterparts and that offer new inroads to examine the remarkable
rotary mechanism of the enzyme. One such property is the presence of a special
regulatory segment located in the gamma subunit that has evolved in higher plant
species to provide a molecular "switch" mechanism that tightly controls the
catalytic activity of the enzyme. The switch is designed to block futile energy
loss during photosynthesis. A major goal of this research is to identify the
productive binding interactions between the gamma subunit and other subunits
within the enzyme structure that are involved in the molecular switch mechanism.
The information to be gained from this work is likely to prove seminal in
understanding natural processes that have evolved to regulate the rotary motor,
identifying different intermediate structural states that occur during rotation
and the molecular steps involved in achieving these structural states. This in
turn will provide the template to design gated "nanomachines" for a wide variety
of important future practical applications. The research will also provide
training in critical research skills for two doctoral students and at least two
semesters of laboratory research experience for a minimum of eight undergraduate
students, most of whom are likely to pursue graduate studies and to develop into
independent scientists. &lt;br/&gt;