* 0212449
* Social and Gonadal Control of Neural Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* John Godwin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 102,618.00

Differences between male and female brains and behavior result primarily from
differences in the timing, level and location of gene expression. Even in
species where sex is determined chromosomally and the gonads play central roles
in the differentiation process, the exact nature of gene expression is
influenced by a host of environmental influences ranging from nutrition to
social interactions. Although we are building a solid understanding of how
gonadal steroids influence the sexual differentiation of brain and behavior, the
mechanisms by which social interactions affect this process remain poorly
understood. This project develops an integrative approach to how gene expression
in the brain changes during sexual differentiation, in a model system where it
is possible to experimentally dissect gonadal and social influences that
regulate behavior. A well-studied reef fish species, the bluehead wrasse,
exhibits socially-controlled functional sex change. When local dominant males
are removed, a large female changes into a male, and even gonadectomized females
change to male behavioral phenotypes. The challenge is to identify those neural
genes from the brain relevant to the behavior that are differentially expressed,
between females that do not change sex and those that are induced to change sex
in their natural environment. This project has a focus on developing the
molecular technology to successfully approach that question, to first identify
some of the relevant genes that then can be targeted to look for changes in
expression during the behavioral change. Results will be important for further
developing this system as a good genetic model to understand the neural basis of
sexually dimorphic behavior.&lt;br/&gt; The impact of this work will extend
beyond neuroscience to animal behavior, to psychology, and to potential use in
aquaculture and fish breeding. In addition, the project continues excellent
field and laboratory training for students in an interesting project integrating
animal behavior, endocrinology and molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;