* 0212892
* Influence of Host Genotype and Growth Traits on Mycorrhizal Community Structure in Loblolly Pine
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Mary Topa, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 12/31/2003
* USD 74,993.00

The biotic and abiotic interactions that occur between roots and the soil
rhizosphere environment are easily the most complex and least understood
interactions in plants. Roots of many trees, in particular pines, are usually
colonized by a large number of mycorrhizal species that are generally regarded
as beneficial to both the host and fungus. Mycorrhizas generally improve access
to limiting soil nutrient and water resources, and offer protective benefits
against root pathogens, in exchange for the tree's carbon. However, the
association can become less beneficial and even parasitic when tree development
or environmental conditions results in carbon costs becoming greater than
benefits, or when fungal genotypes do not form beneficial associations with the
host genotype. Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda L.), the most widely-planted tree
species in the Atlantic Coastal Plain, has co-evolved a high dependency on
ectomycorrhizal associations because its natural range includes dry soils that
are P- and/or N-deficient. However, rates of colonization by individual fungal
species are dynamic, mediated by a hierarchy of biotic and abiotic factors at
the rhizosphere, community and ecosystem levels, with some fungal species more
beneficial to the tree than others. Since roots of an individual tree can be
colonized by 20-35 different ectomycorrhizal species, it is the tree genotype +
fungal community interaction with its soil environment that determines the
potential functioning of mycorrhizal roots along this mutualism-parasitism
continuum. &lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the roles that mycorrhizal biodiversity plays
in tree physiology and growth, and in the carbon/nutrient cycles of forested
ecosystems are essential for predicting soil carbon sequestration under various
global climate change scenarios. Our experiments are designed to test the
hypothesis that there is a wide variation in how roots respond to their
environment because tree origin (i.e. ecotype) and growth traits influence
fungal diversity and mycorrhizal community structure. We are using molecular
identification techniques to characterize mycorrhizal species diversity and
community structure in ten families of loblolly pine, and to determine whether
specific mycorrhizal communities are associated with faster tree growth. The
proposed research represents a mid-career training opportunity for the PI in an
exciting new methodology and area of root research, and will also train a
postdoctoral associate. In addition, Dr. Topa's lab will participate in a local
outreach program (New Visions: Explorations in the Biological Sciences) that is
designed for college-bound high school seniors who have a strong interest in
research and experimentation in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;