* 0212204
* Molecular Regulation of the Capacity for Isoprene Synthesis in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Thomas Sharkey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2006
* USD 390,090.00

Isoprene is emitted from many plants, especially trees. Isoprene emission has
large effects on atmospheric chemistry and so its emission has been extensively
studied but mechanisms of regulation of the rate of emission have not yet been
determined. Isoprene emission from plants varies substantially with temperature
and light. Experiments are proposed to test several hypotheses about how the
rate of isoprene emission from plants is regulated. Short term regulation will
be studied by measuring metabolites before, during, and after a change in light
or temperature. The factors that control the instantaneous rate of isoprene
emission will be assessed by analyzing (1) changes in metabolite levels during
transients and (2) responses to feeding intermediates of the isoprene synthesis
pathway. To keep track of isoprene coming from endogenous photosynthesis
metabolites and that coming from exogenous intermediates, a laser-based
photoacoustic system for detecting deuterium labeled isoprene from deuterated
intermediates will be used by colleagues at the University of Bonn. Longer term
induction phenomena will be studied in (1) leaves that have never made isoprene
and in (2) leaves where the isoprene emission capacity has been reduced by
moving the plants into low temperature and low light. Changes in precursor
metabolite levels, enzyme activity, and transcript abundance for selected
enzymes of the isoprene synthesis pathway will be included in the analysis.
Finally, the steps required for the evolution of the capacity for isoprene
emission will be studied. This will involve two approaches. First, isoprene
synthase from the legume kudzu will be transformed into Arabidopsis on a
constitutive promoter, on its own promoter, and on a heat-shock promoter. The
regulation of the expression and activity of isoprene synthase and other
selected genes in the isoprene synthesis pathway will be assessed to determine
if non-emitting plants normally have the regulatory mechanisms needed for light
and heat-dependent isoprene emission. Second, the differences between isoprene
synthase and a similar sesquiterpene synthase will be determined by analyzing
the crystal structure of isoprene synthase. These studies will provide basic
information on regulation of isoprene synthesis to allow for altering isoprene
synthesis by plants. It may be desirable to engineer plants or bacteria to make
economically useful amounts of isoprene or it might be useful to engineer trees
used in tree farming so that they do not produce isoprene. These studies will
also be used to help predict isoprene emission from plants, which will improve
our ability to predict atmospheric ozone production