* 0212213
* Regulation of Cell Phospholipid Metabolism by Phospholipase A2
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Suzanne Barbour, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 384,998.00

The regulation of glycerophospholipid metabolism is fundamental to cell
homeostasis as these molecules have important roles in both membrane structure
and cell signaling. Recent studies indicate that the 80 kDa calcium-independent
phospholipase A2 (iPLA2) plays a fundamental role in the regulation of
phospholipid metabolism. This study is intended to further elucidate the
mechanisms of regulation of the expression and catalytic activity of this
essential enzyme. Experiments are designed to determine if iPLA2 activity is
regulated by the accumulation of truncated forms of the protein that are encoded
by alternatively spliced iPLA2 messages. These studies will focus on the cell
cycle dependence of iPLA2 activity, as this is likely to have important
implications for the accumulation of phospholipid mass for daughter cell
membranes and potentially for the regulation of cell cycle progression. Among
the studies to be performed are the quantification of full length and splice
variant mRNAs and proteins at each phase of the cell cycle and the over
expression of the splice variants to determine if this reduces the catalytic
activity of endogenous iPLA2. Other experiments are focused on the potential
regulation of iPLA2 expression by Sterol Response Element Binding Proteins
(SREBP) and sterol metabolism. Several recent reports suggest that
glycerophospholipid and sterol metabolism are coordinately regulated and
preliminary experiments suggest that iPLA2 expression may be modulated by
changes in sterol mass. To address this question, a putative Sterol Response
Element (SRE) in the iPLA2 promoter will be characterized. In addition,
experiments will be performed to determine if iPLA2 expression is induced in
cells with low sterol content and if this is can be attributed to SREBP.
Together these studies should provide important insights into the regulation of
iPLA2 in mammalian cells. Given the essential role that iPLA2 plays in
glycerophospholipid metabolism, these studies should provide information that is
fundamental to our understanding of cell homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell membranes are largely composed of lipid molecules
that until recently were thought to play a simple structural role in cell
physiology. However, recent studies indicate that lipids have information
content and can be broken down into other molecules that can regulate cell
behavior. This research is intended to further our understanding of a critical
enzyme, iPLA2, which regulates a subclass of lipids, the phospholipid molecules.
As this enzyme controls the phospholipid content of cell membranes, it can have
dramatic effects on both the integrity of a cell and its ability to respond to
changes in its environment. These studies are designed to further elucidate
mechanisms controlling both the amount of iPLA2 in cells (expression) and the
functioning of the enzyme (activity). Together, these studies should provide
insights into the regulation of an enzyme that plays a critical role in
phospholipid metabolism. Given the importance of these molecules in controlling
cell integrity and responsiveness, this information will be crucial to further
our knowledge of how cells function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;