* 0212710
* Interaction Effects of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation and the Nutrient Environment on the Dynamics of Growth of Freshwater Bacteria and Phytoplankton
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Clifford Ochs, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,957.00

Exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is a fact of life for organisms
living in the photic zone of aquatic environments. It is increasingly evident
that zooplankton, phytoplankton, protozoa, and bacterioplankton exhibit taxon-
specific differences in physiological and behavioral responses to UVR exposure.
Although competition for nutrients is recognized as a critical factor in
structuring plankton community composition, nothing is known of the significance
of UVR under natural conditions for the intensity of competition among plankton
for limiting mineral nutrients. The proposed research will help to fill this gap
in knowledge. We will examine the main and interaction effects of the nutrient
and UVR regime on the growth rates and competition for phosphorus of naturally
occurring phytoplankton and bacterioplankton. A model is presented and
predictions made regarding the severity of nutrient competition under a range in
conditions of nutrient (organic carbon and phosphorus) ratios and UVR exposure.
We predict that, because of differential effects on bacterioplankton and
phytoplankton growth rates, UVR will modify the severity of competition between
phytoplankton and bacterioplankton for phosphorus. Using samples collected from
a low-altitude reservoir in north Mississippi, experiments will be conducted to
test the model predictions. This study fulfills two needs. It will be the first
to evaluate by experimentation using natural sunlight the interaction effects of
UVR and the nutrient regime on growth rates of autotrophic and heterotrophic
plankton under various degrees of nutrient limitation. Second, it will provide
knowledge of the influence of the UVR regime on the relative importance of
autotrophic and bacterial heterotrophic production in a southern U.S. aquatic
ecosystem, where, compared to higher latitudes, there has been very little
research on the ecological significance of UVR. Students will be involved in all
aspects of the project, from planning to sampling to data analysis to
presentation. With anticipated continued increases of UVR in temperate regions
due to ozone depletion, the effect of UVR on plankton trophic-level
relationships constitutes a timely and important problem.