* 0212137
* Reactions of Transition Metal Complexes with Silanes and Oxygen.  Chemistry in Molecular Approaches to Silicon-Based Microelectronic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Ziling Xue, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

Dr. Ziling B. Xue, Chemistry Department, University of Tennessee, is supported
by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division for studies of early transition metal-silane chemistry. The
reactions of silanes with d0 imides and dn amides will be compared with those of
d0 amides to determine how the pi character of the metal-imide bond and the d
electron count in the metal-amides influence sigma bond metathesis. To explore
the generality of the results obtained with the imides and amides, the study
will be extended to reactions between silanes and early transition metal
alkoxides. Reactions of the alkoxides with silanes and of metal silyl complexes
with oxygen will be developed as new routes to metal-silicon-oxygen phases. In
collaboration with scientists at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the compounds
prepared in this investigation will be used as precursors to prepare silicon
based microelectronic materials by chemical vapor deposition. During all stages
of the project theoretical calculations will be carried out in order to
understand the emerging chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
research is to develop the new precursors and routes to silicon-based
microelectronic materials. The first portion of this study will develop
fundamental chemistry that is relevant to the preparation of silicon based
microelectronic materials. Then chemical processes to yield these advanced
microelectronic materials will be developed. These materials include those used
as diffusion barriers and high dielectric constant gate materials in very-large-
scale-integration (VLSI) devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;