* 0212414
* Molecular Basis of Stability and Folding of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Bertrand Garcia-Moreno, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 565,228.00

The goals of this research program are to further understanding of electrostatic
contributions to the stability and function of proteins. Electrostatics is the
most useful correlator of structure and function in biological macromolecules,
especially in proteins. Without deep understanding of the contributions of
electrostatics, the computational methods that are needed to bridge the gap
between structure and energy of proteins cannot be improved, nor can the
structural basis of stability and function of proteins be established. To
accomplish these goals, two sets of experimental studies will be carried out.
One set will address the relationship between the dynamic character of proteins
and their electrostatic properties. To understand how local structural
fluctuations modulate pKa values, the pKa of Asp and Glu residues in
staphylococcal nuclease will be measured by NMR spectroscopy. The pKa values
will also be used to analyze the acid unfolding of nuclease with an ensemble-
based computational method that has the potential to describe a ligand-linked
structural transition at unprecedented level of detail. Global conformational
changes will be studied by measurement of the Stokes radii of the native and
denatured ensemble with size-exclusion chromatography. The goal of the second
set of studies is to elucidate the determinants of the energetics of short-range
electrostatic interactions. A cluster of ionizable and polar residues in
staphylococcal nuclease will be studied systematically. The approach entails
perturbation of interactions with mutagenesis, crystallography to obtain
structures, NMR to measure pKa values, and measurements of stability by chemical
and temperature denaturation.

A central goal of this research is to develop computational tools for structure-
based calculation of electrostatic energy and pKa values. The experimental
studies will contribute the physical insight needed to guide the improvement of
computational models, and provide the data needed to test these methods. To the
extent that the concepts and computational tools that emerge from these studies
have a direct bearing on problems in protein engineering, in rational,
structure-driven design, and in biotechnology, they will have a deep and broad
impact on society.