* 0212370
* The Influence of Late Quaternary Climate Change on the Ecology and Evolutionary Dynamics of Small Mammalian Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Julio Betancourt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2004
* USD 70,000.00

0212370&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the
evolutionary response of woodrats to&lt;br/&gt;temperature change over the late
Quaternary. The project involves work at cave sites in the southwestern United
States, using fossilized woodrat middens or debris&lt;br/&gt;piles. Middens
consist of plant fragments, fecal pellets and other&lt;br/&gt;materials embedded
in crystalized urine ("amberat"); when sheltered in&lt;br/&gt;caves they persist
for thousands of years. Measurements of radiocarbon-dated&lt;br/&gt;fecal
pellets are used to estimate body size; for most mammals, size is sensitive
to&lt;br/&gt;environmental temperature. Over the next year, we will investigate
a&lt;br/&gt;number of potentially problematic sampling and statistical
dimensions of&lt;br/&gt;our study system, including conducting studies with
modern animals to&lt;br/&gt;examine midden deposition and
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms may respond to anthropogenic climate
change by adapting or going&lt;br/&gt;locally extinct. However, the timing,
magnitude and nature of such&lt;br/&gt;responses remains unclear. The past ten
thousand years are arguably the&lt;br/&gt;best proxy we have for understanding
the likely effects of anthropogenic&lt;br/&gt;climate change. By examining
different species of small rodents at&lt;br/&gt;different locations within their
range over the late Quaternary, and&lt;br/&gt;estimating the thermal thresholds
at which different types of evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;responses occur, we may be
able to better understand how future climate&lt;br/&gt;change will impact
mammalian populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;