* 0212847
* LARSON, An Arabidopsis Homeobox Gene in Flower Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Zhongchi Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 06/30/2006
* USD 382,500.00

0212847&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective is to reveal
the mechanisms determining how cells in a multicellular organism assume their
developmental fates. Using Arabidopsis flower as a model, the focus of this
proposal is to reveal the regulatory mechanism for the spatial and temporal-
specific expression of AGAMOUS (AG), a gene for stamen and carpel identity
specification. AG mRNA is normally expressed in the inner two whorls of a flower
and is absent from the outer two whorls. LEUNIG (LUG), a putative
transcriptional co-repressor with sequence similarity to the yeast co-repressor
TUP, was previously shown to play a crucial role in repressing AG expression in
the outer two whorls. Since LUG does not encode a DNA binding domain, how LUG is
recruited to the AG cis-regulatory element is unknown. The newly identified
LARSON (LSN) gene is an excellent candidate for being a DNA-binding partner of
LUG. lsn-1 mutation enhances the defects of lug mutation in AG regulation.
Further, preliminary data indicated that LSN encodes a homeobox protein, can
bind to the AG cis-regulatory elements, and can interact with LUG in yeast. In
addition, as LUG mRNA is expressed in all floral whorls, the outer whorl-
specific repression activity of LUG could be conferred by interaction with an
outer-whorl-specific factor. Could LSN hold the crucial role in providing the
spatial and temporal specificity to the LUG co-repressor? The proposed
experiments are aimed at testing these hypotheses. First, the molecular identity
of LSN will be confirmed by transformation rescue of the lsn-1 mutant phenotype.
Several reverse genetic methods will be employed to identify additional alleles
of lsn. Second, the RNA and protein expression profile of LSN will be determined
by in situ hybridization and immuno-localization or LSN-GFP. Third, by
expressing LSN cDNA in ectopic whorls (where LUG is expressed), the ectopic co-
repressor activity will be tested. Fourth, to establish that LSN directly
regulates AG, the electrophoretic mobility shift assay will be used to identify
the binding sites of LSN within AG cis-regulatory elements. Further, LSN-VP16
chimeric protein expressed in transgenic plants will be used to establish the
functional relevance of LSN binding to AG in vivo. Finally, physical
interactions between LSN and LUG proteins will be tested using a co-
immunoprecipitation assay. Other LSN-interacting proteins will be identified by
a yeast two-hybrid screen. The proposed study will elucidate the basic mechanism
of transcriptional repression in higher plant development and provide excellent
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;