* 0212244
* Enhanced Learning in Undergraduate Education: A Research Communications Studio Model
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Nancy Thompson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 450,003.00

Objectives and Methods: The objectives of this project are to develop and to
critically assess a novel Research Communications Studio model that is designed
to improve learning, retention, and diversity of undergraduate engineering
students. The project will provide much-needed data on how student learning is
enhanced via hands-on research and interactions that take place within the
studio group. In the Research Communications Studio (RCS), small groups of three
to five undergraduate students, who are working on research with an engineering
faculty, will meet under the mentorship of communications faculty and
engineering graduate students. To ensure full integration of the model into the
colleges program of research and instruction, the project will provide
orientation for faculty/research directors and training for graduate student
mentors. The RCS model focuses strongly on the students communications tasks, as
assigned by their research directors. The RCS project emphasizes student
participation in professional meetings where results of their undergraduate
projects are presented. The studio enhances inquiry-based learning by making
principles of research and communications explicit and by engaging students in
reflection on those experiences. Assessment of the methodologies, results, and
significance will be done by the South Carolina Office of Program Assessment.
Assessment data will include measures of enrollment, persistence to graduation,
interviews with faculty and students. Data will be collected for project
participants as well as for a control group of non-participating undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The RCS project is predicated
upon Vygotskian theories of guided&lt;br/&gt;participation and distributed
cognition, i.e. cognitive development of the engineering novice within groups or
communities. The project explores three hypotheses related to the effect of
studio methods of instruction on 1) quality of learning 2) retention and
enrollment and 3) cognitive development and self-directed learning. The program
evaluation component will furnish data to test the three hypotheses and the
overall effectiveness of the RCS model, especially the use of communications, in
cognitive development through research-based learning. The interdisciplinary
project team includes engineering, communications, and education professionals.
Their expertise spans chemical, electrical, and mechanical engineering,
rhetoric, educational psychology, and interactive methods of teaching
professional communications. Broader impacts. In an effort to recruit and retain
more, and more diverse, undergraduate students, engineering colleges in
research-intensive universities are expanding opportunities for undergraduates
to conduct research with a faculty members group. However, better understanding
of student cognitive development from this project is urgently needed to
identify modes of mentoring and instruction that are effective in improving
student learning, retention, and performance. Collaboration with the South
Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation is designed to promote research
participation by underrepresented minorities, and to provide data on whether
minority performance and retention is improved via the RCS. The proposed RCS
implementation plan conforms to the situations and constraints typical of a
state-supported, research intensive engineering college. It should therefore be
widely adaptable. Dissemination of results from the RCS project will occur in a
variety of methods, most notably through two national workshops planned for
years three and five.&lt;br/&gt;