* 0212467
* Exploring the Development of Olfactory Sensitivity in a Procellariiform Seabird
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Gabrielle Nevitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 12/31/2007
* USD 361,611.00

Procellariiform seabirds (the petrels, albatrosses and shearwaters) make their
living foraging over vast expanses of open ocean hunting patchily distributed
prey such as fish, squid and krill. The secret to their success is an ability to
locate prey by smell. Over the past decade, much headway has been made in
understanding olfactory foraging of Antarctic species, both at large (>100s of
miles) and small (<10 miles) scales. Augmenting early work by leading
scientists, the Principal Investigator's (PI) broadly integrative approach to
studying olfactory foraging has expanded the picture of how seabirds "see" the
world with their noses. Now many questions arise. For example, how do olfactory
foraging behaviors develop in chicks? While other pelagic seabirds spend months
teaching offspring how and where to forage, procellariiform chicks fledge and
survive the open seas weeks after their parents have dispersed. These birds
appear to hatch knowing how and where to forage without aid or instruction from
a parent. How is this possible? Drawing from disciplines as diverse as
atmospheric chemistry and developmental neurobiology, this proposal explores the
hypothesis that, during development, chicks become tuned to odors used in
foraging by being exposed to them by their parents. This pre-tuning or
"imprinting" provides birds with information about the olfactory landscape they
will encounter after fledging, and, specifically, offers them clues about where
foraging is likely to be productive. This proposal investigates the development
of olfactory sensitivity in the Leach's storm petrel (Oceanodroma leucorhoa).
There are two primary objectives. First, chicks' behavioral responses to three
prey-related odors (DMS - plankton scent, pyrazine - krill scent, and trimethyl
amine - fish scent) and to one control odor (phenyl ethyl alcohol - rose scent)
will be characterized. The second objective will determine whether chicks learn
odor cues by pre-exposing chicks to a non-prey related odor during the egg
stage, and then testing whether this early exposure increases sensitivity to
that odor later in life. Results from the proposed research will be among the
first to address the development of olfaction in an ecologically important
context. In addition to her seabird work, the PI has been a key player in
developing new and highly integrative approaches to studying salmon imprinting,
so extending these ideas to birds is a logical progression of her work. Overall,
the results will greatly extend our knowledge of the sensory biology of these
fascinating birds. Such knowledge not only is useful to basic science, but also
may help bolster efforts to ensure the conservation of procellariiforms, given
the threatened or endangered status of many species. Moreover, by establishing a
study site at a University-sponsored field laboratory, student involvement in
the work will be much more easily fostered. Relative to the remote sub-
Antarctic, where virtually all of the PI's previous work has been conducted,
Kent Island (New Brunswick, Canada) is easily and economically accessible. The
location also provides access to lab facilities (not typically available on
isolated islands where procellariiforms breed) and collaborators from around the
world, as well as the ability to mentor graduate and undergraduate students in
the field.

