* 0212072
* Creation of the Imaginal Eye Disc in Manduca
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* David Champlin, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 408,000.00

Champlin

Analysis of the development of adult-specific tissues during insect
metamorphosis is providing a wealth of information regarding mechanisms used to
coordinate growth, patterning and differentiation in animals. Adult development
begins in the larva and precursors for adult-specific structures such as the
wing and compound eye are typically present at the time of pupation in the form
of discrete packets of cells called imaginal discs. The familiar and well-
characterized example provided by the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, in
which the imaginal discs are present through the entire larval stage, appears to
be a derived condition. In contrast, imaginal discs in apparently the majority
of holometabolous species are not created until the final larval instar. Little
is known about the development of these "late-forming" imaginal discs. The
current studies focus on the late-forming imaginal eye disc of the moth, Manduca
sexta. Prior to forming the imaginal eye disc early in the final larval instar,
the adult eye precursor cells in Manduca function as fully-differentiated larval
epidermal cells. Members of the Pax-6 and Six gene families are thought to play
essential early roles in eye development of all animals. Portions of these genes
have been isolated and their expression will be characterized as the eye disc is
being formed. A combination of in vivo and in vitro studies will be done to
follow gene expression as the larval epidermal program is turned off and the
adult eye developmental program is activated. A central goal of these studies
will be to establish the regulation of these events by the hormones that control
insect metamorphosis, juvenile hormone and ecdysteroid. Scientists and
nonscientists of all ages and backgrounds find insect metamorphosis a
particularly appealing issue. This attracts undergraduates from a variety of
backgrounds to participate in the research program. Undergraduates as well as
graduate students will be integral participants and it is anticipated that they
will be coauthors on primary research papers. The proposed studies are expected
to significantly broaden our understanding of the regulation of insect
metamorphosis and the findings will be communicated to the general public as
well as the scientific community

