* 0212258
* Morphogenetic Domains and Signaling Centers in Zebrafish Organizer Endoderm
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Mark Cooper, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 329,999.00

The goal of this study is to determine the morphological transformations and
inductive signaling functions of Zebrafish Organizer Endoderm during embryonic
axis formation. &lt;br/&gt;The zebrafish Nieuwkoop Center (inducer of dorsal
cell fate in the Organizer Region), as well as a putative signaling center
involved in head induction, are thought to reside in the dorsal Yolk Syncytial
Layer (YSL) (i.e. the dorsal cortex) of the zebrafish embryo's giant endodermal
yolk cell. During blastulation and gastrulation, several hundred YSL nuclei
within the zebrafish syncytial yolk cell undergo highly-organized morphogenetic
movements. These movements may serve to spatially transform and translocate
early-acting inductive signaling centers located within the dorsal YSL. Laser
photoablation will be used to selectively inactivate specific domains of
fluorescently-labeled dorsal YSL nuclei, to determine whether putative signaling
centers in the dorsal YSL actually induce and/or maintain gene expression in the
overlying zebrafish blastoderm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actomyosin-based
contractility within the YSL may serve to drive directional flows of (i) YSL
nuclei, (ii) the YSL plasma membrane, as well as (iii) mesendodermal cells that
are directly attached to the YSL plasma membrane. Cytoskeletal inhibitors will
be applied to the YSL to test for these putative mechanical interactions. In
separate experiments, the blastoderm will be mechanically removed from the yolk
cell to determine whether the yolk cell is capable of expressing its
characteristic morphogenetic domains without inductive or mechanical influences
from the blastoderm. These combined experiments will determine the extent to
which the morphogenesis of the endodermal yolk cell is coupled to the overlying
blastoderm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The morphogenesis of the zebrafish yolk cell
will also be examined in double mutant embryos that are deficient in cellular
endoderm and dorsal mesoderm. By studying YSL morphogenesis in mutants with
these specific genetic deficiencies, altered morphogenetic movements of YSL
nuclei may be identified and linked to failed gene expression. NEM/forerunner
cells, a small endocytic cellular domain derived from the putative zebrafish
Nieuwkoop Center, have recently been implicated in the establishment of right-
left asymmetry in the zebrafish embryo. Experiments will be performed to
determine whether secreted signals from the dorsal YSL and/or Eph/ephrin
interactions are involved in the endocytic and morphogenetic behaviors of the
endodermal NEM/forerunner cell cluster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
above project should reveal (1) the sequence of endodermal cell behaviors that
are involved in the morphological transformation the zebrafish dorsal axis, and
(2) whether the signaling activities of the dorsal YSL and associated
NEM/forerunner cells play roles in organizing zebrafish morphogenesis. Resolving
these issues will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the sequence of
endodermal cell behaviors involved in the construction of a vertebrate Organizer
Region, as well as the restructuring of germ layers that lie near the Organizer
Region during the course of gastrulation and segmentation.