* 0212386
* Does Ecological Stoichiometry and Defense Theory Predict Patterns of Resource and Predator Limitation in a Tropical Litter Food Web?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Michael Kaspari, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2006
* USD 332,558.00

A basic goal of ecology is to understand the processes that generate the vast
variation in&lt;br/&gt;abundance and biomass among taxa in time and space. Food
webs summarize the flow of elements&lt;br/&gt;and energy in ecological systems.
One basic type of web groups taxa into trophic levels based on&lt;br/&gt;shared
prey and predators. A significant and attainable goal for Ecology is to predict
the biomass&lt;br/&gt;across these trophic levels in time and space. Three
ecological theories, knit together, should help us achieve this
goal:&lt;br/&gt;Are resources limiting? OFAN&lt;br/&gt;How strong is selection
for defense? Defense theory&lt;br/&gt;How do prey allocate between growth and
defense? Ecological stoichiometry&lt;br/&gt;Which elements are potential
resources?&lt;br/&gt;1. OFAN (an acronym for its architects) proposes that the
balance of resource and predator imitation varies with the amount of resources
available at the base of the web.&lt;br/&gt;2. Ecological stoichiometry posits
that resources limiting biomass reflect the balance of chemical elements needed
for growth and defense relative to their availability in the environment. What
available elements can build defenses? How do defenses shape elemental
composition?&lt;br/&gt;3. Defense theory posits that the optimal allocation
between growth and defense is determined by&lt;br/&gt;the intensity of predation
and the time it takes for the prey to grow to reproductive age.&lt;br/&gt;These
theories will be used to explore the dynamics of tropical litter food webs in
the Republic of&lt;br/&gt;Panama's Barro Colorado National Monument (BCNM). Most
of what we know about the structure&lt;br/&gt;and function of food webs comes
from plant-based, or green webs. However, over 80% of the&lt;br/&gt;carbon fixed
in photosynthesis in the tropical canopy falls as litter where it is decomposed
in the&lt;br/&gt;brown food web of microbes, microbivores, and their predators.
The taxa in these webs may&lt;br/&gt;represent 60% of the forest's invertebrates
and their abundance can vary 100-fold at small spatial&lt;br/&gt;scales. Yet,
despite its importance in releasing carbon into the atmosphere, recycling
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;nutrients, and sustaining much of the forest's biodiversity,
we are profoundly ignorant of the factors shaping abundance in these webs. Like
the green forest canopy above it, the tropical litter represents one of the last
ecological frontiers on the planet.&lt;br/&gt;BCNM, with its extensive
infrastructure, its century-long stewardship by Smithsonian
Tropical&lt;br/&gt;Research Institute, and its ongoing large-scale experimental
and demographic studies, is the best&lt;br/&gt;place to undertake this project.
Ecological stoichiometry will be used to identify which
elements&lt;br/&gt;(among C, N, Ca, P, S, Mg, K, Cu, Fe, Zn) limit biomass in
the trophic levels and common taxa of&lt;br/&gt;BCNM's brown food webs. Its 50
ha tree plot will be used to map this biomass onto the
chemical&lt;br/&gt;signatures of 10 common tree species at three stages of
litter decomposition. These patterns will be&lt;br/&gt;further tested
experimentally with long-term 40 x 40 m fertilization plots, and pulses of
nutrients in&lt;br/&gt;1-m 2 plots. OFAN's prediction of a stairstep
accumulation of biomass along nutrient gradients will be evaluated with the
above data. Its mechanism--that the impact of predator limitation varies along
resource gradients--will be tested using fences that keep out predacious ants
and by supplementing plots with litter ant nests. Defense' theory's life history
tradeoffs will be evaluated in microcosms by measuring growth rates of common
litter taxa and evaluating their palatability to predators. If defenses by fungi
and microbivores significantly curtail predation then life history tradeoffs
that play out along resource gradients are a key phenomenon shaping the balance
of predation and resource limitation in this system.&lt;br/&gt;