* 0212215
* Of Moths and Mice: The Influence of Dispersal Distance and Local Predation Risk on Persistence of a Sparse Prey
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Clive Jones, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2006
* USD 400,001.00

Of Moths and Mice: The Influence of Dispersal Distance and
Local&lt;br/&gt;Predation Risk on Persistence of a Sparse
Prey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clive G. Jones, Brett J. Goodwin, Richard S. Ostfeld
and Eric M. Schauber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predators can potentially exterminate
populations of their prey. Understanding how prey populations persist in the
face of predation can help us sustain populations of endangered species and
control pest populations. For example, gypsy moths are introduced insect pests
that cause much damage in hardwood forests of eastern North America. White-
footed mice, which are abundant in these forests, are voracious predators on
gypsy moth pupae and are capable of driving moths locally to extinction. Since
moth extinction has not actually happened over larger areas, how do moths
persist in the face of intense predation by mice? The combined effects of two
factors are important: (1) the likelihood of a gypsy moth pupa being attacked
varies from place to place and (2) gypsy moth caterpillars do not disperse very
far during their lifetimes. Computer simulations indicate that combining these
two factors can substantially increase the chances that moth populations will
persist. During this project, data will be collected in oak forests in New York
State that will allow the development, refinement and testing of these
simulation models. The dispersal distances of gypsy moth caterpillars and the
predation risk for gypsy moth pupae at several sites will be measured. These
measurements will be incorporated into the computer simulation to predict how
changing the spatial pattern of predation risk would affect gypsy moth
populations. Finally, predictions will be tested in areas where there are
different numbers of dispersing moth caterpillars by putting out feeding
stations to manipulate the patterns of mouse foraging. This procedure will alter
the risk of predation for gypsy moth pupae and should change the likelihood of
local moth population persistence in a predictable way.&lt;br/&gt;