* 0212605
* Molecular Analysis of Drosophila Neurotransmission in a Reconstituted Fusion System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* James McNew, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Martha Flanders
* 08/31/2007
* USD 501,601.00

Nerve cells, or neurons, communicate and relay signals by the regulated release
of chemicals called neurotransmitters. This extremely complex process is tightly
regulated and is required for all movement as well as higher brain functions
such as learning and memory. One method to study such a complicated process is
to carefully dissect the problem into smaller units and gain a better
understanding of the component parts. The final step in the release of
neurotransmitter is the merger of the membrane bound sac that contains these
chemicals with the cell membrane, the barrier that separates the nerve cell from
its environment. The consequence of this membrane fusion event is the release of
neurotransmitter to the space between neurons, resulting in communication
between these cells. We seek to understand the structural and functional basis
of this membrane fusion event. The process of membrane fusion can be further
subdivided into discrete steps. Many of the molecular components that drive the
fusion process have been identified, but the precise way they interact to
perform their role is not well understood. The objectives of this work are to
identify the specific interactions that determine the spatial and temporal
coordination of neurotransmission in a defined system. We will develop a
synthetic fusion system to model neurosecretion using only the minimal
components, specifically pure phospholipids and fusion proteins from the
fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. Neuronal fusion proteins, called SNAREs, will
be produced in bacteria and incorporated into synthetic phospholipid vesicles. A
detailed molecular analysis of the protein-protein interaction affect SNARE
function will be studied. In addition, the role of regulatory factors will be
analyzed. This assay will provide a unique window into the way in which cells
fuse biological membranes. The ability to study these proteins in their native
context of a phospholipid bilayer will be a major step toward a better
understanding of their critical physiological role.

