* 0212776
* RUI: An Experimental Examination of the Role of Dispersal for the Spatial Population Dynamics of the Butterfly Parnassius smintheus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Stephen Matter, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2003
* USD 217,515.00

0212776&lt;br/&gt;Matter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the effects
of dispersal on the population dynamics of the alpine butterfly, Parnassius
smintheus. Within a network of 17 populations of the butterfly, two populations
were removed. Based on previous data, populations near the removals are
predicted to receive fewer immigrants (a 2% to 56% reduction in immigration),
while more distant populations should be unaffected. If immigration is an
important component of population size and persistence, populations near the
removals should have reduced population sizes and an increased risk of
extinction in comparison to more distant populations. Mark-recapture methods
will be used to examine dispersal and population size. Experimental methods will
lead to unambiguous conclusions regarding the role of dispersal for the
population dynamics of this species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to anthropogenic
habitat fragmentation and natural heterogeneity, many species exist as networks
of small, potentially extinction-prone populations. In such situations dispersal
can be particularly important. Immigrants arriving to populations may bolster
population size, preventing extinction. In cases where extinction has occurred,
immigrants may act as colonists. Understanding the effects of dispersal is
crucial for the management of these threatened species. This research will
address the role of dispersal for one species that can serve as a model for
threatened species. This RUI research project will train and support many
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;