* 0212700
* An Investigation of Protein Dimerization by Exploiting the Unique Properties of Chemokines
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Patricia LiWang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 417,148.00

Chemokines (chemotactic cytokines) function in immune response and are often
found to be dimers. The goal of this research is to investigate the protein-
protein interactions involved in dimerization of the chemokine family of
proteins. The chemokine family has two main subfamilies, the CC subfamily and
the CXC subfamily. However, despite sharing the same overall fold and having
moderate sequence identity, the proteins in each subfamily dimerize quite
differently, using different amino acids in different regions of the protein.
This structural situation is nearly unique and provides an excellent opportunity
to study the details of dimer formation. Previous work supported by an NSF
CAREER award has allowed the successful design and study of folded monomeric
variants derived from chemokine dimers. This funding has also led to the
development of several strategies designed to switch the dimer type of a
chemokine variant. Experiments in the current project are designed to study the
protein-protein interactions leading to dimerization. First, a screening system
has been established that allows for rapid screening of randomly mutated
chemokines to select for those having an alternate dimer interface. Second, the
new chemokine dimers will be characterized biochemically to confirm the dimer
dissociation constant and stability of the variant. Finally, nuclear magnetic
resonance will be used to determine the structure of the altered dimer(s),
thereby elucidating the specific amino acid contacts that allow dimerization.
This work will exploit the characteristics of chemokines (having identical folds
but two different dimer types) to reveal details of amino acid interactions
necessary for protein dimerization that is not obtainable from simply observing
known structures of dimers or from destabilizing known dimers. The work will
allow a greater understanding of protein-protein interactions at a molecular
level and will also provide an excellent educational experience for
undergraduates, as such students, including a participant in a minority student
summer program, have contributed significantly to the preliminary results that
lay the groundwork for these experiments.