* 0212305
* Society for Developmental Biology 61st. Annual Meeting; July 21-25, 2002, Madison, Wisconsin
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Sean Carroll, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 05/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

0212305 Carroll

Funds are requested for partial support of the 61th Annual Meeting of the
Society for Developmental Biology, to be held July 21-25, 2002 at the University
of Wisconsin in Madison. The Society has held this meeting since its founding in
1939, missing only two years during World War II. This is an indication of its
commitment and success in holding meetings of the highest scientific quality, as
well as a reflection of the community's interest on the field of developmental
biology. The scientific sessions encompass work on diverse organisms including
plants, invertebrates and vertebrates. Fifty-one speakers have already accepted
the invitation to tell the attendees about some of their latest findings in the
following areas: Development of Cell, Organ, and Organismal Size, Making
Boundaries, Developmental Timing, Extracellular Matrix and Cell Signaling,
Signaling into the Cytoskeleton, Making and Connecting the Brain, Development of
Sensory Systems, Organogenesis, Evolution of Morphological Diversity, Control of
Gene Expression, Germ Cells, Dealing with Complexity in Development, and Imaging
Cells and Molecules. An additional 24-32 speakers will be chosen from submitted
abstracts for platform presentations, allowing the inclusion of the latest
results and providing an opportunity for postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students to talk about their works. The Education Symposium will center on the
very current topic of Teaching Evolution and it will include a discussion period
with audience participation. An attendance of about 700 people is expected, and
most of them will present their new data in the two dedicated poster sessions
each day, one after lunch and the other in the evening. The organizers are
certain that this format allows them to continue to emphasize the best science
and to provide a forum to bring together junior and senior investigators, and to
allow them to exchange ideas on science, education and the role of science in
today's society. Merit-based travel awards will be available to students and
junior postdoctoral fellows, as well as Latin American faculty and students to
attend the meeting.