* 0212369
* Ecology and Evolution of Nodule Symbiosis for Invasive Legumes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Wanda Malek, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract: Ecology and evolution of nodule symbiosis for invasive legumes
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As a result of both deliberate and accidental transport
across regions, many species of legumes have become invasive weeds that have
greatly altered the ecology of plant communities throughout the world. The
disproportionate ecological impact of legumes is strongly related to their
symbiosis with root nodule bacteria (rhizobia). This symbiosis provides legumes
with an abundant supply of usable nitrogen, an essential nutrient that is often
a primary limiting factor for plant growth. &lt;br/&gt;However, the influence of
this symbiosis on invasion by legumes is poorly understood. Legumes must acquire
rhizobia from their immediate environment following seed germination, because
bacteria are not carried internally within seeds. As a result, introduced
legumes will often arrive at new habitats where well-adapted mutualist partners
from their ancestral range are nonexistent. Even if legume colonists have
sufficiently unspecialized nodulation behavior to allow them to use bacterial
strains obtained from other legume taxa indigenous to a site, there is no reason
to expect that such strains will be optimally adapted to the novel host.
Invasion success may thus depend on whether colonist plants can select for more
beneficial symbiotic partners over time. To date, there has been no research to
test whether evolutionary changes in symbiotic compatibility are an important
factor in legume range expansion.&lt;br/&gt; This project will use the highly
invasive legume Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius) as a model system to answer
several fundamental questions about demographic and evolutionary processes
affecting biological invasion by legumes. Scotch broom is native to Europe, but
is an aggressive invader on four other continents. The specific objectives of
the project are: 1) to use DNA sequencing of ribosomal genes to identify the
geographic origin of rhizobial symbionts for invasive Scotch broom plants in two
separate regions of the U.S. These bacteria will be compared to samples from a
broad range of other legumes species native to both Europe and North America. 2)
to test whether adaptation of nodule bacteria to invading legumes has involved
horizontal transfer of bacterial genes encoding symbiotic traits. DNA sequencing
will also be performed on two bacterial genes essential to the nitrogen-fixation
symbiosis, to test whether the genealogical relationships of different DNA
regions have been altered by transfer of genetic material between bacterial
strains; 3) to use field inoculation experiments to determine whether the
demographic performance of legume colonists is limited by a scarcity of
compatible rhizobia. The growth of plants in natural environments with and
without exposure to supplemental root-nodule bacteria will be compared; and 4)
to evaluate whether the rhizobia available to legume invaders are of inferior
quality, by comparing how plants grow when inoculated with bacteria from the
plant's ancestral range (Europe) vs. bacteria from newly colonized North
American sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; One of the most serious types of human
environmental impact on natural ecosystems involves activities that have caused
species to invade new geographic regions. By providing insights about the role
of microbial symbionts in legume range expansion, this project will contribute
to a better understanding of biological invasions, and will also generate
concepts and methods relevant to specific programs for managing a variety of
invasive legume weeds.&lt;br/&gt;