* 0212921
* RUI:  Hypercapnic Hypoxia Impacts Shrimp Immune Defenses Against Bacterial Pathogens
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Louis Burnett, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 426,412.00

Like their terrestrial counterparts, most marine organisms require oxygen to
live. In recent years the levels of dissolved oxygen in waters along the world's
coastlines has been decreasing. This decline in water oxygen (hypoxia) has been
attributed to many factors stemming from intensive agriculture and urbanization
in the coastal zone. In aquatic environments, hypoxia is often accompanied by
changes in other aspects of water quality, including dissolved carbon dioxide
and acidity or pH. Laboratory and field investigations support the idea that
this suite of changes in water quality, referred to as hypercapnic hypoxia, can
increase the risk of resident organisms to infection and disease following
exposure to a disease-causing microbe, or pathogen. Coastal zones are critical
breeding grounds for major groups of commercially important fin and shellfish.
Penaeids, including the white, brown, Pacific and tiger shrimps, are such an
important group of crustaceans that live and breed in coastal estuaries.
Preliminary studies have shown that hypercapnic hypoxia increases the rate of
infection and death in the Pacific shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei, following
exposure to the bacterial pathogen, Vibrio parahaemolyticus. Hypercapnic hypoxia
may directly enhance the distribution, survival, or growth of the bacterium
itself, or suppress immune defenses of the shrimp host. The objectives of the
proposed studies are to examine three factors of the interaction between the
host L. vannamei and its pathogen, V. parahaemolyticus, that might be sensitive
to hypercapnic hypoxia. Hemocytes, those cells principally responsible for
immune defense in crustaceans, may be sensitive to levels of dissolved oxygen
and carbon dioxide, or to pH. To examine this possibility, the first objective
of this study is determine whether tissue-level changes in dissolved gasses and
acidity that accompany sublethal hypercapnic hypoxia can suppress the ability of
isolated hemocytes to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria. Several lines of
evidence also suggest that physiological responses to hypercapnic hypoxia, such
as increases in ventilation rate, hemolymph circulation and cell-cell
aggregation, might alter the normal distribution of hemocytes in the shrimp and
reduce the efficiency of clearing an infectious pathogen. To address this
possibility, the second objective of this study is to examine whether
hypercapnic hypoxia alters the normal pattern of hemocyte movement to the gill
or to other major tissue compartments following an injection of live bacteria.
These movements will be monitored using both molecular and immunological probes
specific for hemocyte-associated molecules that are involved in immune defense.
A third set of experiments will examine whether changes in oxygen, carbon
dioxide and pH can alter the efficiency with which the shrimp clears a bacterial
infection. In these studies, L. vannamei will be injected with a genetically-
modified V. parahaemolyticus that produces green fluorescent protein. The
genetic modification will allow investigators to track where the bacteria goes,
where it is killed, and how it is ultimately eliminated from the shrimp. The
results of these studies are expected to provide basic information that can be
used toward protecting a key natural resource, the Penaeid shrimp, while
increasing our understanding of interactions between the functions of
respiration, ion regulation and disease resistance in crustaceans.