* 0212762
* Biodiversity Inventory of Asian Genera of Convolvulaceae (Morning Glory Family)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* George Staples, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Continuing grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 204,564.00

The Convolvulaceae (morning glory family) is a moderate-size family (50-60
genera, 2000 species worldwide) of mostly tropical plants, which has received
only sporadic attention from taxonomists. Consequently, the identity of species
and the classification of these into reliably identifiable genera are
problematic. A specialist on the group, Dr. George Staples of the Bishop Museum
in Hawaii, is studying the mostly Asian members of the family, focusing
especially on the genera Operculina, Rivea, and Blinkworthia. If this process of
verifying purportedly new taxa could be streamlined then the completion of a
global biodiversity inventory could be expedited through greater efficiency of
research effort. The activities include the compilation of an Internet-
accessible and authenticated nomenclator for all described taxa of
Convolvulaceae in tropical and subtropical Asia (Pakistan east to the
Philippines and China south to Queensland, Australia). Where a genus has an
accepted classification and the taxonomy has been reconciled with recently
collected specimens housed in the major museum collections, those species and
infraspecific taxon names will be incorporated into the nomenclator. Where no
accepted classification exists (the genera Argyreia, Merremia, and
Jacquemontia), revisionary work will commence on the Asian taxa, as a basis for
worldwide treatments later. Special research attention will be paid to early
scientific names (usually by European taxonomists) that have not been taken into
account in contemporary classifications. The nomenclator will endeavor to trace
all scientific names and provide their current disposition, with documentation
via literature and selected specimen citations. This research will be carried
out primarily in European and British herbaria and libraries, with recourse to
specimen loans for more detailed study at the PI's home institution. The
products will be a series of taxonomic revisions that provide better methods of
taxonomic identification, improve classification at the specific, generic, and
tribal levels, and contribute to nomenclatural reform. The nomenclator itself
will provide the first inventory of Asian taxa of Convolvulaceae. And the
process for creating the nomenclator will shed light onto how the process for
taxonomic verification of new, undescribed species can be made more efficient
and thereby enhance the taxonomic enterprise.