* 0212406
* RUI: Regulation of Cytoskeletal Linkages by AFAP-110 and Src: Focus on Myofibrils
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Henry Zot, Eastern Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/2004
* USD 264,999.00

This research project will examine the processes that underlie the assembly and
disassembly of myofibrils. Myofibrils are composed of sarcomeres, which are
repeating units of thin and thick filaments. Thin filaments composed largely of
actin filaments are linked to the Z-line, a structure that resembles cell
adhesions in protein composition. Among the proteins found in both focal
adhesions and Z-line structures are the barbed ends of the actin filaments,
focal adhesion kinase, p130 Cas , alpha-actinin, and AFAP-110. AFAP-110, which
is the focus of this project, associates with the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase,
Src. Recent evidence demonstrates that AFAP-110 recruits Src to the actin
cytoskeleton in response either to elevated protein kinase C (PKC) activity or
to mechanical stress. Evidence also suggests that AFAP-110 activates Src
directly, resulting in elevated phosphotyrosine levels in the cell. One
downstream effect of wide- spread activation of Src substrates is the
reorganization of the cytoskeleton brought about by the disassembly of
cytoskeletal linkages at focal adhesions and Z-lines. Mature myofibrils
disappear from myotubes expressing high Src or PKC activity. Conversely, the
generation of force across cell adhesions has been shown to cause the formation
of actin filament linkages and to stimulate Src activity restricted to the
vicinity of the mechanical strain. The properties that make AFAP-110 a candidate
for participating in the formation of cytoskeletal linkages include the ability
to bind and crosslink actin filaments, the ability to recruit Src to the
cytoskeleton, and the ability to activate Src tyrosine kinase. AFAP-110 could be
important in the formation of myofibrils during muscle development. To examine
the role of AFAP-110 in muscle development, primary cultures of myotubes will be
stained for AFAP-110 and the Z-line marker alpha-actinin. The two proteins
should colocalize throughout all developmental stages if AFAP-110 plays a role
in the formation of cytoskeletal linkages during myofibrillogenesis. Specific
inhibitors of Src will be used to test the hypothesis that the myofibril
formation requires activation of Src. To examine the disassembly mechanism,
myoblasts will be transfected with a mutant form of AFAP-110, AFAP.lzip , which
has been shown to activate Src and disrupt actin cytoskeleton of cultured
fibroblasts. Preliminary results show that PKC phosphorylation of AFAP-110
results in the activation of Src tyrosine kinase activity and stress fiber
disruption in fibroblasts. Transfection with mutants of AFAP-110 that cannot
bind PKC or that cannot interact with Src protect fibroblasts from PKC induced
stress fiber disruption. Parallel experiments will be carried out to test
whether AFAP-110 serves a similar role in muscle cells. The results of these
studies will elucidate the mechanisms by which mature myofibrils turn over and
new myofibrils form. The work is to be carried out in large part by
undergraduate students, who will carry their training onward to careers in
science.