* 0212962
* Collaborative Research: Holocene Drought Cycles and Impacts on the Northern Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* James Clark, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2005
* USD 234,226.00

This study will utilize high-resolution analysis of cores from closed-basin
lakes in the northern Great Plains to determine the frequency, intensity,
duration, periodicity, and synchrony of droughts during the Holocene and to
examine how vegetation and fire responded to drought. Since vegetation and lakes
in the Northern Great Plains are highly sensitive to drought, this region offers
an extraordinary opportunity to document decadal- to-century scale climate
cycles in the mid-continental United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The working
hypothesis is that the signal of drought from a single site is regional and that
droughts were synchronous across the region. To test this hypothesis, the study
will utilize lake-sediment mineralogy, fossil pollen, carbon isotopes of
charcoal, and charcoal abundance to develop detailed reconstruction of drought
cycles from the Northern Great Plains at a decadal scale. This will facilitate
evaluation of the teleconnections between mid-continental climate and the North
Atlantic region, where recent investigations have linked century to millennial
scale climate oscillations to variations in solar irradiance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential for broad impact in range
of physical and social sciences. Assessment of drought impacts forecast by
atmospheric models for the Northern Great Plains requires understanding of
natural drought variability. Evidence from paleoscience suggests that 20th
century droughts (e.g., the Dust Bowl) do not provide perspective on the range
of severe droughts that have occurred in even the recent past. Historical
evidence is incomplete and paleoscience data have not yet been assembled at
appropriate temporal and spatial scales to assess the intensity, periodicity,
and impacts of past droughts.&lt;br/&gt;