* 0212510
* Expression of Olfactory SNMPs in Drosophila Melanogaster and Manduca Sexta
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Richard Vogt, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 06/30/2008
* USD 459,268.00

&lt;br/&gt;Insects use olfactory systems to gather information about their
external environment, information critical for locating mates, host plants and
animals, sites for overwintering and egg deposition, and for social interaction.
Insects discriminate odors using hundreds to thousands of sensory organs, called
sensilla, which differ with respect to which odors each can detect. Sensilla
express ensembles of proteins, including Odorant Binding Proteins (OBPs),
Olfactory Receptors (ORs), Odor Degrading Enzymes (ODEs) and Sensory Neuron
Membrane Proteins (SNMPs). These proteins belong to multigene families which
express in specific combinations, and these combinations determine what odors a
sensillum can detect. Each sensillum is hollow and contains 2-3 neurons. Odor
molecules pass through holes in the cuticle walls of a sensillum, entering an
aqueous space where they are transported to neuronal ORs by soluble OBPs and
finally degraded by ODEs. These are the first biochemical processes in odor
detection; these proteins are a genetic interface between the animal and its
environment. The genome of Drosophila melanogaster contains about 30 OBP and 60
OR genes which differentially express among about 1000 olfactory sensilla. While
the functions of OBPs, ORs and ODEs are generally understood, the function of
SNMPs is not. Nevertheless, the properties of SNMPs suggest they play a central
role in odor detection. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies characterize the
expression of SNMPs in the moth Manduca sexta (Lepidoptera) and SNMP homologues
in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster (Diptera). We have identified 5 SNMPs
from 4 moth species; these genes only express in olfactory neurons, and their
proteins (around 525 amino acids) are localized to the receptor membranes where
odors are detected. SNMPs are related to the CD36 family of receptor proteins
which have roles in fatty acid transport, lysosomal transport and cell death in
animals ranging from humans to nematodes. SNMPs are the only CD36 family members
known in neurons. In this project, 13 identified SNMP-related genes of
Drosophila will be characterized with respect to when and where they express and
with which other genes they associate, and two identified SNMPs of Manduca will
be characterized to further understand their interactions and roles in odor
detection.&lt;br/&gt;Manduca and Drosophila belong to insect Orders that include
nearly 250,000 named species, about 25% of the animal group insects that
includes about 2/3 of all known eukaryotic species. Moths such as Manduca have
long been among the most important model systems for understanding the
behavioral, physiological and biochemical processes involved in pheromone
detection in insects, and are an important comparative model for understanding
pheromone detection in mammals and other vertebrates. Drosophila has recently
emerged as an important olfactory model system, due in part to the
identification of complete families of olfactory genes from the fully sequenced
genome and in part to the experimental genetic manipulations possible in
Drosophila. Manduca and Drosophila are highly complementary and provide a
comparison to identify both similarities and differences between insect
olfactory systems. &lt;br/&gt;This study will enhance understanding of the
SNMP/CD36 gene family in several physiological systems, especially olfaction and
the nervous system. The study introduces new technologies to the PI's lab, the
genetic tools of Drosophila, empowering the PI and his students to integrate
Drosophila data into studies of other insects and systems. The studies offer
training opportunities for students, including those of underrepresented groups
who are members of the PI's laboratory. The project will enrich understanding of
basic regulatory processes underlying odor detection, providing insight for
designing new strategies for insect control in olfactory-based predation of crop
plants and host and mate seeking behaviors. Improved understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying odor detection contributes to many disciplines
including agricultural and chemical ecology, entomology, neurobiology,
neuroethology, sensory biology, signal transduction and remote
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;