* 0212012
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Water-Soluble TNT Metallofullerene Derivatives for Imaging Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Steven Stevenson, Luna Innovations, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 09/30/2003
* USD 99,988.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I Project proposes to
functionalize TNT-metallofullerenes with highly water-soluble, steric-
stabilizing ligands and to evaluate these materials as general MRI(Magnetic
Resonance Imaging) contrast agents. Classical endohedral metallofullerenes are
produced in exceedingly low yields and are unstable in air. In contrast, the
development of trimetallic-nitride-template (TNT) process by the investigators
has allowed the production of a new class of extremely stable endohedral
metallofullerenes in sufficient research quantities. Biomedical applications in
diagnostic and therapeutic areas offer a near-term opportunity to utilize these
materials because the quantities required for such applications are relatively
small, and these nanomaterials offer unique advantages over current systems. The
TNT process allows the encapsulation of 1-3 paramagnetic lanthanides, isolating
the metals from the body. Preliminary data indicates that hydroxylated,
gadolinium-containing TNT-metallofullerenes increase the proton relaxation rate
of surrounding water molecules significantly over currently used gadolinium
chelates. However, aggregation of typical hydroxylated fullerenes prevents their
maximum efficiency and utility. Addition of large, highly soluble ligands is
expected to promote enhanced water solubility, deter aggregation, and deliver an
even larger enhancement over current gadolinium MRI contrast agents.

The commercial applications of this project are in the area of Biomedical
Imaging.