* 0212267
* Soil Respiration and Microbial Diversity in a Subalpine Forest
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Russell Monson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

We will investigate the causes of high versus low rates of respiration (CO2
loss) by soil microorganisms (fungi and bacteria) in a subalpine forest
ecosystem in Colorado. Soil respiration is one of the dominant processes
affecting ecosystem carbon balance, and thus affecting the capacity for
ecosystems to absorb carbon dioxide that is emitted to the atmosphere from
fossil fuel and biomass burning. In the subalpine forest ecosystem of Colorado,
soil respiration is responsible for returning 40-60% of the CO2 that is absorbed
by the photosynthetic trees of the forest, to the atmosphere each year. It is
likely that this value changes significantly from wet to dry years and in
response to long-term climate warming. We will seek to understand why it changes
so much by studying changes in the soil microorganisms that release the CO2 in
response to spatial and temporal variation. We will combine modern DNA
"fingerprinting" techniques to determine which, and how many, microorganisms are
present at any point in time and at any point in space, and the magnitude of
soil respiration associated with those organisms. We will also study the
influences of simulated treatments for long-term climate change in the form of
warming lamps and altered snow pack to determine the response of soil
respiration rate to climate change, and the causes of such responses due to
changes in the diversity and amounts of microorganisms. overall, the research
will provide us with an improved understanding of soil microorganism dynamics
and their relationship to soil respiration, one of the critical components of
the global carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will provide for the
training of two graduate students through Research Assistant support, and they
will significantly advance the development of techniques to probe soil samples
for the presence of microorganisms. This latter capability may turn out to be
very useful to future efforts in Homeland Security, especially with regard to
detecting trace amounts of potentially dangerous microorganisms. The grant will
also support the career of a beginning faculty member (David Lipson) at San
Diego State University.&lt;br/&gt;