* 0212134
* Simulation, Situations, and Embodiment in Conceptual Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Lawrence Barsalou, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* ping li
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,480.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lawrence Barsalou will conduct
three years of basic research. The funded project will examine the knowledge
that underlies typical high-level cognitive activities such as human discourse,
reasoning, or perception. The hypotheses that guide this research are quite new.
The key assumption is that high level, abstract, cognitive activities are
actually grounded in the situated everyday workings of the body-thus the terms
situated cognition or embodied cognition. &lt;br/&gt;For example, our knowledge
of cars reflects how we interact with cars, what it is like to actually drive a
car; to see, hear, touch, and smell a real car; or to feel an emotional response
to a car. This view contrasts with a tradition in psychology, whereby our
knowledge of the world is assumed to be fully abstract and detached-something
like the "centralized" one-kind-of-knowledge-structure-fits-all way in which a
computer program can be written. The funded research will test predictions
derived from the new alternative. Human participants will perform classic
"knowledge tasks," responding to questions such as "What are the properties of a
car?" or "Is a tire a property of a car?". Carefully-controlled laboratory
experiments have been designed around such questions and tasks to assess whether
situated and embodied forms of knowledge are used to perform
them.&lt;br/&gt;This research has broad implications. First, support for its
working hypotheses would motivate big changes in basic scientific theories of
human knowledge; this work could contribute to a fundamental shift in how we
think about ourselves. Second, the outcomes of this research could have broad
applied impact in education (i.e., how best to teach a knowledge domain) or
cognitive engineering (i.e., how machines should be designed to best interact
with human beings). Finally, this work may suggest new forms of artificial
intelligence. Intelligent machines that use situated knowledge, shaped around
their peripheral devices, are more robust than traditional centralized
intelligent machines. Possible new machines could resemble the robots used in
exploration of Mars, for example, a second-generation of robots that better
situate themselves in their environments.&lt;br/&gt;