* 0212046
* Multi-threaded Instruction: Forming Multi-disciplinary Research Groups to Improve Undergraduate Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Chris Rogers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 437,185.00

The primary goal of the creation of the Robotics Academy is to form a new multi-
disciplinary, project-based teaching and learning environment for undergraduate
students, involving students from different disciplines in the discovery process
and exposing them to the joy of research and design through hands-on experience
with real world problems. The Academy will include students (and teachers) from
multiple universities (Tufts University and University of Nevada, Reno), giving
the students and teachers the opportunity to benefit from specialties at other
universities, as well as to collaborate with others remotely over the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the proposed system, junior
students from multiple disciplines (i.e., mechanical engineering, electrical
engineering/computer science, human factors, biochemistry/chemistry, and child
development/education) will join the Robotics Academy, completing their major
program of studies through a pre-defined "robotics thread". The "robotics
thread" in each discipline consists of a set of courses that introduces the
students to robotics and how it applies to their chosen fields. During their two
years in the Academy, they will work in a team, composed of four students from
different disciplines, on a common robotics project. This project will
constitute their undergraduate honors
thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each multi-disciplinary Academy team
will work on a robotic project in one of 4 areas: Medical&lt;br/&gt;Robotics,
Tele-robotics, Nanorobotics, and Robotic Toys. Medical robotic projects will be
led by the responsible faculty in the Academy, in conjunction with surgeons
(Tufts School of Medicine and the New England Medical Centre), veterinarians
(with Tufts Veterinary School), or occupational therapists (Tufts University
Boston School of Occupational Therapy). Through their robotics solution,
students in these projects will aim to improve the quality of life of the
patient, or improve the safety and productivity for a particular medical
application. Tele-robotics projects will introduce students to concepts and
applications of remote control and manipulation. This work will be done in
conjunction with NASA scientists and will teach students about remote
exploration. The Nanorobotics project will put students at the forefront of
modern robotics, involving them in the cutting edge of nano-fabrication and
control techniques. The final project area will be in the design of educational
robotic toys. This project will build on the highly successful collaboration
with the LEGO Corporation and the development of ROBOLAB at
Tufts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a team, each team member will learn
from and contribute to the process in the life cycle of the robotic solution.
For instance, the mechanical engineering student will work on robot design and
fabrication; the computer science/electrical engineering student will design the
circuitry and program the intelligence of the robot. The human factors student
will design the user interface to ensure safe and effective use, while the pre-
service teacher on the team will implement the engineering education outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, senior students in the
Academy will act as mentors to junior students from another discipline. This
arrangement allows for the students to receive individual attention, while
encouraging communication across the disciplines. Each senior will also be
responsible for teaching one Academy Hands-On Seminar, an afternoon class in
some practical aspect of robotics that will be useful to all students in the
academy. For instance, a mechanical engineering senior might offer a course in
ProEngineer and CAD, whereas a child development student might offer a class in
cognition and learning strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five robotics projects
are planned for the first year, with two new projects being introduced in each
subsequent year. Progress of the proposed program will be assessed throughout
the three years of proposed funding. Results of the robotics projects will be
documented on the Academy website and disseminated at conferences. The Academy
is expected to be self-sustaining after three years, through industrial support
for individual projects.&lt;br/&gt;