* 0212245
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Abiotic Immobilization of Nitrate in Temperate Forest Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jon Chorover, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 08/31/2006
* USD 214,002.00

Atmospheric deposition of nitrogen to temperate forests has increased in recent
decades as a result of increased combustion of fossil fuels. Knowing how
nitrogen in air pollution is retained within forests will improve the ability of
scientists to anticipate interactions among efforts to mitigate human
alterations of regional and global cycles of carbon and nitrogen. For example,
the way that forests retain nitrogen affects the ability of forests to help
mitigate expected global warming due to increased carbon gases in the
atmosphere. Because nitrogen often limits rates of plant growth, increased
nitrogen inputs could affect forest growth and health. Most of the additional
nitrogen deposited onto the forest from air pollution is retained in the soil
rather than being taken up by plants. The biological and chemical processes
whereby this incoming nitrogen, dominantly in the form of nitrate, is converted
to organically-bound forms that stay in the soil remains unknown. Recent
evidence suggests that abiotic reactions (chemical reactions without
participation of living organisms) convert nitrate into organic nitrogen in
soil. This suggestion challenges a widely held view that microorganisms living
in the soils are the dominant agents for nitrogen uptake in soil. This abiotic
reaction of nitrate is particularly perplexing because the energetics of nitrate
reduction in soils are not favorable under normal conditions of well-drained
soils. The fate of the organically bound nitrogen once it gets into the soils is
also largely unknown. For example, it is not known how much organic nitrogen is
eventually converted back into an inorganic form that plants can use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will be among the first to
investigate the fate of dissolved organic nitrogen, which is increasingly
recognized as central to the nitrogen cycle of many forests. The experiments use
two ongoing nitrogen addition experiments in the Harvard Forest of central
Massachusetts and the Howland Forest of central Maine. The first objective is to
measure reactions of nitrate in these forest soils that have received nitrogen
additions experimentally. The PI's seek to determine whether nitrogen addition
has changed the capacity of soils to react with nitrate, either biotically or
abiotically. The PI's also present in this proposal the "ferrous wheel
hypothesis," that reduced forms of iron in tiny pockets of poorly aerated soil
can reduce nitrate to another form of nitrogen, nitrite, which can then react
with dissolved organic carbon in the soils to form dissolved organic nitrogen.
The second objective is to test this hypothesis in several laboratory
experiments, where the concentrations and combinations of hypothesized reactants
are varied systematically in a laboratory instrument, called a "redox-pH-stat
reactor," which controls the acidity and aeration of the soil sample during the
incubation. As a result of its interdisciplinary nature, the research requires
the collaborative efforts of an ecologist (Davidson), a chemist (Chorover) and a
microbiologist (Dail), all of whom specialize in the study of soils. &lt;br/&gt;