* 0212419
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Extension of Suffrage as Policy Innovation: A Comparative Study of the American States
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Nancy Burns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,885.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation provides an explanation of the
extension of suffrage rights in a federal system. The ultimate question is: what
does it take for a previously excluded group to successfully lobby for the right
of electoral inclusion? While other scholars have treated the behavioral
explanation of mass activism for suffrage rights and the institutional
explanation of policy enactment as separate endeavors, the Principal
Investigator argues that the two are too highly interconnected to be understood
independently. Understanding when and how movements for political incorporation
succeed requires understanding how the processes of activism and institutional
constraints interact. The project will explicitly endeavor to combine
theoretical frameworks from the literature on social movements that seek to
explain the development and maintenance of activism, with the literatures in
political science that seek to explain processes of policy enactment (e.g.,
political parties, legislative institutions, and policy innovation) to offer a
new and more complete explanation of the process of enfranchisement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer this fundamental question about the American
political system, the Principal Investigator studies the struggle for adoption
of woman suffrage. Woman suffrage measures were considered and adopted by states
through legislative enactment, constitutional convention, and popular
referendum. Some of these measures provided for only presidential suffrage, some
only primary suffrage, some full suffrage. Thirty years passed between the
earliest and latest state-level adopters of woman suffrage. It is through
investigation of this variance that we can discover the institutional and socio-
political factors that make expansion of the right of electoral participation
more or less possible for previously excluded groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research design combines an event history approach to analysis of in all forty-
eight states with in-depth archival research on the consideration of woman
suffrage (in a sample of six states). The national data analysis models the time
to adoption of woman suffrage in the states as a function of social and
institutional conditions, including: partisan competition, electoral strength of
third parties, racial and sex composition of the population, economic
conditions, organization of woman suffrage interests, and the difficulty of the
state initiative and constitutional amendment processes. The archival work is
conducted in states chosen explicitly for their variance on these conditions.
This allows the Principal Investigator the ability to trace the processes
through which each of these factors comes to matter in the struggle by
disenfranchised groups for their political inclusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;