* 0212096
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Diversity of Parasites and Infectious Diseases in Three Mammalian Orders
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Sonia Altizer, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2005
* USD 189,112.00

&lt;br/&gt;Pathogens and parasites are a major component of biological
diversity, and have&lt;br/&gt;important impacts on natural populations. A
central question in host-parasite ecology concerns&lt;br/&gt;what features of
host behavior, life history, and environment best explain the diversity
and&lt;br/&gt;evolution of infectious diseases. Significant theoretical progress
has advanced our understanding&lt;br/&gt;of factors that influence infectious
disease dynamics within populations, yet relatively few&lt;br/&gt;studies have
analyzed ecological variables that underlie observed variation in pathogen
diversity&lt;br/&gt;and characteristics. This project will examine patterns of
parasite diversity across three&lt;br/&gt;mammalian orders to explicitly test
predictions derived from both epidemiological models and&lt;br/&gt;island
biogeography theory. Major questions this project will address include (1) What
are the&lt;br/&gt;key ecological variables that determine variation in the types
and diversity of parasites in wild&lt;br/&gt;mammal populations? (2) How do
parasite transmission mode and the degree of specificity&lt;br/&gt;depend on
host ecology? (3) Does evolutionary diversification of hosts correlate with
patterns of&lt;br/&gt;parasite species richness? (4) Does knowledge of parasite
diversity have important implications&lt;br/&gt;for wildlife
conservation?&lt;br/&gt;Establishing a large database on the pathogens and
parasites infecting wild mammals is&lt;br/&gt;critical to conducting
comprehensive analyses and represents a major goal of this project.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators have recently assembled a large database on the
pathogens and parasites of&lt;br/&gt;primates and will extend this effort to two
other well-studied groups - carnivores and ungulates.&lt;br/&gt;These databases
capture (i) ecological, behavioral and life history traits relevant to
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;models of disease spread, (ii) records of parasites and
pathogens recovered from wild&lt;br/&gt;populations, (iii) data on parasite
transmission mode and degree of host specificity, and
(iv)&lt;br/&gt;phylogenetic information on the hosts. Database development
requires an immense effort and&lt;br/&gt;following this study all data will be
made freely available over the World Wide Web so that&lt;br/&gt;other scientists
can access the fruits of this labor.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding factors that
underlie parasite diversity and characteristics is vital to&lt;br/&gt;managing
vulnerable wildlife populations and mitigating threats to human health. This
study&lt;br/&gt;extends the scope of previous host-parasite comparative work by
examining a rich diversity of&lt;br/&gt;both micro- and macroparasites,
including information on parasite characteristics, and by&lt;br/&gt;assessing
phylogenetic information involving tree topology, branch lengths and rates of
host&lt;br/&gt;diversification. Analytical comparative methods will control for
sampling effort, test multiple&lt;br/&gt;variables simultaneously, and will
assess whether host and parasite traits are correlated with&lt;br/&gt;phylogeny.
A synthetic approach that links ecology, parasitology, epidemiology,
and&lt;br/&gt;phylogenetic comparative methods is crucial for developing a broad
conceptual framework to&lt;br/&gt;explain parasite diversity and characteristics
in relation to host features. To advance these goals,&lt;br/&gt;the
investigators will organize three annual workshops composed of experts from each
of these&lt;br/&gt;disciplines to refine predictions for comparative research,
explore methods for examining&lt;br/&gt;ecological and evolutionary interactions
in host-parasite assemblages, and chart future directions&lt;br/&gt;for both
theoretical and empirical work.