* 0212282
* Sox-Domain and Homeodomain Proteins:  Coordinate Regulation of DV Patterning of the Drosophila Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* James Skeath, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 365,997.00

Sox-domain and Homeodomain proteins: Coordinate Regulation of DV patterning of
the Drosophila Nervous System.

The elucidation of the molecular pathways that regulate the development of the
central nervous system is critical to our understanding of nervous system
formation and function. In humans, defects in neuronal development and function
lead to a wide variety of congenital as well as inherited neurological diseases.
The genetic and molecular events that regulate CNS development are just now
being explored in vertebrate and invertebrate model systems. Initial insights
from this work demonstrate a remarkable conservation of structure, expression
and function between Drosophila genes expressed in the developing CNS and their
vertebrate/mammalian homologs. These studies support the idea that the
fundamental architecture of many biological processes are conserved between
flies and humans.

The focus of this grant is to elucidate the molecular basis of CNS patterning in
the early Drosophila embryo. Specifically, the expression and function of a set
of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors, collectively referred to as
the columnar genes/proteins, subdivides the early Drosophila CNS into three
longitudinal domains from which distinct neuronal populations arise. In order to
understand how these proteins partition the developing CNS into distinct domains
it is essential to identify regulatory targets of the columnar proteins and to
elucidate how the columnar proteins act at the molecular level to regulate the
regions specific expression of these genes. However to date, no such target
genes have been identified. This proposal focuses on the identification of
direct regulatory targets of the columnar genes and on the dissection of the
regulatory regions of these genes in order to provide an initial glimpse into
the molecular mechanisms that pattern the early CNS in the Drosophila embryo. Of
note, the Drosophila columnar genes and their mammalian counterparts perform
nearly identical roles during the initial patterning of the Drosophila and
mammalian early CNS, respectively. Thus, it is likely that the clarification of
the molecular mechanisms through which these transcription factors regulate
pattern in the Drosophila CNS will have far reaching implications for our
understanding of CNS development in mammals.



