* 0212365
* Organization of F Plasmid Tra Proteins in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Philip Silverman, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 378,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Philip Silverman of the Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation to elucidate the structural biology of conjugal (lateral)
DNA transfer between F+ and F- strains of Escherichia coli. This research seeks
to define how the 30 or so DNA transfer (Tra) proteins encoded by the F plasmid
are organized at the bacterial cell surface and tests the hypothesis that these
proteins constitute a molecular machine that mediates conjugal DNA transfer. The
first specific aim is to characterize the interactions among the Tra proteins
with the goal of understanding what the Tra protein machine looks like from a
biochemical perspective. The second specific aim of the research is to apply
indirect immunofluorescence microscopy to determine how many Tra machines there
are on each bacterial cell and how they are related spatially to each other, to
F DNA, and to the bacterial cell surface as a whole. This research is the first
step towards a detailed structure/function analysis of conjugal DNA transfer
mediated by the F plasmid. To broaden the impact of our research to science
education in Oklahoma's underserved rural schools, a third specific aim of the
project is to survey antibiotic resistance plasmids in bacteria from the
intestinal flora of livestock throughout Oklahoma. These R plasmids will be
isolated and partially characterized by rural high school science students in
conjunction with The Oklahoma Science Project, which Dr. Silverman founded and
directs. Several considerations make this project both timely and important.
First, conjugal DNA transfer is connected to the dissemination of antibiotic
resistance, an increasingly alarming public health problem. Second, it is one of
several mechanisms by which bacterial cells secrete macromolecules across their
surface barriers; these mechanisms are responsible for the pathogenicity of many
bacteria. Third, conjugal DNA transfer has applications in biotechnology; a
better understanding of the process will increase the number and scope of such
applications. Finally, the project will create more opportunities for Oklahoma's
rural students, including its sizable Native American cohort, to enter
technology career paths.