* 0212346
* Genetic Analysis of Osmotic Stress Signal Transduction in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Jian-Kang Zhu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 01/31/2004
* USD 260,000.00

Osmotic stress caused by drought and salinity has been a major selective force
in plant evolution and an important factor limiting crop productivity.
Understanding the mechanisms by which plants detect and respond to osmotic
stress is important for basic plant biology and for crop improvement. Previous
studies suggested that plant adaptation to osmotic stress is governed by a
complex network of regulatory pathways, but most of the key components in these
pathways remain to be identified. This project continues previous effort in
using Arabidopsis mutants to identify such regulatory components. Several
Arabidopsis mutants impaired in osmotic stress-responsive gene expression were
recovered from a genetic screen by luciferase imaging using plants that express
the RD29A-LUC (firefly luciferase under control of the stress-inducible RD29A
promoter) transgene. Some of the mutations have been isolated through map-based
cloning, which provided significant new insights into osmotic stress responses
in plants. For example, cloning of SAD1 revealed the involvement of RNA
metabolism in osmotic stress signaling. This research is based on such findings
and is aimed at identifying new regulatory components in osmotic stress signal
transduction. Specific aims include the cloning and characterization of two new
genetic loci involved in osmotic stress signaling, and the identification of
genetic suppressors of existing mutants such as sad1.&lt;br/&gt;