* 0212696
* Importance of Buried Charges in Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Marilyn Gunner, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

A central problem in structural biology is to connect the structure of a protein
to its function. To accomplish this, photosynthetic reaction centers of
photosystem I and bacterial type II, the intramembrane F0 ATPase, and
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) will be studied. These are electron, proton, or
hydride transfer proteins where residues, cofactors and/or substrates change
charge or position during reaction. The primary tool for analysis will be MCCE
(Multi Conformation Continuum Electrostatics). This program, written with prior
NSF support, combines continuum electrostatics and molecular mechanics for
calculation of reaction free energy changes, residue pKa's and electrochemical
midpoints (Em's). MCCE will provide the ionization state of residues and changes
in protein conformation or ionization state that modify the reaction. This
information will establish the structural determinates of function for each
protein. The photosynthetic and ATPase proteins will be embedded in different
membrane models to see how membrane structure and charge affect the proteins.
The role of loop motions on catalysis will be studied in DHFR. Where possible,
calculated pKa's and Em's for side chains and cofactors will be compared with
experiment. Molecular dynamics will be used to generate modified structures and
QM/MM simulations will be used to obtain new cofactor and substrate charge
distributions. In addition, the protein structural data bank will be surveyed to
identify motifs that stabilize buried charges. A data set of 5000 buried charges
in 300 proteins will be used to characterize the distribution of buried
ionizable residues. Ionization states at physiological pH will be calculated and
the aspects of the protein structure that control ionization will be identified.
Motifs identified in the detailed structure/function analysis of specific
proteins will be placed in context by comparison with data-bank statistics.
Lastly, MCCE will be made easier for non-expert users by enhancing error
reporting and analysis of the output.

The structural database is growing rapidly. The next challenge would be to fully
analyze this information to connect structure to function. It will be necessary
to calculate functional properties of proteins, with known structures, to
identify most important aspects of the structure for a given property. The
overall objective of this project is to accomplish this goal. The work will be
carried out at City College of New York, a school with a significant population
of underrepresented groups. Initial protein data bank analysis was carried out
exclusively by undergraduates. The aim is to continue to integrate undergraduate
training into these projects. Detailed information about buried acidic and basic
residues and their predicted in situ pKa's will be distributed on the internet.