* 0212409
* Climatic Variability and Ecosystem Response: Precipitation Patterns, Soil Moisture Dynamics, and Productivity in Tallgrass Prairie
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* John Blair, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 08/31/2007
* USD 453,214.00

Climatic variability is a key driver of ecosystem structure and function in
grasslands, and climate models suggest that variability in rainfall,
temperature, and other climatic parameters will increase because of global
climate change. However, there is uncertainty about future rainfall patterns,
with some models predicting increased, others decreased growing season rainfall
and soil moisture. Any shifts in rainfall quantity or frequency will change
rainfall variability, and several lines of evidence suggest that variability may
as important as the total quantity of rainfall in regulating tallgrass prairie
net primary productivity. Indeed, increases in rainfall variability, even with
no change in rainfall quantity, have the capacity to reduce plant performance
and productivity and may cause shifts in tallgrass prairie community
composition, because of unavoidable physiological and morphological limitations
on plant abilities to track and adjust to varying resources. The objective of
the research described in this proposal is to experimentally determine the
impact of variability in rainfall patterns on above- and belowground grassland
productivity, using tallgrass prairie as a model system. We will impose
decreases and increases in variability in rainfall inputs on microcosms
containing common tallgrass prairie grasses and forbs, by experimental watering
at sixteen different quantity and frequency combinations. Measurements will
focus on soil moisture dynamics, photosynthetic performance, canopy development,
root growth dynamics, plant reproduction, and above and belowground net primary
productivity. The overarching hypothesis tested by this experiment is that
variability is a key driver of tallgrass prairie productivity, and the
experiment will examine several specific hypotheses about the relationships
between rainfall quantity and frequency and productivity in grasses and forbs.
This knowledge will broaden our understanding of the regulation of grassland
productivity, and will have implications for research on productivity/diversity
relationships, fire/grazer interactions, terrestrial carbon dynamics,
atmosphere/vegetation feedbacks, and interactions among climatic elements in
global change scenarios (rainfall, temperature, and elevated CO2). An accurate
understanding of these issues is crucial to predicting climate change impacts on
grasslands and developing proactive conservation and management plans for these
endangered systems.