* 0212829
* Collaborative:  Reliability of Ferroelectric Thin Films: A Systematic Study of Point Defect Phenomena and Local Electronic Structure Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Nigel Browning, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 75,000.00

This is the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) portion of a collaborative
research project on the connections between the point defect chemistry and
electronic structure of ferroelectric thin films and the fatigue and imprint
processes that limit their reliability in non-volatile memory devices. A key
objective of the research program is to understand the relative contributions of
field-induced electronic charge injection/carrier trapping and charged oxygen
vacancy redistribution during fatigue and imprint of state-of-the-art
Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) films. We will use atomic resolution STEM and EELS to study
the changes in atomic arrangements and local electronic structure that result
from ferroelectric fatigue and imprint electrical testing. Examples of such
changes might include development of locally-high oxygen non-stoichiometry near
electrode interfaces and grain boundaries, and changes in bonding arrangements
and the local density of states at these interfaces. Atomic structure
determinations will be made using the Z-contrast imaging technique. Simultaneous
acquisition of electron energy loss spectra will allow electronic structure
information in the spectrum to be correlated with individual atomic columns in
PZT thin film specimens. Electrical testing of the PZT capacitors prior to
STEM/EELS studies will be performed by our collaborators at Stanford.
Quantitative interpretation of EELS features will be facilitated by ab initio
calculations (also performed at Stanford) of the local electronic structure at
ferroelectric/electrode interfaces and the energies of carrier trap states
associated with point defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric materials
exhibit a spontaneous polarization which can be used in a variety of different
applications in microelectronics and communications. For example, thin film
ferroelectric materials are the key enabler for a new generation of non-volatile
semiconductor memories which are currently being developed (and, increasingly,
brought to market) by major microelectronics firms worldwide. The physics of
switching the ferroelectric polarization state in small-dimension, thin film
structures is also an important topic of fundamental scientific interest. Both
the science and the technology of ferroelectric thin films provide motivation
for better-understanding phenomena that interfere with reliable polarization
switching in these materials. Such phenomena include ferroelectric fatigue, the
loss of switchable polarization after repeated switching by applied voltage
pulses, and imprint, a shift in coercive voltage resulting from repeated voltage
pulses of one polarity. A host of experimental observations and theoretical
models for ferroelectric fatigue and imprint have been reported over the years.
However, the detailed mechanisms responsible for these reliability-limiting
processes remain uncertain. This research program will investigate the
underlying mechanisms of ferroelectric fatigue and imprint in state-of-the art
ferroelectric films provided by our collaborators in the semiconductor industry.
The research will be directed by three co-principal investigators based at
Stanford University and UIC with complimentary expertise in measurements of
charged defect migration and polarization switching of ferroelectric thin films,
atomic resolution imaging and spectroscopy using the electron microscope, and
simulations of the electronic properties of solids. The UIC portion of the
research will focus on direct examination of local bonding and electronic
structure changes induced by fatigue and imprint electrical testing of PZT thin
films. This research program will also strengthen our existing educational
outreach activities to Chicago-area high school students, an effort that has,
over the last 4 years, provided research positions for 32 students from groups
typically under-represented in engineering and the natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;