* 0212785
* Molecular Analysis of Meiotic Recombination and Genomic Organization in the Bronze Region of Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Hugo Dooner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2006
* USD 575,000.00

Homologous meiotic recombination is an important process for
sexually&lt;br/&gt;reproducing organisms: it creates new genotypes by shuffling
chromosomal&lt;br/&gt;segments that otherwise would be inherited as a unit and
promotes fertility by&lt;br/&gt;ensuring that chromosomes segregate properly at
meiosis. For close to a century,&lt;br/&gt;geneticists have been using
recombination as a tool to construct genetic maps,&lt;br/&gt;which now find
practical applications ranging from risk prediction for
inherited&lt;br/&gt;deleterious alleles to marker-assisted selection of
desirable genotypes in&lt;br/&gt;agriculture and map-based cloning of valuable
genes in plants and animals. Yet,&lt;br/&gt;in spite of its importance, our
knowledge of the process of homologous meiotic&lt;br/&gt;recombination in higher
plants is rudimentary compared to other organisms, like&lt;br/&gt;yeast. This
project will increase our understanding of this basic
biological&lt;br/&gt;process in maize, a plant that is both an excellent model
organism&lt;br/&gt;for studies of recombination, and an economically important
crop in American agriculture and industry.&lt;br/&gt;The genetic system being
used in the project is the bz locus, which affects seed&lt;br/&gt;pigmentation
and is uniquely advantageous for studies of recombination.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will continue the analysis of meiotic recombination in
maize by combining the power of the genetics of the bz region with that of
modern molecular tools. It is greatly influenced by the recent finding that the
organization of genes and retrotransposons in the bz genomic region is
polymorphic in different maize lines. There are five specific objectives of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;1. To analyze conversion tract lengths within the bz gene
island in heterozygotes&lt;br/&gt;lacking heterologies and extend the analysis
to adjacent retrotransposon blocks.&lt;br/&gt;2. To determine if the apparent
conversion polarity at bz, detected with small&lt;br/&gt;insertion mutations at
the 5' and 3' ends of the gene, but not with more centrally&lt;br/&gt;located
point mutations, is due to the nature or the position of the
mutations.&lt;br/&gt;3. To test whether the presence of a highly methylated
retrotransposon block&lt;br/&gt;affects recombination in adjacent
genes.&lt;br/&gt;4. To determine if all recombination junctions in an interval
made up of genes&lt;br/&gt;and retrotransposons fall in genes.&lt;br/&gt;5. To
test if recombination between two sites in the genome separated by
a&lt;br/&gt;different number of genes in different lines is a function of the
number of&lt;br/&gt;common genes in the intervening segment.&lt;br/&gt;