* 0212802
* Regulation of Monoterpene Emission in Snapdragon Flowers
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* David Rhodes, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 01/31/2007
* USD 435,000.00



Floral scent plays a vital role in the reproductive cycle of higher plants by
attracting pollinators to flowers. The long-term goal of this research is to
fill important gaps in our knowledge of biochemical pathways leading to the
formation of floral volatiles and the molecular mechanisms controlling their
accumulation and release in plants. Although monoterpenes, the C10 members of
the terpenoid family of natural products, are very common constituents of floral
scent, little is known about how floral tissues regulate their developmental and
rhythmic emission. This project will focus on investigation of the role of
geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP), the key precursor of monoterpene biosynthesis, in
the regulation of developmental and rhythmic emission of trans-b-ocimene and
myrcene, the two major scent components of snapdragon scent. GPP, the starting
point leading to the synthesis of many monoterpene end products, is the result
of condensation of dimethylallyl diphosphate and isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP)
in a reaction catalyzed by GPP synthase (GPPS). Plant cells have two different
IPP biosynthetic pathways located in two different compartments. Biochemical
pathway(s) leading to GPP biosynthesis in snapdragon petal tissue will be
elucidated and the possibility of compensation of one pathway by the other one
through the exchange between cytosolic and plastidic IPP pools will be examined.
In contrast to other homodimeric short-chain prenyltransferases, GPPS is a
functional heterodimer in which small and large subunits are absolutely required
for enzymatic activity. In this project, the complexity of the GPPS gene family
in snapdragon will be characterized, the role of both subunits of GPPS in the
regulation of the amount of GPP in cells will be analyzed and the involvement of
subcellular localization in the regulation of GPPS activity will be determined.
Floral scent plays an important role in the crop economy since one-third of our
total diet depends upon insect-pollinated plants including most fruit trees,
berries, nuts, oilseeds, and vegetables. Pollination not only affects crop yield
but also quality and efficiency of crop production. This research will result in
new insights into the regulation of floral scent production in higher plants and
also provide the knowledge for engineering plants with improved scent quality.
This could increase the attraction of flowers to certain pollinators and lead to
the more efficient pollination of crop plants cultivated for their seed, forage,
or food value.