* 0212293
* The Enriched Learning Environment Model: A Community for Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Edwin Odom, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

The proposed work seeks to create a new way to educate prospective engineers.
This idea is founded on the concepts of an enriched learning environment, which
is a system of education that provides an interconnected focus on the learner,
on the teaching process, on discipline knowledge and on the community. Specific
aims are to&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Create a change process that leads faculty
towards the ideas embodied in the enriched&lt;br/&gt;learning environment model.
This task will involve a set of ongoing workshops (2-4 per&lt;br/&gt;year)
facilitated by specialists in faculty development. Workshops will be
interdisciplinary with participation from disciplines such as engineering,
education, mathematics, and English.&lt;br/&gt;2. Create a mentor program,
organized in tiers. A professor mentors a limited number
of&lt;br/&gt;experienced mentors, each an undergraduate. Experienced mentors
supervise beginning&lt;br/&gt;mentors, and the mentors guide students in
engineering classes.&lt;br/&gt;3. Design and build a creativity incubator, the
Idaho Mind Works. Patterned after the highly successful Idaho Engineering Works
(IEWorks), the Idaho Mind Works will be located in a physical space that
promotes social, cultural and experiential learning.&lt;br/&gt;4. Implement the
enriched learning environment model in engineering science, lab and design
classes.&lt;br/&gt;5. Gather validated evidence that informs the relevant
scientific and educational communities of the results of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a prototype of a new
engineering education system-one that is based on new assumptions and
foundations. Knowledge will be documented and disseminated, including transfer
to an innovative company that specializes in faculty
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. While ideas of the
enriched learning environment have been achieved in some classrooms, this
proposal seeks change across a community of educators. The proposed objectives
are each an extension of significant ongoing work, and the project team contains
engineering educators, assessment specialists and personnel from the College of
Education. Through commitment from faculty and students across disciplines, the
proposed work will create an environment based on inquiry, investigation, and
discovery, where faculty and students learn and research together. In addition,
the proposal team seeks to reduce the cost of education and to develop a method
for transferring the enriched learning environment model to other
universities.&lt;br/&gt;To improve quality while decreasing costs is the way of
the engineer--this proposal is founded on the belief that this is
possible.&lt;br/&gt;