* 0212782
* LTREB: The Population and Community Dynamics of Desert Winter Annuals
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* D. Lawrence Venable, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2008
* USD 324,000.00

0212782&lt;br/&gt;Venable&lt;br/&gt;This LTREB proposal is to extend the
continuous record of population and community dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of desert
winter annual plants on permanent plots at a Sonoran Desert site at the
Desert&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory near Tucson, AZ, USA. It will clarify and extend the
understanding of demographic&lt;br/&gt;variation and covariation and its role in
population and community processes. Data on&lt;br/&gt;germination, survival and
reproduction of desert annual plants will be continuously monitored
on&lt;br/&gt;long-term plots established from 10 to 19 years ago at locations
both under shrub canopies and in&lt;br/&gt;the open at this field station.
Delayed germination and between year seed carry over are thought&lt;br/&gt;to be
important for the persistence of desert annuals, so the magnitude of the soil
seed reserves&lt;br/&gt;will be monitored and determine what fraction germinate
in each year for each species under&lt;br/&gt;shrubs and in the open. Seeds will
be separated from standardized soil samples and tested for&lt;br/&gt;viability.
The results of this research will be analyzed together with weather data to
determine&lt;br/&gt;how climatic variation determines population variation for
these annual plant species. The&lt;br/&gt;investigators will then construct
population and community models of this desert annual system.&lt;br/&gt;These
models will be used to explore the role of soil seed banks in buffering
populations in the&lt;br/&gt;face of environmental variation. They will also be
used to investigate how life history&lt;br/&gt;differences among species promote
their coexistence and species diversity.&lt;br/&gt;Desert annual plants have
played an important role as model organisms in the development of
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how organisms adapt to variable and unpredictable
environments. They have&lt;br/&gt;also been used to exemplify ideas about non-
equilibrium community dynamics in variable&lt;br/&gt;environments. Yet their
dynamics are not well known empirically, especially the behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;seeds. This project will provide the best available long-term data
for evaluating these ideas.&lt;br/&gt;There has been considerable theoretical
and experimental work carried out on the evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;ecology,
population ecology and community ecology of this system. Such combinations
of&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and experimental work with long-term observations are
proving to be a powerful&lt;br/&gt;approach to yield new insights and syntheses
in plant ecology.&lt;br/&gt;This research will further the goal of combining
research and education by virtue of occurring in&lt;br/&gt;the academic
environment of a major research university. Graduate and undergraduate
students&lt;br/&gt;will be involved in capacities that fosters hands-on training
and research experience that&lt;br/&gt;complements formal coursework. Ph.D.,
Masters, and undergraduate honors projects will be&lt;br/&gt;facilitated as part
of or offshoots of this research. REU support will be sought for
related&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate projects. In the first phase of this research
more than half of the undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and graduate participants in this
project were women and an attempt will be made to include a&lt;br/&gt;high
percentage of women in the proposed research. The PI will endeavor to
include&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented ethnic and cultural groups in this research
by working with minority access&lt;br/&gt;programs on campus.