* 0212452
* Ribosomal Gene Repeats and Site-Specific Retrotransposons
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Thomas Eickbush, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2006
* USD 610,267.00

Transposable elements have played a major role in determining the size,
structure and expression of eukaryotic genomes. R1 and R2 are two site-specific
non-LTR retrotransposable elements that insert in the 28S ribosomal RNA genes of
arthropods. The specificity of these elements has enabled them to serve as a
convenient model system, such that R1 and R2 are now among the best
characterized transposable elements. Taking advantage of the diverse array of 5'
truncations that frequently result from non-LTR retrotransposition, preliminary
experiments have shown that individual R1 and R2 insertions and deletions can be
scored among members of the same population as well as among 19 Harwich mutation
collection lines of Drosophila melanogaster. Therefore new copies are
continually being inserted into and old elements eliminated from the rDNA loci.
In this project, experiments are described to address a) the recombinational
forces that bring about the concerted evolution of this locus, b) how R1 and R2
elements are affected by these recombinations, and c) how often and when R1 and
R2 retrotranspose. Attempts to answer these questions will focus on the
following specific aims. The rDNA loci from one Harwich line will be cloned as a
series of overlapping bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs). While the cloning
of rDNA loci are avoided in genome projects, it should be achievable in this
project because nearly 80 uniquely marked R1 and R2 insertions have been
identified to serve as reference points for the assembly of overlapping clones.
Based on this physical map, as well as the 18 examples of how that locus has
changed over a period of 350 generations, it can be determined where R1 and R2
insert into the loci and whether they are uniformly removed. Second, by scoring
changes in the variable intergenic spacer region between the rRNA genes, a
detailed view can be obtained of the recombinational processes responsible for
the concerted evolution of the rDNA locus. Third, a study will be conducted of
the differential replication of rDNA units in larval tissues. This latter
experiment is of interest because Drosophila larvae grow normally even when
large fractions of their rDNA units are inserted by under-replicating in
polyploid tissues those units that have R1 and R2 insertions. Finally, to
determine the tempo and developmental timing of retrotransposition, R1 and R2
activity will be monitored from one generation to the next. R1
retrotransposition is sufficiently high in the Harwich lines that new events can
be monitored per generation. A search will be made for a lab strain that will
allow similar studies with the R2 elements. These studies should provide an
unprecedented understanding of the life cycle of two retrotransposable elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the target site for R1 and R2, the rDNA locus and
the nucleolus that forms from it, plays a key role in all cellular metabolism,
these studies will also provide insights into the evolution, replication and
function of this critical cellular component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;