* 0212637
* Functional Studies of Drosophila Genes with Enriched Expression in the Wing Discovered by Microarray Analyis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Amanda Simcox, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 06/30/2006
* USD 434,144.00

0212637 Simcox

The Drosophila wing is an important model for analyzing how signaling pathways
are coordinated to organize development of a cell field and link patterning with
growth. Discovering all the players will be key to a full understanding of the
processes involved. Additional genes with wing-enriched expression patterns have
been discovered by microarray analysis, here a functional-genomics approach will
be taken to probe the roles of these genes in wing development. Oligonucleotide
microarrays were used to identify thirty transcripts with four-fold or greater
enrichment in the wing versus the body wall. These include genes known to be
specifically expressed in the wing (for example, nubbin, Distal-less, knot, and
bifid). Here it is proposed to test whether uncharacterized transcripts with
similar enrichment have functional roles in wing development and to analyze how
they are regulated by major signaling pathways. The first three objectives
relate to this goal. In the first, the functional roles of the wing-enriched
genes will be investigated by examining phenotypes resulting from ectopic
expression and following gene silencing. In the second, the role of the
morphogens, Wingless, Hedgehog and Decapentaplegic, in controlling the
expression of these novel genes will be assayed. In the third, targets of
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signaling will be identified by
comparing EGFR mutant wings with wild type wings in microarray experiments. The
function of novel targets will be investigated. In the fourth objective, a
workshop will be offered for high school students to investigate the expression
pattern of genes that have the potential to encode posterior-specific
transcripts.

