* 0212730
* RUI:  Proteins that Control Rab GDI
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Clarissa Cheney, Pomona College
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2006
* USD 281,063.00

This project concerns how cells regulate intracellular membrane trafficking,
including the formation of intracellular vesicles by budding from larger
intracellular membrane compartments, movement of vesicles from one region of the
cell to another, and the fusion of intracellular membrane compartments with one
another. Rab GTPases play a multitude of roles in vesicular transport, including
regulation of vesicle formation, vesicle motility, vesicle tethering, membrane
fusion and membrane remodeling. Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI) is a
protein that binds to rabs, keeping rab in the GDP-bound state, as well as
delivering and placing rabs in the correct membrane compartment. The mechanism
for releasing rab from GDI and delivering the rab to the correct membrane is
unknown and is likely to involve proteins that bind and interact with GDI. Dr.
Cheney's laboratory and collaborators have previously cloned the Drosophila GDI
gene, determined the Drosophila GDI crystal structure, isolated and
characterized Drosophila GDI mutations and located the GDI mutations within the
GDI crystal structure (Ricard et al., 2001). Prior work supported by NSF
(#9874626, "RUI: Proteins that control interaction of rab GTPases and GDIls")
resulted in the discovery of candidate proteins that interact with GDI and
potentially could regulate the release of rab from GDI. The research that will
be conducted under this award will extend this project by further characterizing
the interacting proteins and investigating the nature of their interaction with
GDI and role in rab delivery. The prior work has isolated a 30 kD protein that
bound to mutant, but not wild-type, GDI in a GST-GDI pulldown assay. This
protein could be GDI displacement factor (GDF) or a rab. The prior work has also
discovered 14 genomic regions that interact genetically with a GDI null allele.
These regions include Myosin V, Myosin VIIa, rab26, Mp20/Calponin, and
commissureless. Finally, this prior work has isolated 6 mutations that interact
with GDI. The aims of the current project are:

1, to identify the 30 kD protein and determine whether it triggers rab release
from GDI to membranes; 2, to find the candidate gene in ech of 4 interacting
genomic regions and determine if the candidate gene product binds to GDI,
affecting rab release from GDI; and 3, to clone the genes for one mutation that
interacts with GDI and determine if the protein encoded by this gene binds
directly to GDI, affecting in rab release.

This research will investigate proteins that interact with GDI and will shed
light on how rab is released from GDI and delivered correctly to membrane
compartments. Further, this project will integrally and actively involve
undergraduates in an exciting area of research.