* 0213026
* QEIB: Using Phase Dynamics and a Model Experimental System to Understand the Effects of Extrinsic Variability on Predator and Prey Metapopulations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Marcel Holyoak, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2006
* USD 274,708.00

Population density cycles that appear synchronous, or irin-phasel, over large
geographic areas are some of the most striking phenomena in population biology.
In theory, such synchrony is caused either by widespread meteorological factors,
or by movement of individuals between populations. Theory for predator-prey
'metapopulationsl' that extend over groups of patches also links synchrony to
regional persistence. The study of these phenomena in nature has been hampered
by difficulty in identifying both the cause of population cycles and the roles
of environmental factors and interpatch movement in modifying population
fluctuations and synchrony. The environmental forcing of metapopulations which
is explored here is relevant to biological control of pest species and
conservation. Additionally, extreme weather events caused by global warming have
the potential to synchronize regional populations, which might cut short
regional persistence. The proposed work uses mathematical techniques focused on
phase dynamics to analyze synchrony and build precise links among environmental
variability, population dynamics and extinction. Phase dynamics have been widely
used in neurobiology, but their potential in ecology is only just beginning to
be realized. This project develops new analytic tools for an ecological audience
and uses a model experimental system, bacteria and protozoa in laboratory
microcosms, to bridge the gap between populations and metapopulation theory. The
work starts with a classic model and then develops more precise and biologically
realistic models, which in turn will fuel further, more precise, experimental
tests. Two-patch predator-prey systems coupled by random dispersal will provide
a link with analytical solutions, which numerical simulations and experiments
can build on to consider more complex and realistic situations. Two patch models
will be used to derive equations which relate phase, the point in a predator-
prey cycle, to population dynamic processes. The dynamics of phase difference
between two patches will be derived and used as a measure of synchrony, which
can be related to regional persistence and within-patch predator-prey dynamics.
Phase dynamics can also distinguish whether persistence is controlled not by
deterministic equilibrium dynamics (the focus of most theoretical studies), but
instead by long-lived transient dynamics which may dominate during ecologically
relevant time scales; specifically regression of phase difference through time
will be used to calculate the duration of transient dynamics, when phase
difference becomes zero. Experimentally, the initial phase difference of
predator-prey oscillations in two linked patches will be manipulated by starting
microcosms with different predator and prey densities in each patch. Statistics
will then quantify the phase difference between patches and test its correlation
with regional persistence time. Repeating this procedure in microcosms with
different movement rates between patches (lengths of corridors) will test the
prediction that increased movement rate between patches will reduce phase
differences and regional persistence time. Experiments with 1-8 patches will
manipulate environmental variability through temperature fluctuations and
control whether this operates uniformly across a region or just in a single
patch. Quantification of regional persistence time and phase differences between
patches will then test the predictions that local variability enhances regional
persistence, but regional variability and increased movement reduce regional
variability. This project will demonstrate how and why environmental variability
influences dynamics and extinction in regionally-distributed predator and prey
systems. The techniques of phase dynamics will be brought to a broader
ecological audience, and two graduate students will be trained with the
necessary mathematical, modeling, statistical and experimental techniques that
are required to understand the links between the environment and populations.
This work will provide a paradigm on which future combined experimental and
theoretical studies of population synchrony and persistence can build.







































