* 0213186
* The Relationship Between Lateral Gene Transfer and Patterns of Diversification of Sulfate-Reducing Microorganisms
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Jesse Dillon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2008
* USD 313,198.00

Drs. David A. Stahl and Jesse G. Dillon of the University of Washington have
been awarded a grant to study the evolutionary histories of certain
microorganisms, and how they develop new metabolic capabilities. Stahl and
Dillon will focus their research on microbes that respire ("breathe") sulfate
rather than oxygen, asking how they acquired this ability. Earlier studies have
shown that exchange of genetic information between phylogenetically widely
separated microbial groups has contributed to the evolution of sulfate-respiring
microbes. However, the role this process (horizontal gene transfer) has played
in their speciation and diversification is unknown. These investigators will use
molecular and culture-based techniques, in combination with high-speed sorting
of single cells using flow cytometry technology, to better resolve the
contribution of horizontal gene transfer to the speciation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that organisms that live by sulfate
respiration were present on earth at least as early as 3.5 billion years ago.
Thus, they represent one of the earliest types of life on earth. Today they play
a central role in the sulfur cycle, a key biogeochemical process on our planet.
They are widely distributed in the environment and contribute to the
biodegradation of organic matter in virtually all habitats lacking oxygen. For
example, they can be responsible for one half of the total carbon degradation
occurring in near-shore marine sediments. Although sulfate respiring
microorganisms are central participants in global sulfur and carbon cycles,
little is known about how this mode of living originated and how it has
diversified within and among different earth habitats. The study of how
horizontal gene transfer has influenced the distribution of sulfate respiring
organisms will contribute to a better understanding of the microbial speciation
process, and also address a more fundamental question of the origin of our
planet's biogeochemical cycles.&lt;br/&gt;