* 0213296
* Conference:  'Coordination, Incomplete Information, and Interated Dominance:  Theory and Experiments.  August 17 thru 19, 2002'
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Stephen Morris, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 06/30/2003
* USD 20,361.00

Many economic problems are naturally modeled as coordination problems.
Speculators in financial markets may have an incentive to attack a currency only
if they believe that others will do so. Depositors in a bank may have an
incentive to withdraw their money only if they think that others will do so. In
such settings, informal commentary points to "confidence" and "self-fulfilling
expectations" as determinants of the outcome, but there is still no consensus on
the corresponding theory to flesh out these
explanations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to fund the
participation of U.S. researchers in an international conference that brings
together theorists and experimental economists who have been studying these
issues. The conference will be held in Barcelona, Spain on August 17-19, 2002 in
the campus of Pompeu Fabra University. The time is ripe is for such a
conference. There has been rapid theoretical progress in the modeling of
coordination with incomplete information. However, there is no consensus on
whether the predictions of the new theories are of practical relevance. There is
a well-developed experimental literature on coordination games. These
literatures have developed independently and the two groups of researchers have
much to learn from each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;