* 0213001
* Vertebrate Ranging Scale and Tree Dynamics in a Congo Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Peter Walsh, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2004
* USD 119,996.00

&lt;br/&gt;A central question in community ecology is how species diversity will
typically respond to&lt;br/&gt;the removal of a one or a few species. Are
species highly redundant so that the loss of one species&lt;br/&gt;is easily
compensated for by other, functionally equivalent species? Or, do species tend
to play&lt;br/&gt;unique functional roles so that the loss of one species can
propagate out to cause a catastrophic&lt;br/&gt;loss of diversity. These
questions assume ever greater practical importance as the global wave
of&lt;br/&gt;extinctions accelerates. And, although some progress has been made
in simple model systems, we&lt;br/&gt;still have a vague understanding of more
complex communities with dynamics that evolve over&lt;br/&gt;large temporal and
spatial scales. It is not clear whether anthropogenically induced extinction
of&lt;br/&gt;individual species will generally cascade across these communities.
Most notably, we have little&lt;br/&gt;ability to predict how the mounting loss
of the largest mammals to hunting is likely to affect&lt;br/&gt;diversity in
tropical forests, which are home to a large proportion of the world's
species.&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this study will be the collection of
empirical data linking the ranging&lt;br/&gt;behavior of terrestrial mammals to
tree species diversity in a Congo forest. The study site
typifies&lt;br/&gt;tropical forests worldwide in that its mammals act both as
seed dispersers for a species rich guild&lt;br/&gt;of spatially rare trees and
seed predators of a species poor guild of spatially aggregated
trees.&lt;br/&gt;Even though mammals of many body sizes disperse and predate the
same tree species, they may&lt;br/&gt;not be functionally redundant because
mammalian body size is highly correlated with ranging&lt;br/&gt;scale. Thus,
large mammals are particularly mobile seed predators that are drawn to dense
stands&lt;br/&gt;of the species poor guild from great distances. Large mammals
also tend to disperse seeds over a&lt;br/&gt;great area, which provides a number
of benefits to mutualists in the species rich tree guild,&lt;br/&gt;including
escape from predators &amp; pathogens. Consequently, local extinction of large
mammals&lt;br/&gt;may well tip the competitive balance between guilds,
triggering a loss of diversity in the species&lt;br/&gt;rich tree guild that
propagates out through a myriad of dependent plants and animals,
including&lt;br/&gt;smaller mammalian seed dispersers.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will include both animal and vegetation studies and use a combination of
ground&lt;br/&gt;and remote sensing methods. Aerial video and satellite imagery
at several resolutions will be used&lt;br/&gt;to develop detailed maps of the
distribution of the two tree guilds over a large scale. Line
transect&lt;br/&gt;methods will then be used to quantify how the spatial grain
of mixing between the two tree guilds&lt;br/&gt;influences both fruit
availability and the spatial distribution of mammals varying in body
size&lt;br/&gt;from mice to elephants. Trapping studies on rodents, the first
GPS telemetry study on several&lt;br/&gt;duiker species, and the first telemetry
study of any kind on red river hogs will quantify how body&lt;br/&gt;size
influences the spatio-temporal pattern of fruit availability within an animal's
home range.&lt;br/&gt;And an attempt will be made to identify a set of
individual tree species using high-resolution&lt;br/&gt;digital photography and
aerial videography. If this proves successful, it will allow the first
large-&lt;br/&gt;scale scale study of tropical tree distribution and phenology.
The empirical data collected in the&lt;br/&gt;study will be used to parameterize
coupled, spatially explicit models of animal ranging and&lt;br/&gt;vegetation
dynamics with the goal of predicting how large mammal extirpation is likely to
affect&lt;br/&gt;tree species diversity.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing
basic theoretical issues, data collected in this project will be
of&lt;br/&gt;direct value to wildlife management, both guiding management at the
study site and informing&lt;br/&gt;park planning and sustainable hunting
programs across the region. Remote sensing methodologies&lt;br/&gt;developed in
this project will also provide the tools for studying how the wave of
logging&lt;br/&gt;currently sweeping Central Africa is likely to affect tree
species diversity. And African personnel&lt;br/&gt;trained and employed in the
study will bolster feeble research and management capacity in
the&lt;br/&gt;region.