* 0213032
* Sensory Processing of Environmental -CO2 Information in the Insect Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* John Hildebrand, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/29/2004
* USD 93,665.00

The carbon dioxide (CO2) produced by the respiration of most organisms is a
fundamental constituent of their odor. Many insects can sense the concentration
of CO2 in the air around them, and they are thought to use that information in
vital tasks such as locating food sources (e.g., appropriate plants) and
possibly identifying desirable sites for oviposition (egg laying). Whereas
considerable research has focused on how the sensory information about CO2 is
acquired, little is known about how that information is processed in the central
nervous system (CNS). In order to address this issue, this project will take
advantage of an experimentally favorable and extensively studied model plant-
eating insect, the moth Manduca sexta, using methods already developed and in
practice in this laboratory. Pilot studies that led to this project suggested
that a particular group of sensory receptor cells, situated in a sensory organ
(the labial-palp pit organ, LPO) recessed in a deep invagination on each labial
palp (a mouthpart) of the adult moth, are specialized to detect and
quantitatively assess CO2 in the air around that organ. Anatomical evidence
shows that although the LPO receptor cells are located in that mouthpart, they
send their axons to the antennal lobe (AL), the primary-olfactory center
resembling the vertebrate olfactory bulb, in the insect's brain. Furthermore,
our pilot work clearly shows that some of the central neurons in the AL receive
and process synaptic inputs, and thus information about CO2, from the LPO
receptor cells. Thus, the project centers on recording of the electrical signals
(coded sensory information about CO2) generated by LPO receptor cells and the
responding neurons in the AL that receive inputs from the LPO sensory cells. In
addition, the morphology of those AL neurons is studied by means of
intracellular staining in order to reveal the types and patterns of branching of
neurons contributing to processing of CO2 information. This research is the
first study of central processing of environmental-CO2 information, and it
promises to add significantly to our understanding of CNS olfactory mechanisms
in insects. CO2, temperature, and humidity are environmental variables of
importance to insects, and the sensory systems for those three kinds of stimuli
share certain physiological properties. Therefore it may be that the processing
of CO2 information has aspects in common with the processing of information
about temperature and/or humidity, such that general principles of information
processing in the brain could emerge from the proposed project. These studies
are expected to lead to understanding of how information about environmental CO2
is first processed in the AL of the insect brain. Manduca sexta is an excellent
experimental animal for this research because it: (a) possesses a highly
developed CO2-detecting organ; (b) is large and hence ideal for
neurophysiological studies, easily reared in the laboratory, and favorable for
experimentation at the molecular, physiological, and organismal levels; (c) has
yielded a wealth of information about the neurobiology of insect olfaction and
the neuroethology of odor-guided behavior, much of it through previous research
done in this laboratory; and (d) is an agricultural pest which, although not
very important economically, exhibits behavior and sensory mechanisms that are
similar to those of important, herbivorous pest insects. Thus, the findings from
this project, complementing other research under way in this laboratory, will
benefit ongoing basic research aimed at understanding how nervous systems
analyze, recognize, and respond to odors, and should also yield insights that
will be useful in the agricultural arena for designing new strategies for
protection of crop plants from insect predation. Finally, in addition to its
scientific impact and potential benefit to agriculture, this project will
contribute to the research training of a postdoctoral associate (the key
investigator) and also involve one or more undergraduate students in aspects of
the studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;