* 0213095
* RUI: Physiological Adaptations for Resolving the Conflicting Metabolic Demands of Lactating While Fasting in Northern Elephant Seals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Daniel Crocker, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 281,600.00

The amount of investment that females place in their offspring (maternal
investment), whether it is behavioral (such as protection from predators) or
material (such as milk), must be balanced against future efforts at reproducing.
Understanding how females of different species balance current and future
investment in offspring provides insight on the evolution of alternative
reproductive strategies. In mammals, quantifying maternal investment can be
difficult. This occurs for several reasons: 1) it is difficult to assign value
to maternal behaviors; 2) offspring may stay with their mothers for many years
making observation periods unrealistically long; and, 3) the material directly
transferred from mother to offspring through gestation and lactation may be hard
to determine. Northern elephant seals (Mirounga angustirostris) provide a unique
system within which to study maternal investment. The investment period for
elephant seals is limited to the period of lactation. This period is brief (~ 25
days) and almost all investment is given in the form of milk making it more
feasible to quantify maternal investment. Furthermore, elephant seal females do
not eat or drink during lactation. This combination of fasting and lactation
constrains the ability of females to invest in their pups because the nutrients
(fat and protein) used to meet their own energy needs are also used to produce
milk for the pup. Material and energy investment in elephant seal pups has been
previously determined but its relationship to the energetic costs of the mother
has not been characterized. The study proposed here will investigate how
lactating elephant seals utilize nutrient reserves to support their metabolism,
identify and quantify physiological mechanisms that protect maternal nutrients
for milk production, and characterize the strategy for nutrient use that
contributes to maximizing investment in pups. Isotopically labeled compounds
will be used to study biochemical paths important to supplying energy to
lactating female seals. Specifically, changes in the importance of glucose and
fat as fuel sources over the time course of lactation will be estimated and the
contribution of glycerol, a byproduct of fat breakdown, to the production of
glucose (gluconeogenesis) will be determined. Insulin and glucagon, two hormones
important in regulating how the body uses sugar and fat, will be manipulated to
determine whether these hormones interact in a manner unique to this system.
This information will provide insight on how elephant seals optimize investment
in their offspring under fasting constraints, and thus, will provide insight on
ultimate strategies that contribute to future reproductive effort. As part of
the NSF-RUI initiative, undergraduates will be actively involved in field
research and data analysis. A graduate student, who will derive a research
question for a thesis from the proposed work, will also be financially supported
through this program. Integration of undergraduate and graduate students into
the research will insure that students experience an innovative and dynamic
curriculum with an emphasis on integrative approaches to organismal biology.