* 0213913
* Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical Economics; Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2002-2004
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Jose Scheinkman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

Since its inception in 1970, the Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical
Economics (CEME) has sponsored a number of annual meetings on a variety of
topics in economic theory and econometric methodology. There are currently six
seminars, in Bayesian Inference, Time Series, Forecasting, Microeconometrics,
Decentralization, and General Equilibrium, which meet annually. The purpose of
this ongoing conference series is to stimulate discussion and research on the
frontiers of econometric and economic theory, and to investigate the application
of mathematical, statistical, and computational techniques to empirical economic
studies. It is intended to both encourage research on new topics and speed the
dissemination of the latest findings by leading scholars. To this end, these
meetings have been exceptionally successful, providing forums for the exchange
of ideas in economic theory and methods that are not constrained by more formal
frameworks of journal publications. The channels of communication are informal
and regular, allowing specialists in selected topic areas to meet regularly, at
widely dispersed institutions and for longer periods than is generally possible
at meetings of professional societies. CEME has been especially fruitful,
particularly for young scholars at the beginning of their professional careers.
Recently, a number of structural changes to the CEME organization were made to
ensure continuing diversity in the participants and research topics. These
changes include regular appointments of new co-organizers and seminar leaders.
New appointments have been made in most positions since the last funding period.