* 0213474
* A Contextual Perspective on Gender and Negotiation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Linda Babcock, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 337,008.00

Over the last two decades, there has been an upsurge in research in social
psychology on the relationships among gender, cognition, and social behavior.
Over the same period, studies of gender in negotiation have declined. In
contrast to the movement in social psychology from tests of gender as a
personality variable to investigations of gender in context, the negotiation
field has largely abandoned the gender variable as an inconsistent predictor of
negotiator behavior or performance. In this research program, we argue that
gender has mostly been treated as a static, decontextualized demographic
variable in the negotiation literature, and that we have yet to understand the
complex nature of gender as a labile yet influential psychological construct in
negotiation. Our focus is on the situational factors and psychological processes
that mediate the relationship between gender and negotiation. We thus begin to
answer the questions "under what conditions and why does gender matter in
negotiation?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We take as a central proposition in this
research that gender effects are not invariant across situations; rather we
emphasize that gender is a "context-dependent phenomenon." We investigate how
contextual factors, such as the strength of the situation and the relevance and
salience of gender to negotiator's roles or the type of resource being
distributed, activate distinct gender-based expectations, cognitions, and
behavior. In the first set of studies, we present preliminary laboratory
evidence about the role the situational factors play in moderating gender
differences in negotiation outcomes. We propose a series of new experiments to
further explore these contextual moderators and importantly, to develop
interventions that eliminate gender differences. Our goals in this research are
to further illuminate the psychological mechanisms that cause gender to matter
in negotiations and develop practical advice that can help women improve their
negotiated outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In the second set of studies, we turn
our attention to a greatly understudied area - the initiation of negotiations.
We develop a two-stage model of the decision to initiate a negotiation. Using
data from a preliminary field study, we find that women are less likely to
initiate negotiations and that the psychological process in our model help to
explain the overall individual differences as well as gender differences in
initiating negotiations. We propose a new field study and a series of laboratory
experiments to further investigate the contextual moderators of gender
differences in the initiation of negotiations.