* 0213282
* MIT Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2009
* Michael Rubner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sean Jones
* 02/28/2009
* USD 22,341,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology supports a broad-based interdisciplinary
research program. The research is conducted in five interdisciplinary research
groups (IRGs). These include Microphotonic Materials and Structures (IRG 1)
where new physical phenomena in materials are discovered for which relevant
length scales are comparable to a photon wavelength. Such "photonic crystals"
can exhibit new phenomena that can be formulated by theory and applied in novel
optical devices. IRG 2 on Nanostructured Polymer Assemblies seeks to gain
understanding of how polymer nanocomposites organize at the molecular level and
how to enhance or control the performance of electronic, magnetic, biosensor and
optical devices based on these materials. Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic
Semiconductor and Magnetic Structures (IRG 3) explores charge and spin transport
in solid-state electronic structures. Both chemically produced as well as
lithographically defined nanostructures are investigated. IRG 4 on the Science
and Engineering of Solid-State Portable Power Sources focuses on the fundamental
science and engineering of materials for solid-state electro-chemical power
sources. The ultimate goal of the IRG is to apply this fundamental knowledge to
develop ultra-high performance batteries. Quantum Magnetism, Correlated
Electrons and Superconductivity in Transition Metal Oxides (IRG 5) investigates
the effects of carrier doping, temperature and magnetic fields on materials with
strongly correlated electron systems. Such materials exhibit unusual electronic,
magnetic and superconducting properties which are currently not understood.
Future activities in this IRG are expected to be reduced. The Center has a
strong education program directed toward graduate students, undergraduates,
middle and high school students and K-12 teachers. Emphasis is placed on
including underrepresented minorities in these programs. The education
activities enjoy the broad participation of MIT students and faculty and are
closely linked to complementary programs in other MIT administrative units, such
as the MIT museum and MIT's Council on Primary and Secondary Education. The
Center operates shared facilities and has an effective industrial outreach
program.

Participants in the Center currently include 35 senior investigators, 2
postdoctoral associates, 28 graduate students, 33 undergraduates, and 2
technicians and other support personnel. Professor Michael F. Rubner directs the
MRSEC.













