* 0213437
* Function of Arabidopsis thaliana Proline Rich Proteins in Root Hairs and Guard Cells of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Mary Tierney, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 10/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

The plant cell wall is a dynamic structure that can be modified in
response&lt;br/&gt;to developmental and environmental signals. In this manner,
the cell wall&lt;br/&gt;provides structural information that helps maintain
cellular form and&lt;br/&gt;function during plant growth. The structure of the
cell wall also changes&lt;br/&gt;in response to pathogen infection and stresses,
such as drought, high salt&lt;br/&gt;and cold temperature, in a manner that
helps protect plants from biotic and&lt;br/&gt;abiotic stresses when grown in
natural environments. Expression of many of&lt;br/&gt;the structural proteins in
the wall have been shown to be cell-type&lt;br/&gt;specific, suggesting that
these proteins play novel roles in modifying cell&lt;br/&gt;wall structure in
order to provide mechanical strength and assist in proper&lt;br/&gt;wall
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proline-rich proteins (PRPs) represent an
integral family of structural&lt;br/&gt;cell wall proteins whose expression has
been linked to active growth in a&lt;br/&gt;number of plant systems. We have
used a combination of PRP promoter/GUS&lt;br/&gt;fusions and epitope-tagging to
characterize the expression of these genes&lt;br/&gt;in arabidopsis and their
localization to the walls of specific cell types.&lt;br/&gt;Two of these
proteins, AtPRP1 and AtPRP3, are expressed during the early&lt;br/&gt;stages of
root hair outgrowth but are localized within different regions of&lt;br/&gt;the
root hair cell wall. These results suggest that individual PRP
gene&lt;br/&gt;family members may play distinct roles in helping to establish
root hair&lt;br/&gt;cell wall structure during wall assembly. In addition, we
have shown that&lt;br/&gt;AtPRP4 is expressed in guard cells and localizes to
the inner shelf of the&lt;br/&gt;guard cell wall. We have isolated several T-DNA
insertion alleles for&lt;br/&gt;these three proteins and we propose to
characterize the loss-of-function&lt;br/&gt;phenotypes in these mutants
associated with root hair and guard cell&lt;br/&gt;function. In addition, we
will examine the ability of epitope-tagged PRP&lt;br/&gt;sequences to become
cross-linked within the wall in wild type and mutant&lt;br/&gt;PRP backgrounds.
In combination, these experimental approaches should&lt;br/&gt;provide new
insight into the nature of the amino acid sequences encoded&lt;br/&gt;within
individual AtPRPs that are sufficient for their targeted&lt;br/&gt;localization
within the cell wall and their insolubilization within
the&lt;br/&gt;extracellular matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of the
function of structural cell wall proteins in defining&lt;br/&gt;cell-type
specific matrix structures is an important first step in our&lt;br/&gt;ability
to modify the cell walls of plants in a manner that will let them&lt;br/&gt;grow
in adverse environments. We have shown that the AtPRP
proteins&lt;br/&gt;participate in determining cell wall structure in guard cells
and root&lt;br/&gt;hairs, two cell types that are crucial for nutrient uptake
and maintenance&lt;br/&gt;of water balance during growth. Further analysis of
the function of these&lt;br/&gt;proteins may allow us to devise novel mechanisms
for enhancing plant growth&lt;br/&gt;under conditions of water and/or nutrient
limitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;