* 0213490
* A Study of Nonlinear Behavior in the Electrochemical Oxidation of Oxygenated Organics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Mark Schell, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 07/31/2006
* USD 277,000.00

Mark Schell of Southern Methodist University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to study the electrochemical oxidation of
oxygenated organics, using experimental and theoretical approaches to explore
these processes and the nonlinear behavior that they exhibit. Most of the effort
will focus on formic acid oxidation. Objectives are to characterize the
different ways that anions affect the oxidation process, to find the origin of
these effects, and to investigate whether these effects can be used to probe
electrochemical mechanisms. Substantial new understanding is expected to be
gained by studying anion interactions with surrounding stationary and transient
neighbors. Research outcomes are expected to enhance the understanding of
oxidation reactions that are important in fuel cell applications. This project
will provide valuable introductory research opportunities to undergraduate
students in both theoretical and experimental chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrocatalyzed oxidations of oxygenated organic
compounds are important because of their applications in fuel cells. It is a
goal of many academic and industrial researchers to improve the viability of
commercial ambient methanol-air fuel cells to replace conventional fossil fuel
sources. This goal is important because greenhouse gases are increasing in the
environment, and as well because future fossil fuel energy shortages are
probable. A practical objective of this research is to enhance methanol
oxidation by methods similar to those used to enhance formic acid oxidation.
Enhancing methanol oxidation translates into more efficient fuel cells.
&lt;br/&gt;