* 0213916
* Banking and Liquidity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Douglas Diamond, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 392,549.00

Despite a growing interest among academics in both the microeconomics of banking
and the micro-macro links, there has been very little work on why the
institutional form of the bank - the financing of illiquid loans with demandable
demand deposits -makes sense. But this issue is at the center of almost all
questions about banking: It is central to recent work on the transmission of
monetary policy. If the lending channel shuts down because demandable deposits
become prohibitively costly, we have to understand why it is critical that loans
be financed with demand deposits. It is central to issues of crisis management.
What kinds of interventions will help revive a failing banking system? It is
central to the design of a financial system. Do we really need banks -can other
institutions substitute? In a sense, many of the recent models addressing these
issues are incomplete because they address important issues without a fully
specified rationale for the form of the banking firm. In a project funded by the
NSF that is about to end, the investigators develop a model of the bank that
rationalizes its institutional form. They argue that through demand deposits,
banks provide more value to depositors than the market value of the illiquid
loans they hold. Moreover, banks' ability to issue demand deposits helps them
shield borrowers from sudden demands for liquidity from investors. Taken
together, the bank's institutional structure enables it to create liquidity on
both sides of the balance sheet. In the proposed project, the investigators want
to embed the rich, albeit partial equilibrium, &lt;br/&gt;analysis of optimal
bank and borrower contracting that they developed over the course of the
previous project in a general equilibrium setting to understand the consequences
of various shocks, regulations, and government interventions on the state of the
banking system in particular, and the economy in general. The objective is to
obtain a better understanding of the relationship between the various tools of
regulatory or macroeconomic policy, banking, and aggregate economic activity.
&lt;br/&gt;