* 0213091
* Mechanism of Chromophore Formation in Green Fluorescent Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Rebekka Wachter, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 411,113.00

In recent years, green fluorescent protein (GFP) technology has revolutionized
molecular and cellular biology. GFP has proven extremely useful as a fusion tag
for detection of gene products, and as a biosensor for monitoring specific
cellular events. Yet, the level of understanding of the underlying mechanism of
fluorophore generation is lagging behind the development of novel applications.
This project is designed to learn more about the structural and catalytic
requirements for chromophore formation in GFP. When the protein folds into its
native three-dimensional structure, a spontaneous, autocatalytic peptide
backbone cyclization occurs in the protein's interior, initiating a series of
chemical events that lead to the generation of the fluorophore. This highly
unusual backbone cross-link has been identified only in GFP and in histidine
ammonia lyase, though it might be present in a number of other, less well-
characterized proteins. In this project, structural and catalytic requirements
for GFP chromophore formation will be explored, using techniques such as site-
directed mutagenesis, kinetics, and x-ray crystallography. Crystal structures of
GFPs without chromophore will be analyzed with respect to preorganization
towards chromophore formation. A detailed kinetic investigation of the
individual steps leading to fluorescence will be carried out, with the aim of
clarifying how backbone cyclization is coupled to protein folding and oxidation.
Improved understanding of the factors leading to chromophore formation in GFP
will aid in predicting similar unusual post-translational modifications and
chemistries in unrelated proteins.