* 0213377
* Oxidesulfurization (ODS) of Petroleum Sulfur Compounds for Simultaneous Reduction of Sulfur Emissions and Production of Valuable Chemicals:A Novel Environmentally Benign Process
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 09/30/2005
* USD 345,500.00

The objective of this project is to explore the vapor-phase oxidesulfurization
(ODS) of various organosulfur compounds found in petroleum feedstocks and to
upgrade those compounds to valuable chemical products. Simultaneously, a basic
understanding of ODS catalysis will be investigated. Preliminary studies have
revealed that such organosulfur compounds can be selectively oxidized to
valuable chemical intermediates (e.g., phenol, maleic anhydride, and
formaldehyde). The objectives of the fundamental scientific ODS studies are to
determine the: (1) molecular nature of the active surface sites present in model
supported metal oxide catalysts, (2) number of surface sites required for the
various reactions, (3) role of surface redox, acidic and basic sites, (4) role
of the specific oxide support (ligand effect), (5) fundamental kinetics and
mechanisms and (6) molecular structure-reactivity/ selectivity relationships for
ODS.

In terms of broader impacts, the advantages offered by an ODS process are: (1)
the use of free oxygen, rather than expensive hydrogen, (2) eliminates the need
for costly reactor units for methane steam reforming, water-gas shift and Claus
reactions, (3) production of significantly lower amounts of global warming
carbon dioxide due to the minor unselective oxidation reaction pathways, (4)
direct production of sulfuric acid that can be used in the alkylation processes
in the petroleum refinery and (5) a supply of relatively inexpensive sulfur-
containing feedstocks for the production of valuable chemical intermediates. The
educational aspect will be the mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students.
Thus, an ODS process to remove sulfur from fuels is a potentially attractive
pollution control strategy. It is environmentally benign with low emissions.