* 0213750
* Longitudinal Effects of Technical Change, Capital Accumulation and Labor Market Dynamics on Deforestation in the Low-Income tropics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Gerald Shively, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 164,990.00

This research uses household data to study how technical change in agriculture
affects rates of tropical deforestation. Data come from surveys conducted in the
Philippines over the period 1995-2001. The timing and coverage of the data
provide an opportunity to study the direct and indirect effects of irrigation on
agricultural production and labor allocation, while controlling for a number of
agronomic features of the sample farms and important social factors such as
tenure security. It is also possible to trace the causal chain of impacts
leading from technology changes to changes in employment, incomes, and
activities undertaken by households living along the forest margin. The analysis
links three bodies of economic theory regarding agricultural development, labor
market dynamics, and environmental management. Specific objectives include (1)
assessing labor hiring and labor selling decisions in a dynamic context and
their implications for capital formation, subsequent factor use, labor market
participation, and forest pressure; (2) identifying the importance of
transaction and supervision costs, as well as tenure security and site-specific
factor productivity, for labor hiring and selling decisions; and (3) testing and
correcting for attrition bias in the sample, especially as influenced by tenure
security and factor productivity. Results will provide an empirical foundation
for assessing competing theories regarding poverty and the environment, and will
also inform broader debates regarding the distributional effects of growth and
development and their implications for important aspects of household behavior.
Results should have implications for a range of social and environmental
outcomes including economic development, poverty reduction, biodiversity
protection and carbon sequestration.