* 0213651
* US-Tunisia Cooperative Research:  Analysis of Interrupt Latency Using Hybrid Machines
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Feng Lin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 31,200.00

0213651&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
for support of a cooperative project by Professor Feng Lin, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
and Dr. Nejib Ben Hadj-Alouane, Department of Applied Computer Sciences at the
Ecole Nationale d' Sciences Informatique (ENSI) in Tunis, Tunisia. This project
is to investigate the interrupt latency problem in software design. Most
microprocessor/microcontroller systems contain sources of interrupt and
interrupt service routines, which are software components executing in response
to the assertion of an interrupt in hardware. Because the interrupt service
routines execute on the same Central Processing Unit (CPU), they compete for the
CPU and interfere with each other's latency requirements. Latency is defined as
the delay between the assertion of the interrupt in hardware and the start of
execution of the associated interrupt service routine. An important problem is
whether a specific set of sources of interrupt and interrupt service routines
can coexist in the same microprocessor/microcontroller software load without
causing interrupt latency violations. The investigators plan to use a recently
developed framework of hybrid machines to solve this problem. They will model
sources of interrupt and interrupt service routines as hybrid machines. The main
task of this project is to develop models for common
microprocessor/microcontroller systems, efficient algorithms to check co-
reachability in hybrid machines, efficient ways to represent hybrid machine
models in programming languages such as C, and software tools that will help
engineers to check interrupt latency violations in software and the how to
eliminate the violations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The two scientists have
collaborated and published jointly in 1994 and in 1997 while Dr. Hadj-Alouane
was employed at Dow Chemicals Company and at the University of Michigan
respectively. The model they propose in this project may result in important
changes in practice for software design. The project will allow for visits by
Dr. Lin to Tunisia and will encourage a mutually beneficial international
collaboration between the Wayne State University and the ENSI in Tunisia. Funds
for this project are provided by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, the Division of Computer-Communications Research and Division of
Experimental and Integrative Activities. &lt;br/&gt;