* 0213085
* Mechanisms of Axon Sorting in the Zebrafish Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Chi-Bin Chien, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2005
* USD 320,460.00

Chi-Bin Chien&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;-------------------------&lt;br/&gt;To form the correct
circuitry in the developing nervous system, &lt;br/&gt;billions of nerve cells
must send their axons (individual nerve &lt;br/&gt;fibers) over long distances
to find their specific target cells. How &lt;br/&gt;these axons find their
targest is one of the fundamental questions of &lt;br/&gt;developmental
neuroscience. When many axons take similar pathways and &lt;br/&gt;form a nerve
bundle or axon tract, individual axons are often highly &lt;br/&gt;organized
within the larger tract. How such sorting within axon &lt;br/&gt;tracts is
achieved is a basic question of axon guidance that has been &lt;br/&gt;studied
very little.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the visual system, retinal axons exit the
eye and form the optic &lt;br/&gt;nerve, where they are organized in a very
precise array according to &lt;br/&gt;their point of origin. Shortly after
passing through the optic &lt;br/&gt;chiasm, these retinal axons reorganize in a
characteristic way, so &lt;br/&gt;that they are sorted out according to a
different order as they grow &lt;br/&gt;through the optic tract on their way to
visual centers in the brain. &lt;br/&gt;This sorting of retinal axons in the
optic tract allow the proper &lt;br/&gt;formation of normal visual connections,
and is therefore critical for &lt;br/&gt;normal
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the mechanisms of axon
sorting in the visual &lt;br/&gt;system of the zebrafish, Danio rerio. The
zebrafish visual system has &lt;br/&gt;many fundamental similarities (both
genetic and anatomical) to humans &lt;br/&gt;and other vertebrates, and so the
principles discovered here are &lt;br/&gt;likely to have wide applicability. In
a particular zebrafish mutant &lt;br/&gt;strain, called boxer, a subset of the
retinal axons fail to &lt;br/&gt;reorganize normally within the optic tract.
Thus, normal function of &lt;br/&gt;the boxer gene is critical for normal
development of the visual &lt;br/&gt;system. The proposed experiments will
analyze whether boxer function &lt;br/&gt;is required in the eye or in the
brain, and will clone boxer to &lt;br/&gt;determine which mutated gene is
responsible for the visual system &lt;br/&gt;defect. These experiments will shed
light on a critical aspect of how &lt;br/&gt;the brain is properly wired during
development.&lt;br/&gt;