* 0213358
* Reproductive Tactics in an Androdioecious Crustacean - Laboratory and Field Tests of a Model for the Maintenance of a Mixed Mating System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Stephen Weeks, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/2007
* USD 368,639.00

Outcrossing sexual reproduction has intrigued evolutionary biologists for
decades, for the individual that can produce offspring by self-fertilization or
asexually has an immediate advantage over outcrossers. Mixed mating systems
(with both self-fertilization and outcrossing) provide an excellent way to
identify the selective advantage of both modes of reproduction. One form of
mixed mating, androdioecy (males + hermaphrodites), is particularly interesting
because theoretical treatments suggest such a mixture should be evolutionarily
unstable. A recently discovered crustacean (Eulimnadia texana) exhibits a
persistent form of androdioecy. In a previous grant, we implemented an
integrative approach to the study of androdioecy, using genetic, cellular,
physiological, behavioral, and ecological studies to quantify the parameters of
a model in two populations. Although these projects proved quite fruitful, many
questions remain. The current proposal will address those questions with two
integrated projects. (a) Laboratory tests that combine behavioral and genetic
studies will be used to further explore two of the model's parameters. (b) Field
Collections, that estimate relative male to hermaphrodite survival, inbreeding
depression and male mating success to estimate three of the four parameters of a
model in natural habitats. Two sets of field data will be collected (data from
naturally-filled ponds and from artificially-filled) at the Jornada LTER site in
New Mexico. Data collected from both the field and laboratory studies will be
used to estimate the four model parameters, which will in turn be used to test
the ability of the model to predict the proportions of sex types found in each
pond. The results of these tests will provide a thoroughly integrative
understanding of the maintenance of outcrossing in this system, which will
further our understanding of mating system evolution in general. Broader
Impacts: Both PIs have strong commitments to student training and are on
projects designed to bring inquiry-based science experiences to high school and
undergraduate students in the Akron area. The proposed research will mentor
graduate and undergraduate students who will gain training in modern genetic
techniques, and be enriched by field experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;