* 0213179
* Correlational selection on physiology and alternative male strategies
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/2005
* USD 232,001.00

Both reproduction and whole-organism performance are influenced by the endocrine
system, and all of these traits have heritable, genetic components. Elucidating
links among genetics, reproductive function, performance, and the endocrine and
immune systems is essential to understanding how evolution has shaped
reproductive strategies and physiology. Systems with discrete polymorphisms
provide good models for examining the relationships among these traits since
variation both within and among morphs can be examined. Male side-blotched
lizards (Uta stansburiana) have three different color morphs (orange, blue, or
yellow throat), which arise from a gene of major effect. Each of the types
exhibits a different physiological and mating strategy (defense of a large
territory with multiple females, defense of an individual female, or "sneaking"
into another male's territory). In particular, territorial orange-throated males
have high stamina and high levels of plasma testosterone, relative to the other
two types. However, these males also have higher mortality rates than the other
morphs. Testosterone may decrease the capability of the immune system to cope
with infectious agents. In laboratory breeding studies, sprint speed, endurance,
and standard metabolic rate of parents and progeny with known throat color
genotypes will be measured. In the field, variation in plasma hormones
(testosterone and corticosterone) and their effects on sprint speed, endurance,
and field metabolic rate will be studied. DNA paternity analysis will provide
field pedigrees to complement genetic studies in the laboratory. These
experiments will allow the investigators to evaluate the links among hormones,
physiology, and reproduction. Currently no data are available to address
relations between genetics, physiology, performance, and reproduction; this
research accomplishes this major goal and establishes a database for future
work. Our work addresses the fundamental forces that shape the joint evolution
of endocrine function, physiology and immune function.