* 0213198
* The Role of Localized Interactions and Dispersal in the Ecology and Evolution of Model Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Brendan Bohannan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2005
* USD 230,000.00

Ecologists have long recognized that spatial heterogeneity can be crucial for
the generation and maintenance of biological diversity. For example, a diverse
array of species can be maintained if environmental conditions vary from place
to place, and if each species has a distinct set of conditions under which it
can exclude other species. Recently, theoretical studies have also shown that
diversity can be maintained even if conditions do not vary from place to place;
this can occur through a process called "self-organization." Self-organization
is the emergence of large scale patterns of coexisting species due only to local
interactions among different species. Whether self-organized spatial
heterogeneity is generated by actual ecological communities (as opposed to
communities simulated by a computer) is controversial. This research project
will use laboratory communities of microorganisms to study whether localized
interactions can result in self-organized spatial heterogeneity, whether self-
organized heterogeneity is sufficient to promote the coexistence of populations,
and how self-organized communities change through
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the most critical challenges facing
humanity are the conservation, restoration and wise management of the Earth's
diverse living resources. To meet these challenges, society requires basic
information concerning how these resources are generated and maintained. This
research project will generate such information. &lt;br/&gt;