* 0213671
* Collaborative Research: Economic Insecurity and the Globalization of Production
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Kenneth Scheve, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 10/31/2004
* USD 105,278.00

Across the world, there appears to be significant opposition to policies aimed
at further liberalization of international trade, immigration, and foreign
direct investment (FDI). A large number of political events in recent years
suggest a marked turn away from liberalization, and many prominent observers
have raised alarms about this "globalization backlash." There is a growing body
of research examining what political-economy forces underlie this backlash.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this research has identified some of the key
sources of political conflict over international economic liberalization, a
number of central questions remain unanswered. Most importantly, debates about
globalization frequently involve claims about the impact of integration on
individual economic insecurity. The argument most often made is that
globalization increases insecurity. Although this claim is central to both
political and academic debates about international economic integration, there
is no empirical research that has directly tested the relationship. In fact, in
many accounts, it is not even clear on what theoretical grounds the claim is
made. The primary objective of this research project is to evaluate
theoretically and empirically whether and how globalization increases individual
economic insecurity in advanced industrial democracies. The Principal
Investigators propose to develop a theoretical argument that FDI by
multinational enterprises (MNEs) is the critical mechanism through which
globalization generates economic insecurity in advanced economies and to
directly test this connection using individual-level survey data. No existing
research has made a direct empirical test of the hypothesized relationship
between the multinationalization of production and the economic insecurity of
individual workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators contend
that rising economic insecurity among workers may relate to deteriorating
employment and/or wage interactions with their employers. These ideas can be
formalized in standard frameworks of labor economics in terms of either rising
elasticities of demand for labor and/or declining profit/risk- sharing
opportunities. Greater cross-border flows of FDI by MNEs are key forces that are
likely both to raise elasticities and lower profit/risk sharing. Our research
will further develop these theoretical connections between rising MNE activity
and economic insecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our overall empirical approach
will be to examine how individual self-assessments of economic insecurity
correlate with the role of FDI and MNEs in the industries and/or regions in
which these individuals reside and work. Initially, the Principal Investigators
will study Great Britain by combining two data sets: the British Household Panel
Survey (BHPS) and the Annual Respondents Database (ARD). The BHPS is a
nationally-representative panel of more than 5,000 households and over 9,000
individuals surveyed annually from 1991 to the present. It records detailed
information about each respondent's employment, wages, and perceptions of
economic security. The ARD tracks U.K. manufacturing activity and, importantly,
the nationality of ownership for each firm. By industry and region, the
Principal Investigators can then calculate the share of manufacturing activity
accounted for by foreign-owned firms, British-headquartered MNEs, and purely
domestic firms. With similar data for non-manufacturing activity from other data
files of the same form as the ARD, the Principal Investigators can then merge
MNE information into the BHPS and thereby see how individual responses relate to
MNE activity. Together these data will allow us to evaluate the extent and way
in which FDI activity affects labor market outcomes and perceptions of economic
security across individuals in the UK and whether these relationships have
changed over the last decade. The Principal Investigators will extend their UK
study to at least 14 other advanced economies using similar datasets. The
comparative and temporal dimension of the project is critical for evaluating how
the relationship between globalization and insecurity is affected by variation
in the extent of FDI activity, economic performance, labor market institutions,
and characteristics of welfare states.&lt;br/&gt;