* 0213948
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Uniting genre analysis and multidimensional analysis: A corpus based analysis of scientific research articles
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Jeff Connor-Linton, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2003
* USD 5,525.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jeff Connor-Linton, Ms. Budsaba Kanoksilapatham will
compile and analyze a corpus of 60 biochemistry research articles. These
articles will be randomly selected from five core journals in biochemistry
published in the United States. Previous studies of discourse structure and
language use in scientific articles have emphasized the communicative functions
of rhetorical moves (like 'Summarizing previous research,' and 'Identifying a
research niche') and of a few lexical and grammatical features (like past tense
and passive voice). Ms. Kanoksilapatham will address both levels of analysis to
determine how they are connected. She will analyze rhetorical moves to determine
the rhetorical organization conventionally used in each of the four sections of
biochemistry research articles (Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion)
and to assess the reliability of move identification. She will then analyze the
use of dozens of lexical and grammatical features to identify the sets of
features that are most typically used to construct each type of
move.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this research is threefold.
Empirically, the study will offer the most representative review of the
rhetorical structure of research articles to date. Theoretically, it is the
first study to assess the validity of subjective interpretive constructs like
rhetorical moves by analyzing the use of concrete linguistic features within and
across those moves and revealing the connection between two ways that meaning is
communicated in written texts. Pedagogically, this study may guide language
teachers and materials designers in selecting texts and developing learning
activities for English as a second or foreign language instruction. Insights
from these analyses will help scientists who speak English as a second language
to better understand and contribute to reports of scientific discoveries around
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;