* 0213089
* Understanding the Decline in U.S. Output Volatility:  An Analysis of the Automobile Industry
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Valerie Ramey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2003
* USD 72,054.00

Why has output volatility in the post-1984 period been so much lower than in
earlier periods? Is it just good luck, better monetary policy, or structural
change in the economy? Understanding the source the decline in output volatility
not only helps forecast future volatility patterns, but also sheds light on
potential improvements in monetary policy and firm behavior. The proposed
research seeks to shed light on the source of the decline in volatility by
conducting a case study of changes in output and sales volatility in the U.S.
automobile industry. The U.S. automobile industry represents an ideal case study
of the decline in volatility because it exhibits patterns similar to, but more
dramatic than, the aggregate data. Previous work by Kahn, McConnell and Perez-
Quiros presents evidence that changes in production and inventory behavior are a
key source of the decline in volatility. In the post-1984 period, the variance
of production fell much more than the variance of sales. Furthermore, the
covariance of inventory investment and sales has changed from being positive
(which adds to volatility) to being negative. These facts represent
circumstantial evidence that the key to the decline in volatility is structural
change in production and inventory management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specificially, this research explores the alternative hypothesis that these
observed changes stem mostly from changes in the sales process rather than
structural changes in firms' production and inventory scheduling. The U.S.
automobile industry, as well as many other industries, face nonconvex costs and
lumpy production margins that can lead to a very nonlinear relationship between
the variance of production and the variance of sales. Thus, a change in the
dynamics of the sales process can lead to radical changes in the way production
is scheduled. The first part of the project demonstrates the complex
relationship between sales dynamics and output dynamics using simulations.
Employing a cost function similar to the one faced by automobile assembly
plants, optimal production schedules in response to various sales processes will
be derived. The second part of the project gathers and analyzes detailed weekly
automobile assembly plant data to investigate how much of the change in
production behavior is due to structural changes at the plant level versus
changes in the nature of the sales process. Since the sales process can be
affected by changes in monetary policy rules or by firms' pricing behavior,
identifying how much of the change in production behavior is simply a response
to changes in the dynamics of sales is key to tracking the source of the decline
in volatility. &lt;br/&gt;