* 0213563
* Conformationally Preorganized Diamide Ligands for Enhanced Binding of f-Block Elements: New Ligands, Coordination Complexes and Functional Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* James Hutchison, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 07/31/2007
* USD 351,000.00

This proposal builds off Professor Hutchison's recent discovery of a new class
of chelating bicyclic diamide ligands that exhibit dramatic enhancements in
binding affinity for the f-block elements compared to the large class of ligands
based upon the malonamide substructure. The new ligand class, the 3,9-diaza-3,9-
dialkylbicyclo[ 4.4.0]decane-2, 10-diones, were identified using a rational
approach utilizing molecular mechanics modeling. The preorganized bicyclic
structure ideally positions the two carbonyl groups for optimal metal-ligand
interaction. A highly efficient and versatile synthesis of this ligand class has
been developed and ion extraction experiments have shown a 3 to 5 million-fold
enhancement in affmity for f- block ions when compared to several analogous
acyclic diamides. This initial discovery suggests a rich class of ligands can be
prepared wherein the binding affinity for f- block elements can be widely tuned.
The overall goal of this proposal is to identify methods by which the new
ligands can be rationally designed and rapidly optimized through an integrated
theory, synthesis and testing program. The three primary objectives in this
proposal are designed to help elucidate the design criteria that dictate the
properties of this new class of ligands. These objectives are (i) developing
synthetic methods that permit wide variation of the ligand structure (ranging
from the nature and position of alkyl and aryl substituents to the ring sizes
within the bicyclic structure), (ii) investigating the solution and solid-state
coordination chemistry of the new ligands and relating this chemistry back to
the ligand design and (iii) incorporating these ligands into functional
materials (polymers, organic thin films).

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
research of Professor James Hutchison of the University of Oregon whose work
involves ligand design, synthetic chemistry, spectroscopy methods, coordination
chemistry, crystallography, solvent extraction, and materials chemistry. This
work will enhance student training through exposure to a wide range of research.
It will also contribute to society by targeting such applications as nuclear
fuel reprocessing and high-level waste management, and sensitizers for
lanthanide luminesence in fluorescent probes and sensors.