* 0213075
* Plumage Color Polymorphism in Red-Backed Fairy-Wrens: Mechanism and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2009
* Michael Webster, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 08/31/2009
* USD 437,623.00

Title: Plumage color polymorphism in red-backed fairy-wrens: Mechanism and
function PI: Michael S. Webster Co-PI: Hubert Schwabl and Jordan Karubian

One primary goal of evolutionary biology is to explain biological diversity,
both within and among species. Many species show pronounced phenotypic variation
in both behavior and morphology, with individuals of one phenotype looking and
behaving very differently from individuals of another phenotype. For example,
males of the Australian red-backed fairy-wren (Malurus melanocephalus) are of
two different types: some males breed in bright plumage, provide relatively
little parental care, and seek extrapair copulations, whereas other males are
cryptically colored, provide much parental care, and do not appear to seek
extrapair copulations. An understanding of this sort of phenotypic polymorphism
requires an understanding of both the mechanisms that produce it and the
evolutionary forces that create and maintain it. In this project, Webster et al.
will examine the hormonal/physiological mechanisms and also the evolutionary
forces responsible for polymorphism in the red-backed fairy-wren. Correlational
analyses of changes in hormone levels will be combined with a hormone
manipulation experiment to determine the mechanisms that cause a male to adopt
one plumage type or the other. In addition, experiments with wild and captive
birds will be used to thoroughly test whether males change plumage type in
response to social cues. At a functional level, observations of wild birds,
combined with field experiments and genetic analyses of parentage, will be used
to determine the total reproductive success of males with different phenotypes.
This project will be among the first to examine a complex intraspecific
polymorphism in an endothermic vertebrate from both mechanistic and functional
perspectives. As such, the study will serve as a model for understanding
polymorphism in other endothermic organisms, and also as a model for a
pluralistic approach to the study of natural phenomena. In doing so, this
project will directly address several current controversies in behavioral and
evolutionary biology. Specifically, this study will: (1) lead to a better
understanding of the function of conspicuous and polymorphic traits; (2) help
clarify the role of hormones in the development of plumage color; and (3)
elucidate the mechanistic connections between social behavior and morphology.

