* 0213954
* RUI: Testing for Wage Discrimination: Measuring Relative Female Productivity in Nineteenth-Century English Agriculture
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Joyce Burnette, Wabash College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2006
* USD 71,412.00

While it is well known that women have received lower wages than men throughout
history, there is no agreement about how to interpret this fact. Economists who
believe that markets work generally assume that the difference in wages is a
measure of the difference in productivity between men and women. Historians are
often more skeptical of markets, and many assume that these wage differences
indicate that women were underpaid. Unfortunately, little work has been done to
test which of these hypotheses is closest to the truth. This project tests which
interpretation is correct by comparing wages to measures of productivity derived
from an estimated production function. Using farm accounts from English
archives, this project creates a data set containing measures of outputs and
inputs from a number of farms in early nineteenth-century England and uses this
data set to estimate a production function, and thus the marginal productivity
of male and female workers. Once the relative productivity of female workers has
been determined, comparison with their relative wages will show whether women
were paid appropriate market wages or were underpaid. &lt;br/&gt; The results of
this study have implications for how we understand labor markets. At issue is
the question of whether wages are determined by social custom or by
productivity. It is clear that women were paid lower wages than men throughout
most of history, but why they were paid lower wages is still an open question
that this project will attempt to answer. This project will leave other
questions unanswered. The production function can determine women's productivity
relative to men's, but it cannot determine the reasons why women's productivity
differed from men's. This project tests for wage discrimination, which occurs if
wages do not match the workers' productivity, but it does not test for
discrimination in general. Discrimination comes in many forms, including limited
access to some occupations, and may exist even if women were not underpaid in
farm labor. &lt;br/&gt;