* 0213941
* Socio-Phonetic Cues Differentiating African American and European American Voices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Erik Thomas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 148,597.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Erik Thomas will conduct two years
of linguistic research on the phonetic cues that differentiate African American
and European American English. The project has two components, one examining
differences in the production of African American and European American speech
and the other examining differences in their perception - i.e., how listeners
distinguish the two. Past research on African American English has focused
largely on grammatical variants (such as copula deletion: "He happy"; and
habitual BE: "He be working"), and consonantal variants (such as R-lessness:
HEAH for HERE; and consonant cluster simplification: PAS for PAST). Research on
vocalic and intonational variation in African American English has been scarce,
and research on variation in rhythm and voice quality even rarer. This project
will examine these lesser-known variables. The production component will include
acoustic analyses of recordings of African Americans and European Americans from
the same communities in North Carolina, examining vowel, intonational, rhythm,
and voice quality variables. The perception component will include a series of
speech identification experiments in which the effects on ethnic identification
of the variables investigated in the production component are compared.

It is important to study variables involving vowels, intonation, rhythm, and
voice quality because they are the factors that give speakers accents and thus
are critical for African American and European American identity. These
variables are likely to appear in running speech before the better-studied
grammatical variables and usually before the consonantal variables. Unlike those
variables, variables involving vowels, intonation, rhythm, and voice quality
seem to persist in standard African American speech. African Americans can use
them to project their ethnic identity even in situations in which they have to
avoid the more stigmatized grammatical and consonantal variants. In situations
such as telephone conversations and radio broadcasts, listeners can distinguish
a speaker's ethnicity using these variables. This ability is involved in both
racial profiling and discrimination. More information about these variables,
including their distribution within the two ethnic groups and how they are used
by listeners, can provide insights as to how racial profiling occurs. This
information could be useful in legal cases.

