* 0213423
* Travel Support for Activities of DELOS-NSF Working Group on "Digital Imagery for Significant Cultural and Historical Materials"
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Ching-chih Chen, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 26,981.00

The proposal is to establish a US-EU/DELOS working group on "Digital Imagery for
Significant Cultural and Historical Materials". The working group will meet over
the next year to discuss and evaluate fruitful joint activities and research
paths for collaborative activities in this general topical area. The EU
component of the effort is funded and managed by the DELOS Forum, a major
organizer of digital libraries research and planning activities in Europe. DELOS
receives support from the Information Societies Technologies (IST) 5th Framework
Programme of the European Commission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort continues
the planning and assessment activities begun by an earlier NSF-EU working
groups' process. In their final report "An International Research Agenda for
Digital Libraries", delivered in Brussels in October 1998, increased levels of
collaboration and interaction was seen as critical to building multi-lingual,
multi-national digital libraries. The objective of the new working groups, of
which this is one, is to define a research agenda on a specific topic and
identify areas and activities for cooperation between EU and US researchers. The
efforts of this particular group take the next step in the planning process by
assessing fruitful research activities and resource development related to
digital imagery collections.&lt;br/&gt;