* 0213576
* First US-Italy Workshop on Frontiers in Materials Research, Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Aron Pinczuk, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/2004
* USD 56,345.00

The First U.S.-Italy Workshop on Frontiers in Materials Research, Nanoscience
and Nanotechnology will be held on March 14-15, 2002 at the National Science
Foundation, Arlington, Virginia. In addition to key note talks that will address
the core topics of the workshop, six breakout groups will meet in parallel
sessions to hold discussions and write a report that outlines issues and
identifies opportunities for collaborative research in each of the respective
fields. Three major areas will be explored, each having two sub-areas. (1)
Frontiers in Characterization of Nanoscale Systems: Low dimensional systems,
nanostructures and devices; Studies of single-molecule and few electron systems
and devices. (2) Advances in Self-assembly and Novel Materials: self-assembled
systems and devices; synthesis of novel organic and inorganic systems and their
devices. (3) Interfaces between Materials Research and Biology: self-assembly of
biomolecular materials; novel biomolecular devices. A goal of the workshop is to
foster bilateral collaborations between leading groups in materials research,
nanoscience, and nanotechnology in the U.S. and Italy. The research initiated
through these direct bilateral collaborations will complement research that is
presently sponsored under the U.S. National Science Foundation - European
Commission implementation agreements.

Materials research is a huge driving force for innovations that serve to educate
and train future scientists and engineers, while advancing economic growth and
social progress. Frontier areas of nanoscience and technology are generating
scientific breakthroughs that revolutionize existing technologies as well a
create new ones in areas that include health and medical services,
transportation, environmental protection, energy efficiency, civil
infrastructure, information technology, and homeland security.

