* 0213146
* A Symposium in Honor of Peter W. Hochachka," Toronto, Canada, January 4-8, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Raul Suarez, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 2,500.00

The symposium (scheduled for the SICB meeting in Toronto, January 4-8, 2003) has
a number of related goals. It shall honor Peter W. Hochachka for his numerous,
pioneering and decades-long contributions to the study of biochemical adaptation
to the environment. The symposium shall feature historical perspectives and the
latest developments in areas encompassed by the field of biochemical adaptation
to the environment. It shall provide zoologists an overview of how, over the
past 30 years, the field of adaptational biochemistry has grown from an infant,
highly speculative field into one that continues to be fascinating and dynamic,
but is now mature, sophisticated, and highly influential. The symposium shall
demonstrate that the August Krogh Principle (choosing the species best suited to
the scientific question of interest) is alive and well and illustrate the broad
range of techniques including nmr spectroscopy, molecular biology, and
comparative phylogenetic approaches, used in studies of biochemical adaptation.
The symposium shall illustrate how tightly interwoven this discipline has become
with various subdisciplines in ecology and evolutionary biology, i.e., that it
has become one with the rest of the biological sciences. The symposium shall
have 10 speakers who will each give 30 minute presentations. Their lectures
shall be written up for publication in American Zoologist.