* 0213574
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center: Center for Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2011
* Irving Herman, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mary E. Galvin-Donoghue
* 08/31/2011
* USD 8,181,825.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Columbia
University investigates ways of forming films containing complex metal oxide
nanoparticles and the properties of these films through an interdisciplinary and
collaborative effort. The Center is composed of a single interdisciplinary
research group (IRG). The focus of the IRG research is the materials chemistry
of oxide nanoparticle systems, and includes nanoparticle synthesis, assembly,
and diagnostics. The Columbia MRSEC links thirteen faculty members from five
departments on campus with other faculty at City College of New York, and with
fourteen collaborators in industry and at national laboratories. The MRSEC
maintains shared experimental facilities that meet the needs of the Center
research and serve for the training of students. Education outreach efforts of
the MRSEC include a summer research experience for undergraduates and for high
school teachers, and an extensive visitation program to high and middle schools
in New York City that brings materials demonstrations to teachers and students.

Participants in the Center currently include 13 senior investigators, 3
postdoctoral associates, 8 graduate students, 10 undergraduate students and 1
support personnel. Professor Irving P. Herman directs the MRSEC.

