* 0213516
* Dynamics of Spin Polarized Free Radicals in Polymeric and Photobiological Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Malcolm Forbes, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 465,000.00

This research project deals with fundamental studies in radical pair dynamics
with applications in photobiology and polymer chemistry. Professor Forbes will
develop methodology for the observation and analysis of spin polarization
phenomena in single amino acids, short peptides and proteins. Using a new dye
sensitization reaction, he will characterize several amino acid radical cations
and neutral radicals and investigate their conformational and chemical dynamics.
In the polymer area, a major issue will be to determine the degree of influence
of long range macromolecular motion on the locally measured dynamic effects in
the time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (TREPR) spectra. New molecular
dynamic simulations of interesting micelles will be carried at the North
Carolina Supercomputing Center and new photochemically active surfactants will
be synthesized to learn if control can be exerted over the starting point for
diffusion of the ensuing free radicals. Further work will be done on the
photochemical degradation of beer using sensitizers and visible light. This work
has the potential to impact the entire multi-million dollar per year beverage
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program and the Central and Eastern Europe Program in the Office of
International Science and Engineering continues support for the research of
Professor Malcolm D. E. Forbes of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. Professor Forbes work is at the forefront of photochemical research. He is
developing sophisticated magnetic resonance methods along with computer modeling
to obtain valuable information on several important chemical systems.