* 0213508
* Characterization of Grain Structure in Block Copolymer Thin Films by Guided-wave Depolarized Light Scattering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Nitash Balsara, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 08/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

The proposal describes the development of guided-wave depolarized light
scattering, a novel technique for characterizing the structure of ordered block
copolymer thin films. This technique will enable cost-effective, nondestructive,
real-time quantification of order formation and defect density in these two-
dimensional systems.

A planar optical waveguide will be fabricated by depositing the polymer film on
a low refractive index substrate (fused silica). Standard optical waveguide
elements such as prism couplers will be used to couple the laser beam into the
film and the scattered light out of the film. The depolarized scattered beam
will be guided through the film and detected using a CCD camera. Considerable
effort will be devoted to the development of tractable models for relating the
detected optical signal to the grain structure within the film. The models that
have been established for the optical properties of bulk block copolymer samples
will serve as a starting point for this development. Preliminary predictions
indicate that the guided-wave geometry will lead to fundamental differences in
the nature of the detected signal. The grain structure determined in reciprocal
space by the guided-wave depolarized light scattering studies will compared with
position space data obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic
force microscopy (AFM) experiments on the same samples.

The proposed work builds on earlier work by the co-PIs on optical
characterization of grain structure in three-dimensional block copolymer
samples. This information is crucial for a number of recently proposed
applications for block copolymer thin films such as information storage and
photonics. The proposed research will also answer fundamental questions
regarding the influence of substrates and interfaces on order formation and
defect annihilation in thin block copolymer films.