* 0213112
* Development of a Novel Inducible/Reversible Gene Knockout System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Ya-Ping Tang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Gene targeting is a powerful tool for the studies of in vivo gene functions.
However, the null mutants produced by currently available targeting techniques
are frequently accompanied by either developmental deficit from subtle to
embryonic death or non-phenotypes since the deficits associated with the missing
gene are functionally or genetically compensated. All these concerns have
dramatically complicated the interpretation of the results or even misled the
conclusion in terms of gene functions. Therefore, to develop a novel technique
that is able to solve these concerns is of most importance in the studies of in
vivo gene functions, especially for behavioral genomics. Based on the principles
that both trans-acting and cis-acting are the essential mechanisms for gene
transcription in eukaryotic cells, we have development a novel transposon system
that is able to tag any gene of interest and produce inducible/reversible mRNA
knockout in the mouse. The novelty of Dr. Tang's system is to change the
strategy of deletion of a crucial part of a targeted gene, which is the
principle for traditional knockout techniques including conventional or the
currently available conditional gene knockout techniques, such as Cre/loxP
recombination system, to the strategy of inactivation of (inducible knockout) or
reactivation of (reversible to normal) mRNA transcription. The most striking
promise of this system is to allow one to temporally associate mRNA
transcription with a given biological or behavioral process. Therefore, it will
be particularly useful for the studies of gene function in relation to
complicated biological and behavioral processes. There are 20,000-25,000 genes
in the mouse genome. With 30% genes expressed in the brain, at least 7,500 genes
are necessary to tag and further study for a comprehensive understanding of
behavioral genomics. Based on the feasibility of this novel system and the
progress in the mouse genome project, it is reasonable to establish a small
library for gene targeted transposon tagged ES cell lines. At the first stage,
the PI will produce presenilin-1 (PS-1) and BDNF transposon tagged ES cell lines
and then the knockout mice to validate this system and later on, 20-60 ES lines
are expected to be established. Due to the fact that to maintain colonies of
mutant mouse lines requires extensive husbandry space as well as labor, it will
be eventually required to establish a large or complete tagged ES cell library
in our whole research community. Thus, the development of this novel technology
will significantly contribute to other efforts on the functional (behavioral)
genomics in this post-genome era. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;