* 0213595
* Novel Stable Chiral Ligation for Asymmetric Organoborane Conversions via 10-Substituted-9-borabicyclo[3.3.2]decanes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* John Soderquist, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 274,000.00

The objectives of this work involve several aspects of organoboron chemistry.
Professor Soderquist and his group will first prepare a number of chiral allyl,
crotyl, allenyl, and alkynyl boron reagents which contain the
9-borabicyclo[3.3.2]decane framework. The allyl, crotyl, and allenyl reagents
will be utilized in asymmetric addition reactions to prochiral aldehydes and
ketones. The chiral alkynyl organoboron reagents will be used in asymmetric
conjugate addition reactions to enones. Boron NMR will be used to assess the
stereoselectivities of these addition reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Dr. John A. Soderquist of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Puerto Rico. Dr. Stewart will work on the development of
organoboron reagents capable of effecting a number of chemical reactions. This
group will explore stereoselective addition reactions using molecules containing
ketones and aldehydes as substrates. These addition reactions produce molecules
which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of
the two possible forms (a single enantiomer). Development of this family of
reactions is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical
industry today. Students trained during the course of this work will gain skills
needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries which now
produces a number of single enantiomer compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;