* 0213047
* Investigation of the Crustacean Molt-Inhibiting Hormone Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* R. Douglas Watson, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 319,390.00

A long-range goal of the research is to understand the mechanisms by which
hormones control growth and development in crustaceans. The crustacean carapace
(exoskeleton) restricts growth. Therefore, as crustaceans grow and develop the
exoskeleton is periodically shed (molted) and replaced by a new and larger
version. These cycles of growth and molting, and associated developmental
processes including regeneration, are controlled by the crustacean endocrine
system. The cellular events that lead to molting are stimulated by steroid
hormones termed ecdysteroids. Ecdysteroids are secreted by paired endocrine
glands, the Y-organs. The production of ecdysteroids by Y-organs is negatively
regulated (inhibited) by a peptide hormone, molt-inhibiting hormone (MIH),
produced by neurosecretory cells in the eyestalks. Thus, it is hypothesized that
MIH inhibits Y-organs during much of the molting cycle, and that a molting
sequence is initiated when MIH secretion diminishes. Recent progress has been
made in understanding the structure of the MIH peptide and gene. Progress has
likewise been made in understanding cell signaling pathways in Y-organs.
However, a major gap in current understanding of the regulation of crustacean
molting is lack of information on the MIH receptor. It is hypothesized that the
effect of MIH on Y-organs is mediated by a cell surface receptor, but the MIH
receptor has not been isolated or thoroughly characterized for any crustacean
species. The specific aims of the current research are to (1) isolate a cDNA
encoding the MIH receptor of the blue crab (Callinectes sapidus), (2) determine
the tissue distribution of MIH receptor mRNA, (3) determine whether there occur
changes in the level of receptor mRNA during a molt cycle, and (4) begin
characterizing the native MIH receptor in Y-organ cell membranes. The aims will
be achieved using methods of modern cellular and molecular biology and
biochemistry, including recombinant DNA technology, nucleic acid blotting and
hybridization, and protein cross-linking. The research will answer fundamental
questions about the neuroendocrine regulation of growth and development in this
abundant and economically important group of animals. In addition, study of the
crustacean model system may provide conceptual insights into general questions
about the regulation of steroidogenesis and the structure and function of
neurosecretory cells. Finally, it is anticipated that the research will provide
information that will enable development of methods for specifically
manipulating growth and molting in crustaceans, a benefit to fisheries managers,
the aquaculture industry, and consumers of shellfish.