* 0213884
* Collaborative Research: The Role of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) in Modulating Major Hurricane Activity in the U.S. on Interannual to Millennial Timescales
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 167,730.00

Records from the 20th century indicate considerable variations in coastal
hurricane activity along the Gulf and Atlantic coastlines of North America. A
decade of strong hurricanes on the Gulf coast is followed by a decade of severe
hurricanes on the East coast. Preliminary research suggests that these cycles
are related to the location and strength of the subtropical Atlantic high-
pressure cell (Bermuda High), perhaps controlled by the strength of the North
Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). To explore the dynamics of these relationships, it
is necessary to consider records of past hurricane activity that predate the
20th century. This research project will examine the role of the Bermuda High
and the North Atlantic Oscillation in modulating major U.S. coastal hurricane
activity on time scales ranging from the inter-annual to the millennial. Lakes
and marshes along the Atlantic coast and Gulf of Mexico coast will be cored, and
the overwash sand deposits preserved in these coastal sediments will be studied
to produce proxy records of past hurricane activity. These geological records
and evidence from historical documents will be collated with the modern
instrumental records using geographic information systems (GIS) and statistics.
Past climate patterns will be inferred from measured and proxy indices. The
objectives of this project are to better understand climate patterns associated
with variations in coastal hurricane activity and to improve return-period
estimates of catastrophic events. GIS will be used to collate the disparate
historical archives into an electronic document. Statistical models will be used
to distinguish periods of activity from inactivity locally and regionally. A
probabilistic framework will be adopted to capture the varying levels of
uncertainty in the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong hurricanes have enormous
societal impact. High winds, heavy rain, and storm surge combine to create a
catastrophic threat to life and property. Coastal populations are growing faster
than the population at large, thereby continually accentuating problem
associated with strong hurricanes. Careful examination of historical documents
and fresh geological evidence gathered from Cape Cod and the Gulf coast through
this project will provide valuable clues about the regularity of hurricanes in
the distant past. A careful study of these records will result in new knowledge
about the relationship between climate variability and hurricane frequency,
which will lead to a better understanding of the future threat of a hurricane
disaster in the United States and nearby nations.&lt;br/&gt;