* 0213305
* ITR:  Tools For High-Performance Simulation of Granular Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Sriram Pemmaraju, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 249,958.00

This grant is for the development of computational tools
for&lt;br/&gt;simulating very large-scale problems involving granular
flow.&lt;br/&gt;Rather than use a continuum model of a granular material
(which&lt;br/&gt;involves a large number of assumptions and approximations about
the&lt;br/&gt;way they behave), rather we look at the computational challenges
in&lt;br/&gt;discrete element models.&lt;br/&gt;These are challenging large-
scale problems with thousands to millions&lt;br/&gt;of grains that have to be
simulated.&lt;br/&gt;Direct interactions are usually between touching
grains.&lt;br/&gt;However, one grain can not only affect the others that it
touches, but&lt;br/&gt;those will affect their neighbors, and so
on.&lt;br/&gt;Further, the network of interactions is dynamic.&lt;br/&gt;Indeed,
the overall pattern of interactions can become very&lt;br/&gt;different
depending on the circumstances: if a sand table is shaken,&lt;br/&gt;then most
of the sand grains will be independent; when the grains&lt;br/&gt;settle, each
grain will be touching many others.&lt;br/&gt;In order to efficiently organize
the computational tasks, we need to&lt;br/&gt;use techniques from graph or
network theory.&lt;br/&gt;These tools include graph partitioning techniques,
graph coloring&lt;br/&gt;techniques, and new techniques for handling the
collisions of grains.&lt;br/&gt;Since the problems are very large scale,
currently available&lt;br/&gt;techniques often have to be adapted from dealing
with small-scale&lt;br/&gt;problems to deal with large-scale
problems.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, since the network of interactions is dynamic,
these&lt;br/&gt;techniques have to be adapted to use information about the
previous&lt;br/&gt;network in order to efficiently obtain the corresponding
information&lt;br/&gt;about the new network.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will
be developing these tools and drawing&lt;br/&gt;techniques from graph theory,
continuous optimization, complementarity&lt;br/&gt;theory, and computational
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are materials made of small,
relatively hard&lt;br/&gt;objects that collide off each other.&lt;br/&gt;Sand,
breakfast cereals, talcum powder, and a box of marbles are
all&lt;br/&gt;examples of granular materials.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding these
materials and simulating their behavior directly&lt;br/&gt;is difficult because
the position and velocity of each of the&lt;br/&gt;``grains'' in the material
needs to be tracked and updated as they&lt;br/&gt;move and collide.&lt;br/&gt;In
order to do this well, we need high-performance computers, and we&lt;br/&gt;need
to use them well.&lt;br/&gt;The crucial problem is to understand the nature of
the interactions&lt;br/&gt;between the grains, and to develop automatic tools
that can determine&lt;br/&gt;how to divide the computational tasks so that they
can be tackled&lt;br/&gt;efficiently on high-performance and parallel computers.