* 0213356
* RUI:   Collaborative Proposal:   Visible and Near-Infrared Electronic Spectroscopy of Metal-Containing Diatomic Radicals by Intracavity Laser Absorption Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* James O'Brien, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 170,901.00

In this collaborative research project, funded by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, O'Brien will conduct research on
the electronic spectroscopy of metal containing diatomic radicals CuO, NiH,
NiCl, and NiF. The goal of the work is to provide new or improved molecular
constants for a series of electronic states and to construct the energy level
scheme and potential curves of these species. These species are characterized by
their open shell structure, which give rise to a host of interactions between
nuclear, electronic, vibrational, and rotational degrees of freedom. Besides
being of intrinsic interest, the results of this research will also have bearing
on other fields such as astrophysics. Experimental techniques are based on
intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy, the equipment for which is located at
the University of Missouri at Saint Louis. This research will be conducted with
undergraduate and MS level graduate students who will receive knowledge and
training in the techniques of contemporary experimental and theoretical
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of a collaboration
between researchers at a primarily undergraduate institution and a major
research university. The research program is designed to provide new information
about the energies of a set of metal containing diatomic molecules, the results
of which will be useful to other fields such as astrophysics. The project
provides training in research to undergraduate and intermediate level graduate
students in advanced contemporary techniques of laser spectroscopy. The project
also contains an outreach program that will allow gifted high school students to
participate in the research. &lt;br/&gt;