* 0213533
* Supramolecular Chemistry of beta-Sheets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* James Nowick, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 391,734.00

This proposal aims to elucidate factors involved in edge-to-edge interactions
between beta- sheets and to learn how to control this important mode of protein
interaction, which is involved in protein dimerization, protein-protein
recognition, and protein aggregation. The proposal builds upon an exciting
discovery by the Principal Investigator under NSF award CHE-9813105 ("Molecular
Templates for Creating Artificial Protein Structures") of a molecular template
that induces beta-sheet folding and interactions when incorporated into
peptides. This molecular template is constructed as a composite of two amino
acids. One of these, Orn, is natural although not routinely found in proteins;
the other, Hao, was invented by the Principal Investigator and his students
under the prior NSF support. The Orn-Hao composite is easily incorporated into
peptides using standard peptide synthesis techniques. Peptides containing the
Orn-Hao composite dimerize in a fashion similar to that of certain beta-sheet
proteins. The current proposal will study the dimerization of peptides
containing the Orn-Hao composite and learn how to control the dimerization
process through a series of experiments. The earlier experiments will focus upon
optimizing the structure and folding of peptides containing the Orn-Hao
composite, while the later experiments will focus upon learning how to use
specific interactions to control the dimerization. All of these studies will
rely heavily upon organic synthesis, peptide synthesis, NMR titration, and NMR
NOE methods. The intellectual merit of this work is that interactions between
beta-sheets are widespread and important, yet the molecular basis for these
interactions is not well understood. The proposed work explores creative and
original concepts, by using small chemical model systems to address this
fundamental and important biological problem. One special merit of using these
small chemical model systems, instead of larger proteins, is that these systems
can be prepared easily and used to evaluate hypotheses very rapidly. Another
special merit of these model systems is that they will be able to be prepared in
other laboratories, thus enabling other researchers to use them to test their
own ideas about protein folding and interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program (OMC) will support the
research of Professor James Nowick of the University of California- Irvine.
Professor Nowick's work is expected to generate valuable basic scientific
knowledge with important biomedical implications. In addition, this proposal
will have broader impacts through the training of students and the development
of human resources. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students working
on this project will be trained to perform cutting-edge research in the
laboratory and will also learn to effectively communicate their results to
others by presenting their work in seminars, at meetings, and through
publications. Many of these well-trained students will contribute to the US
scientific endeavor and the economy as researchers in the pharmaceutical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;