* 0213622
* Support of Foundations of Computer Aided Process Operations (FOCAPO) 2003 Conference:  A View to the Future Integration of R&amp;D, Manufacturing and the Global Supply Chain
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

The process industry (chemical, petroleum and pharmaceutical) in the United
States has been one of the strongest industrial sectors of the economy,
producing a consistent positive balance of trade. This has been due to the cost
effectiveness of its processes as well as to its technological innovations. In
the 21st century the process industry faces three major challenges: increased
competition in the global marketplace, pressure for keeping operating costs and
product prices low, and pressure to reduce environmental, safety and security
risks. Given these competitive concerns, there is an increasing focus for
optimizing and integrating the supply chain in order to achieve reduced costs
and a tighter level of coordination in the operations of manufacturing
facilities. One component for accomplishing these objectives is new process
operations methodologies and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to
provide support for the conference on Foundations of Computer Aided Process
Operations (FOCAPO) that will take place on January 12-15, 2003, in Coral
Springs, Florida. The meeting will focus on the areas of supply chain
management, R&amp;D for pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries,
methodologies for process operations (hybrid systems, data reconciliation,
safety), and optimization models and algorithms (discrete, stochastic and
dynamic). It will also provide a forum to discuss supply chain software from
vendors, and industrial and academic collaborations in the area of process
operations. FOCAPO 2003 aims to attract about 150 participants, with roughly
equal representation from academia and industry. There will also be substantial
international participation. One important goal is to ensure the participation
of 20 graduate students. The grant will support invited academic speakers and
panelists and the graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;