* 0213818
* Strong Electronic Correlations in Layered Materials, in Nanoscale Dynamics, and in Actinide Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* John Marston, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 504,000.00

Sophisticated experimental studies of several classes of layered materials, as
well as recent advances in the fabrication and characterization of
nanostructures such as quantum dots and wires, require a deeper theoretical
understanding of strongly correlated electronic systems. Realistic descriptions
of aqueous actinide complexes also require the treatment of strong corelations
in ways that go beyond the usual methods of quantum chemistry.

This theoretical research will employ a combination of systematic analytical and
numerical methods to establish phase diagrams, to study far-from-eqilibrium
dynamics, and to study charge-transfer in complex materials. The role of strong
electronic correlations will be investigated in three different electronic
systems: layered materials such as the cuprate high temperature and organic
superconductors, and quantum antiferromagnets; quantum many-body theory far-
from-equilibrium as seen recently in the Kondo effect in quantum dots and
Luttinger liquid behavior in quantum wires; and, aqueous plutonium complexes as
found in nuclear waste. %%% This is a broad-based theoretical program with the
common thread that all critically involve electrons which interact strongly.
This calls for new and powerful techniques. The problems chosen are diverse and
range from the physics of high temperature superconductors to the chemistry of
nuclear waste materials. ***