* 0213066
* Do Internal N Signals Regulate Interspecific Variability in N Uptake Response to Elevated CO?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Hormoz BassiriRad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2007
* USD 274,000.00

While there is a general consensus among scientists that the projected rise in
the concentration of atmospheric CO2 will have a profound impact on productivity
and composition of terrestrial ecosystems, our capacity to reliably predict the
exact nature of these changes remain tenuous. The unknown effects of other
environmental factors such as nitrogen (N) and water are major sources of this
uncertainty. N is an essential mineral nutrient whose availability and
utilization regulates plant responses to high CO2. This high leverage by N is
fortuitous when one considers the intricate connection between carbon (C) and N
in plant biology. It is well recognized that in the short term, plants exposed
to high CO2 will enhance their C uptake. Theoretically, however, only those
species that can maintain a balance between N and C demand will sustain a long-
term positive effect. The few available data indicate that plant species vary
widely in their N uptake responses to high CO2. However, observations from a few
empirical studies can not be extrapolated to cover a wide range of species
around the globe and we currently lack a mechanistic understanding to develop
such a roadmap. Here we propose to elucidate the major mechanism(s) that control
plant N uptake when CO2 concentration is elevated using species from contrasting
ecosystems. We propose to develop physiological and biochemical markers that
could be used to gauge the extent to which a target species can maintain its N
and C balance. The physiological and biochemical markers targeted here are known
to control plant N uptake under natural conditions and therefore are likely to
control N uptake responses under high CO2 as well. The findings are equally
important for basic research and management/policy issues that must deal with
increasing pressure to cope with the future climate. The proposed research will
be conducted at six nationally funded Free Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment (FACE)
experiments, two CO2 natural springs in Italy and New Zealand, and a number of
open-top chambers at the University of Illinois at Chicago. The results
generated here will be critical for the development of predictive models
designed to forecast the fate of terrestrial ecosystems in a future climate.