* 0213921
* Influence of Sensory Input and Environmental Stress on Brain Development, Behavior and Genomic Activity in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Stephen Roberts, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 304,655.00

Both inherited and environmental factors influence central nervous system (CNS)
development, behavior, and gene activity throughout the lifetimes of animals.
Sensory enrichment generally has a positive effect on CNS development, although
the behavioral consequences of sensory enrichment are still in question.
Alternatively, stress exposure typically disrupts CNS development, with known
detrimental effects on behavioral and cognitive abilities. The proposed research
focuses on the Drosophila mushroom body, a conserved structure in the insect
brain necessary for olfactory learning. Normal mushroom body development has
been demonstrated in genetic, transgenic and tissue ablation studies to be
critical for cognitive functions in flies. Environmental conditions greatly
affect Drosophila mushroom bodies in several ways. Artificially enriched visual
and olfactory conditions enhance its development, while exposure to stressful
temperatures and chemicals disrupt its anatomy. Hence, the opposite effects of
enrichment and stress on CNS development should be counteractive and mirror
behavioral and cognitive abilities as well as gene activity in the CNS.
Specifically, the proposed research will establish the consequences of
ecologically relevant variation in olfactory enrichment and thermal stress
during development on (1) mushroom body and general anatomy, (2) behavior, and
(3) gene expression in Drosophila. This study will identify fundamental
relationships between environment, brain development, behavior, and gene
expression through the integration of molecular, genetic, structural and
functional perspectives.