* 0213076
* Molecular Phylogeny of the Peronosporomycetes (Oomycota or Heterokonta)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Michael Hudspeth, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 280,000.00

0213076&lt;br/&gt;Hudspeth&lt;br/&gt; Phylogenetic relationships within the
Peronosporomycetes, a&lt;br/&gt;diverse group of economically important fungal-
like protists often&lt;br/&gt;referred to as oomycetes, are poorly understood.
In this study the&lt;br/&gt;primary goal is to establish an extensive DNA
database derived from&lt;br/&gt;mitochondrial and nuclear genes of a diverse
selection of these&lt;br/&gt;organisms. The resultant database is then to be
used to infer&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary relationships of major, understudied, and
newly identified&lt;br/&gt;genera. With the development of peronosporomycete
specific DNA primers&lt;br/&gt;this study emphasizes both obligate and
opportunistic parasites of&lt;br/&gt;plants, algae, and terrestrial and marine
animals. The resulting&lt;br/&gt;inferred phylogeny is expected to provide new
insight into evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;relationships and trends within the
Peronosporomycetes, and to identify&lt;br/&gt;anomalously placed taxa for
reevaluation using morphological and&lt;br/&gt;biochemical data. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this study stems from the inclusion in
the&lt;br/&gt;Peronosporomycetes of a significant number of pathogenic
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;Hosts include representatives from all eukaryotic kingdoms.
Plant&lt;br/&gt;pathogens encompass a spectrum of cereal and leguminous crops,
rosaceous&lt;br/&gt;fruit trees, forest trees, and ornamental plants as hosts.
The societal&lt;br/&gt;impact of the downy mildews Plasmopara and Peronospora
(responsible for&lt;br/&gt;the decimation of the French wine and Cuban tobacco
industries) and of&lt;br/&gt;Phytophthora infestans, the causative agent of late
blight of potato&lt;br/&gt;(famines in Ireland in the mid-1840's and World War I
Germany), is part&lt;br/&gt;of the historical record. Currently, the worldwide
economic impact of&lt;br/&gt;these and other peronosporomycete genera amounts to
tens of billions of&lt;br/&gt;dollars in crop losses and disease control. The
newly identified&lt;br/&gt;Phytophthora ramorum (causative agent for sudden oak
death) with its&lt;br/&gt;broad host range currently threatens large stands of
trees in the&lt;br/&gt;western U.S., and aggressive hybrid variants of
other&lt;br/&gt;"phytophthoras" with their expanding host ranges are
emerging&lt;br/&gt;as additional threats. In the rapidly expanding area of
aquaculture,&lt;br/&gt;peronosporomycete animal "mycoses" affecting roe,
fingerlings,&lt;br/&gt;molluscans, and crustaceans are currently being
identified. Even the&lt;br/&gt;incidence of mammalian "pythiosis" (Pythium
isidiosum) in an&lt;br/&gt;increasing number of hosts, including man, is being
recognized.&lt;br/&gt;Establishing a molecular database for this group provides
both a&lt;br/&gt;resource for the early and rapid molecular identification of
pathogens,&lt;br/&gt;and a significant step in understanding the evolutionary
history and&lt;br/&gt;trends of the Peronosporomycetes.&lt;br/&gt;