* 0214514
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  A Roll Call Analysis of the California Assembly
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Jeffrey Lewis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,871.00

The Doctoral Dissertation student produces a computerized database of all roll-
call votes cast in the California Assembly since 1849. Using a Poole-Rosenthal
method of analyzing the ideological composition of the US has greatly increased
the understanding of the Congress. By employing roll data from every
Congressional session and assuming that each member's ideological position is
relatively fixed from one session to the next, Poole and Rosenthal are able to
locate all members of Congress throughout its history in a common ideological
space. Given this cross-temporally comparable space, they are able to address
questions of how, for example, partisan divergence, regional alignment, and the
dimensionality of political conflict have changed over time. While the leverage
of this approach clearly extends beyond the US Congress, there are few such
applications in the literature. In this grant, the student brings the power of
Poole and Rosenthal's method to the study of party and ideology within
California's state legislature. The dissertation will unravel the dynamics of
partisanship in the California legislature and, in particular, how these
dynamics are affected by electoral institutions, such as rules governing primary
elections, which have varied considerably across California's history. In this
case, the data generated are used to measure the degree of partisan alignment
and polarization through California's history. Application of these data to
other central questions of legislative scholarship such as the effects of term
limits, legislative professionalization, or the presence of the ballot
initiative come quickly to mind. The researcher has already completed collection
of these data for 1957-1958, 1967-1968, 1977-1978, 1987-1988, and 1993-2001
sessions.

This is a dataset that will be used by other scholars interested in these
questions.

