* 0214471
* Auction Design with Resale
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Charles Zheng, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 171,980.00

Auctions are widely used mechanisms for the allocation of resources, and resale
after auctions is a practical possibility. However, this possibility is usually
not considered in auction theory. This project is to re-examine auction theory
when resale among bidders is possible. The project is based on two preliminary
results obtained by the investigator: (a) with the possibility of resale, the
optimal auction in the literature may fail to be optimal; (b) the investigator
has designed a new mechanism that achieves optimality despite resale. The
project consists of three parts. First, develop a general method to characterize
incentive-feasible mechanisms when resale is possible. Second, analyze the
impact of resale on multiple-object auctions, with the FCC radio frequencies
spectrum auctions constituting the motivating example. Third, examine the
relationship between the formation of middlemen and the pricing scheme in
multiunit auctions, with the Treasury-bill auctions constituting the motivating
example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help to provide a better
understanding about auctions, especially on their relation with resale and other
re-contracting activities. Such better understanding has the potential of
providing policy implications for major privatization auctions. Theoretically,
the project will help to extend the framework of mechanism design beyond static
isolated environments. Such extension will make the framework more applicable to
industrial organization, market design, and political economy. More broadly
speaking, auction theory has produced explicit predictions on how commodities
change hands and hence the theory is a building block for a future precise
science of markets. Extending the theory to the more realistic resale settings,
this project will enhance the knowledge of how competitive markets actually
operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;