* 0214317
*  Quasi-Bayesian Alternative to M-Estimation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Han Hong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2003
* USD 37,493.00

This research develops a class of econometric estimation procedures, called
quasi-bayesian estimators, which are computationally and practically attractive.
The estimator is simply defined as the mean or median (or other quantity alike)
of the quasi-posterior distribution of economic parameter interest. Unlike in
the conventional bayesian approach, the quasi-posterior distribution is
generated by transforming a criterion or objective function (such as that in
GMM) which may not have any likelihood interpretation. The approach is useful
and new for a class of ``semi-parametric" problems that do not impose rigid
parametric structure on the economic model of interest. The main application of
this estimation consists of nonlinear generalized method-of-moments and various
other structural econometric models, such as instrumental median regression, in
which the conventional estimates are very hard or practically infeasible to
compute . All of these models allow, in principle, to answer very interesting
economic questions in the context of microeconomic models and economic policy
evaluation. However, the practical estimation and use of such models faces very
severe implementation challenges. Quasi-bayesian estimation overcomes this
problem by relying on the markov chain monte carlo methods. This allows us to
form a class of estimators that are practical, easy to use, and that have
excellent statistical properties. The project develops the formal statistical
and computational properties of quasi-bayesian estimators for a class of semi-
parametric models that fall outside the conventional bayesian inference.
Asymptotic normality and consistency of the estimates are proven, and it is
shown that the quasi-posterior quantiles can be used for making inferential
statements about parameters of interest. The project also implements computer
programs and demonstrates the usefulness of the entire approach through
simulations. An empirical application is also presented. It deals with
estimation of dynamic market risk forecasts using the recursive nonlinear
quantile (value-at-risk) models. This application is of great interest to the
financial firms and banks who are required by law to asses value-at-risk on a
daily and a weekly basis.