* 0214760
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Resonant-Enhanced Crystallization (REC) Process
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Fangxiao Yang, RESODYN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel Resonant-Enhanced Crystallization (REC) Process. REC technology
is similar to conventional impeller stirring crystallization but with enhanced
mass and heat transfer, low shear or reduced crystal breakage, and improved
crystal size distribution. Purification and separation by crystallization is a
multicomponent mass transfer phenomenon of the crystallizing solute and impurity
solutes. Mass and heat transfer in crystallization process are key factors
affecting crystal growth rate, size distribution and habit. However, in
conventional crystallizers, the mass transfer coefficient is maximized when
crystals are in their terminal velocity and increased agitation results in
significant crystal breakage. The proposed technology will further increase mass
transfer even in cases where crystals are in suspended status. Due to the low
shear associated with the acoustic agitation, crystal breakage will be minimal.
The second nucleation will also be reduced and therefore, crystal size
distribution will be improved. The objective of this proposed research is to
incorporate low-frequency acoustic agitation to the crystallization process to
greatly enhance mass and heat transfer. This is expected to improve crystal
growth rate, size distribution and quality.

The commercial applications of this project are in the area of pharmaceutical
separation and purification.