* 0214334
* The Ecologies of Children's Computing:  Investigating the use of Technology across Multiple Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Harouna Ba, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 09/30/2004
* USD 249,385.00

This project will investigate the role that the quality and depth of in-school
technology access plays in shaping disadvantaged children's broader
understanding of and engagement with technology, as expressed in their
technology use at home and in other out-of-school settings. In particular, the
research will examine how school choices about educational computing affect
disadvantaged children's use of technology at home, in their peer groups, and in
community settings. This research begins from a premise that how young people
are invited to make use of technology shapes their conceptions of themselves as
users of technology. This work will follow 36 young people from two middle
schools during their seventh- and eighth-grade years of school. Surveys,
interviews and structured observations will track participants' use of,
engagement with, and knowledge about technology as it develops and changes over
the course of the two years of the project. This project will explore concerns
raised by researchers who have demonstrated that children from different family
backgrounds are using computers for very different activities in school, with
children from disadvantaged families facing greater barriers to meaningful use
of the technology. Drill-and-practice software is used more widely in schools
serving large numbers of impoverished students than in other schools, and
teachers in these schools are more likely than others to report that they use
computers to "reinforce basic skills" for their students than to encourage
creativity, self-expression, or communication. Even in schools serving a diverse
student population, poor students and students of color are likely to be using
computers for drill-and-practice work or to learn office skills, while Caucasian
students and students with high socioeconomic status are likely to use computers
to conduct original research, create original work products, and communicate
with others. This prior research demonstrates that effectively addressing the
digital divide will mean doing more than providing more points of access to
technology. Ensuring that all children have opportunities to make full use of
the range of technological tools available for communication, information-
gathering, and self-expression, will require attending to the interplay of
multiple social settings on children's learning and development. Little is yet
known about how they are using these technologies outside of school, and even
less about when and how those uses intersect with school or family goals for
young people's learning and development. This project will describe how a range
of social settings influence young people's understandings of and uses of
digital technologies. This study will also describe how young people's use of
technology in multiple settings develops over time, and how experiences in
various settings shape expectations and interests brought into other settings.
Finally, findings from this study will demonstrate specifically whether and how
different kinds of in-school technology use shape young people's perceptions of
themselves as users of technology across multiple settings.