* 0214351
* Empirical Analyses of Politician Accountability in the United States:  A Regression Discontinuity Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* David Lee, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 301,966.00

An important implication of virtually every economic theory of political
competition in a representative democracy is that the actions of elected
political leaders are somewhat constrained by the desires of the electorate.
Many of these theories suggest that even if politicians and their political
parties would like to implement diametrically opposed policies, they would
nonetheless be compelled to seek more moderate positions because to adopt
extreme policies would risk being voted out of office. In this way, political
competition is thought to bring opposing parties' positions closer to the
"median voter". But to what extent is this notion empirically relevant for the
political economy of the United States? Do voters implicitly moderate parties'
positions? Can we quantify the extent to which they do or do not, and does it
depend on characteristics of the voting populace, such as education levels?
Providing credible answers to these questions is hindered by two fundamental
problems: 1) it is difficult to measure the "closeness" of two opposing
candidates' positions since only the policy decisions of the winner of the
election is observed, and 2) a candidate's probability of winning an election -
which depends on voters - may cause candidates to adopt certain positions; but
those positions influence how voters vote, which in turn impacts the candidates'
likelihood of winning the election, making it difficult to disentangle cause and
effect from real-world data. Using data on the legislative voting patterns of
members of the U.S. House of Representatives and election returns data, this
project addresses these two problems by utilizing a quasi-experiment inherent in
the U.S. electoral system. The approach of this project is to examine the roll
call voting behavior of U.S. House members that were elected by a slim margin
(say, by less than 1 percent). Under certain assumptions, this generates
virtually random assignment of which party wins the Congressional District,
among the elections that turned out to be close. The average roll call voting
behavior of barely-elected Democratic Representatives should represent how the
opponents of the barely-elected Republicans would have voted in roll call votes
if they had not lost. This so-called "regression discontinuity design" strategy
is also used to examine if Representatives respond to sharp changes in the
probability of being re-elected - in other words, to assess whether or not the
risk of not being elected compels politicians moderate their positions. The
empirical analysis indicates very little evidence of strong or weak forms of
this kind of responsiveness, suggesting that the diverging forces of
partisanship seem to outweigh the converging forces of voters.&lt;br/&gt; The
extent to which the political and electoral system in the U.S. operates to
reflect the "will of the people" is of great concern to the public at large and
motivates those who advocate political reform in areas ranging from campaign
finance laws to term limits to the Congressional re-districting process. One way
to evaluate how well the U.S. federal system functions is to assess whether or
not voters, via the electoral process, compel partisan politicians and their
parties to seek a "middle" ground, and moderate their policy choices. Indeed,
much of the theoretical literature on this issue attempts to describe mechanisms
by which voters can implicitly "discipline" politicians' decisions. However, the
evidence on whether this notion is empirically relevant is far from conclusive,
mostly due to the standard problem faced by social scientists, that of
disentangling cause and effect in non-experimental settings. The findings of
this research project can lead to two important advancements in our
understanding of the operation of the U.S. political and electoral system: 1) a
quantification of the relative importance of the convergent (the will of the
electorate) and divergent (partisanship) forces that lead to public policy
outcomes, and 2) a demonstration of how a "natural experiment" inherent in the
electoral system can be used by researchers to learn about causal relationships
in political and electoral contexts.&lt;br/&gt;