* 0214160
* On the Economics of Eco-Labeling
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Charles Mason, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 54,334.00

While there is evidence that consumers would be willing to pay a premium for
items produced using "environmentally friendly" techniques, they are often
unable to express these tastes because an asymmetric information problem.
Consumers cannot typically tell the type of production process the firm has
used, so they can't determine when it is environmentally friendly. Since the
environmentally friendly technique is generally more costly, firms would be
disinclined to choose such a technique, with larger pollution flows resulting.
In response to this problem of asymmetric information, eco-labeling programs
have emerged in a wide range of countries over the last decade or so. The
research in this project models eco-labeling as an imperfect and costly test of
product quality, where quality is interpreted as "environmental friendliness."
The study determines the set of possible equilibria, the welfare implications of
the introduction of an eco-labeling option, and the potential for eco-labeling
to provide a regulatory alternative to more traditional methods. This project
has important implications for public policy towards environmental regulation.
When firms are privately informed about production and abatement costs, as in
the context of this project, environmental regulation is notoriously difficult.
Whether society opts for a traditional regulatory approach, using pollution
taxes or abatement standards, or a market-based approach, for example using
tradable permits, there will be costs to society associated with the
informational advantage that firms have over regulatory agencies. Appealing to
outside interests, as with eco-labeling, can allow environmental regulators to
overcome their informational disadvantage at relatively low cost. On the other
hand, the certification process is costly to firms, costs that must ultimately
be paid by consumers. This project outlines conditions under which eco-labeling
is preferable to a more traditional regulatory approach.