* 0214776
* SBIR Phase I:  Power Generation from Ambient Vibration Energy Using Re-configurable Micro-Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS) Generator
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Sudipta Das, WILLIAMS-PYRO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Winslow L. Sargeant
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
providing ambient power for wireless smart sensor units used for condition-based
monitoring. Specifically, this project is to develop a Micro-Electro-Mechanical
System (MEMS)-based power-scavenging module. Current research in the area of
ambient power has established a strong foundation from which future solutions in
the area of condition-based maintenance will take shape. Research will also be
performed on rare earth magnets to custom design thin permanent magnets that
will produce a high-flux density in the compactly designed system. The proposed
component will provide power through the conversion of ambient machine vibration
using electromagnetic induction. Design objectives include the optimization of
energy-scavenging efficiency in varying environmental conditions, operating
conditions, and system types. The proposed system uses MEMS technology to
realize small dimensions (one-inch square and less than 0.5 cm. thick) and
energy storage capabilities.

Commercial applications include industrial machinery, vehicles, air
conditioners, and refrigerators. Additional options are large markets such as
building controls and manufacturing.