* 0214422
* Lenape Language Database Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* James Rementer, The Delaware Tribe
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2007
* USD 209,424.00



ABSTRACT Rementer & Pearson 0214422

With National Science Foundation support, Mr. James Rementer and Dr. Bruce
Pearson will review and convert to digital format some 1,000 hours of tape-
recorded material in the Delaware Indian language dating back to the mid-20th
century. Although this language has been studied in the past and belongs to the
widely studied Algonquian family, little information about the structure of the
language is available in a form that is readily usable by contemporary English-
speaking members of the tribe or the general public. The project will result in
the digitized preservation of the old analog recordings, many now growing
brittle, and will lead to permanent storage of the material in a format that
will bring together phonetic renditions of words and phrases, sound files of the
words and phrases pronounced by the last generation of native speakers, and in
many cases, pictures of cultural items being named. A reference CD that will
teach some of the language basics will also be produced and made available to
Delaware Tribal members as well as the general public.

In addition to the importance of the project to the 11,000 members of the
Oklahoma-based Delaware tribe, the language is historically important. It was
once spoken over an area of almost 25,000 square miles, including all of New
Jersey, eastern Pennsylvania, northern Delaware. and southeastern New York. It
was also significant as the language used between the Lenape and the early
Dutch, Swedish, and English settlers in the area. It was the medium used to deal
with William Penn when he established the Pennsylvania colony in the 17th
century. The importance of Lenape continued through the period of American
independence and westward expansion to the end of the 19th century. The language
remained in use in Oklahoma through the 20th century and survived until August,
2002, in the memory of a 98-year-old man. Some middle-aged tribal members have a
limited command of the language, as do a few scholars. The storage format
developed for preservation of the materials will facilitate efforts of the
Delaware tribe to create language-teaching materials. This documentation will
also support the work of linguists, folklorists, and historians in researching
narratives contained in the material and in preparing English translations
and/or bilingual editions of Delaware texts of interest to a wider public.

