* 0214074
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Coatings for Dental Biofilm Control
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Don Elrod, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
synthesize and test lubricious/antimicrobial coatings to prevent biofilm
formation in dental water lines. Microbial contamination of water delivered by
dental-unit water systems continues to be a significant problem. The most common
cause of dental-unit contamination is believed to be the formation and
subsequent sloughing off of microbial biofilm from the surfaces of tubing within
dental-unit water systems. Persons who are immunocompromised may be at risk due
to some opportunistic microorganisms present in most biofilm. Contaminated water
may be ingested by the patient or be aerosolized and inhaled by the patient or
dental worker. During the Phase I research, antimicrobial monomers will be
incorporated into copolymers with additional monomers, that upon wetting, cause
the coating to become quite lubricious. The coatings will be tested in order to
evaluate their effectiveness in preventing biofilm formation. The lubricious
component will help prevent microbial attachment while the antimicrobial
constituent will eradicate microorganisms on contact. The antimicrobial and
lubricious parts of the coating are expected to perform synergistically when
used in combination in order to significantly inhibit biofilm
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial applications of this project will
be in a number of areas, including medical, industrial, marine and consumer
products. Specific examples include the following: medical coatings for
catheters, stents, endoscopes, implants and endotracheal tubes; various
industrial coatings; food/beverage packaging; coatings for ship hulls; and
coatings for various consumer products.