* 0214978
* Acquisition of Gas Chromatography Equipment for Research in Microbiology and River Ecology at Three Undergraduate Institutions
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Brian Mangan, King's College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 101,808.00

&lt;br/&gt;A National Science Foundation grant has been awarded to King's
College for microbiology laboratory equipment that will be used in undergraduate
research at three local colleges. David Glick, Ph.D. and Brian Mangan, Ph.D. of
King's College will share a new gas chromatography system installed at King's
with Michael Sulzinski, Ph.D. of the University of Scranton and Kenneth Pidcock,
Ph.D. of Wilkes University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will demonstrate
that shared use of equipment can foster the integration of research and
education among undergraduate microbiology students and four highly skilled
faculty investigators at three institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two gas chromatographs configured with a
computer and special software will facilitate new research in two areas.
Separate, but related, research will identify and analyze lipids (fats) in
bacteria, fungi, and fish through laboratory studies at the three institutions.
Additional research will focus on Susquehanna River ecology, analyzing the
effect of the environmental contaminant, polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), on
fish, and the effect of acid mine drainage on the abundance and diversity of
river bacteria and fungi. One of the gas chromatographs will be dedicated to
analyzing lipids (fats) extracted from bacteria and fungi. Once the lipid
analysis has been done, the computer software supplied will allow the
identification of the particular bacteria or fungus. The other gas chromatograph
will be dedicated to the analysis of an important environmental contaminant
known as PCB (Polychlorinated Biphenyl). This second instrument will also be
used to examine which chemicals, in a mix, bacteria
degrade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to this NSF grant award, no institution of
higher education in northeastern Pennsylvania possessed a gas chromatography
system configured for research to identify and analyze microbes by their fatty
acid profile. The research also has basic scientific importance. It will provide
new insights into the ecology of soil and river bacteria and fungi as well as
increasing our knowledge of the impact of PCB contamination on the life cycles
of fish. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this important equipment will
strengthen the integration of undergraduate education, research and research
training at all three institutions of higher education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;