* 0214199
* Reconstructing Law on the Street: The Influence of Citizen Characteristics on Traffic Law Enforcement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Charles Epp, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2006
* USD 202,806.00

A growing body of scholarship suggests that policies adopted by legislatures,
executives, and public bureaucracies are revised, even transformed, through the
discretionary actions of front-line public officials such as social workers, tax
auditors, and police officers. The PIs will examine the transformation of the
policy of the traffic stop and citation by front-line law enforcement officers.
Traffic stops and citations are widespread, and there is growing evidence that
they disproportionately affect racial minorities. Thus, traffic stops offer a
direct and focused opportunity to assess the effects of citizens' personal
characteristics on street-level law enforcement. The PIs will test several
hypotheses concerning how drivers' race, sex, socioeconomic status, and other
characteristics influence the likelihood that police officers will stop and
ticket them. They will also examine whether oversight policies-namely, that
police officers must record and report the race of drivers whom they stop-result
in lower racial disparities in jurisdictions with such policies. Lastly, the
investigators will test several hypotheses that address whether discretionary
actions of street-level bureaucrats are significantly influenced by the value of
equal enforcement of the law. . The research had the potential to contribute to
literatures on bureaucratic discretion, political oversight, policing, and urban
politics and policy and to the policy debate over racial profiling and police
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct a telephone
survey of a stratified random sample of African-American and white adult driers
who are residents of the Kansas City metro area (in both Kansas and Missouri),
with an over-sampling of African-Americans and of drivers who have been stooped
in the last years. This sampling frame offers substantial variation to on key
variables. For example, residents of Kansas City vary on key personal
characteristics and driving habits, and the level of personal-agent oversight
varies in the two states. That is, the state of Missouri and two Kansas metro
municipalities require officers to record and report the race of the driver in
all stopped vehicles; other Kansas City jurisdictions do not have this
requirement.&lt;br/&gt;