* 0214216
* A Sociolinguistic Investigation of an Ethnolinguistic Boundary: Tense-Aspect on the Island of Bequia, St. Vincent
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* James Walker, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 93,001.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jack Sidnell and James Walker
will conduct three years of sociolinguistic research on an ethnolinguistic
boundary on Bequia, a Caribbean island in the territory of St. Vincent and the
Grenadines. Over 90% of Bequia's approximately 5000 residents are descended from
Africans brought to the Caribbean during the 17th and 18th centuries. The rest
of its population consists primarily of the descendants of Scottish, Irish, and
English indentured laborers also brought to the Caribbean during that period and
relocated to Bequia in the mid-19th century. Most Afro-Bequarians speak a
variety of English-influenced creole similar in many respects to the creole
varieties spoken elsewhere in the Eastern Caribbean (St. Kitts, Nevis, St.
Vincent) and in Guyana. Anglo-Bequarians speak a variety of English that is
structurally similar to varieties of English spoken in Ireland, Scotland, and
the Southwest of England. This research emphasizes the tense-aspect system in
these varieties of English and English-based creole. This area of grammar is
prominent in descriptions of creoles and in theories of their origin and
transmission. Researchers will also examine social factors that constrain
variation in the creole- and English-speaking communities, especially the nature
of contact between these communities and the extent to which ethnic boundaries
maintain distinct varieties of speech. The analysis of social factors and
linguistic variation will be used to address central issues of sociolinguistic
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will shed light on problems of
language contact and change, especially on the way that such linguistic
processes are shaped by their social and cultural context. It will also document
two language varieties that remain almost completely undescribed. Researchers
will produce a booklet for local circulation that will explain the project and
its findings. This will include a description of the language varieties, an
account of their social history, and a discussion of their place in the daily
lives of Bequia's residents. These materials will be made available for use in
schools in Bequia and in the English-speaking Caribbean more generally. This
research and the publications derived from it will help to dispel groundless but
widely held stereotypes about the inadequacy of creole languages. The research
will thus contribute to the legitmization of these varieties and promote a
better appreciation of their importance in the communities in which they are
spoken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;