* 0214170
* Collaborative Research: Individual Differences in Decision-Making Competence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Baruch Fischhoff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 74,792.00

Every day, people face decisions in domains as diverse as the choice of
shampoos, stocks, medical treatments, and friends. When people have not learned
what to do through trial and error, they need a general ability to make
effective decisions. The attendant skills include extracting relevant
information from the world, applying general values in specific settings, and
integrating these pieces with a coherent decision rule. Research has often found
deficiencies in such skills. While interest in general cognitive processes has
diverted attention from individual differences, people do differ substantially
in these skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parker and Fischhoff (2002) used this
performance variability to develop a measure of decision-making competence
(DMC). Seven tasks, tapping into the above skills, were administered to
respondents from an ongoing longitudinal study. Performance correlated
positively across the seven DMC tasks, suggesting a common central competency. A
single DMC score correlated strongly with measures of intelligence, cognitive
style, risk behavior, and social/family influences. Although the CEDAR study
demonstrates the potential of DMC, it is limited by problems with some of the
instruments and special properties of the sample used. The current research
includes four studies that will further refine the seven DMC tasks. Each study
addresses individual decision-making skills in light of recent theoretical
developments and improving overall scale properties. In addition, these studies
provide opportunities for addressing scientific questions within the individual
task domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This connection of laboratory results with
"real world" behavior is an exercise itself that has not been widely pursued. It
provides the opportunity to clarify the validity of decision-making research
findings, as well as shed light on the underlying theory. This work has
applications to the training of individuals to make better decisions, competence
in making legal and medical decisions, as well as relative performance in
competitive environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;