* 0214395
* The Economic Impact of the New Deal
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Price Fishback, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 392,798.00

Faced with an economy in recession, policy-makers today have proposed a variety
of federal programs and projects that they believe will stimulate the sluggish
economy. An underlying premise of the recent stimulus proposals is that the
federal government can successfully use fiscal policy to grow the economy. The
objective of this research is to better understand the economic impact of such
fiscal stimulus. Perhaps the greatest example of federal peace-time fiscal
intervention was the New Deal in which President Franklin D. Roosevelt
introduced a myriad of programs designed to aid in the "relief, recovery, and
reform" of the depressed economy. Despite the great importance of this
remarkable episode of U.S. economic history, there has been very little attempt
to quantitatively analyze the economic effects of the New Deal. To help fill
this gap this project will provide a series of studies on the impact of the New
Deal on a variety of measures of economic activity, including real estate
wealth, housing values and construction, retail sales, manufacturing activity,
agricultural development, criminal behavior, as well as demographic changes
attributable to the New Deal. Since most of the research focuses on the impact
of the New Deal at the county level, it is important to control for spillover
effects from New Deal spending in neighboring counties and economic activity in
neighboring areas. In addition, there may be unmeasurable economic shocks in one
county that might spillover into neighboring counties. &lt;br/&gt; Measuring the
impact of the New Deal on local economies is complicated further because in most
cases we probably cannot treat New Deal spending as purely exogenous. New Deal
expenditures might have been related to economic activity in conflicting ways.
Given the stated goals of the New Deal, we might anticipate that the New Dealers
distributed more resources to areas with lower incomes or to areas with higher
unemployment or slower growth. On the other hand, many of the New Deal programs
required that the state or local government have the resources to seek help for
projects from the federal government or go even further by providing matching
funds to help finance the projects. Thus, New Deal spending might have been
positively related to measures of economic activity. To deal with the geographic
spillover effects and simultaneity issues, we have adopted an econometric model
that incorporates both the simultaneous relationship between New Deal spending
and economic activity and the spatial correlation inherent in the deterministic
and random components of the empirical model. This research program takes
advantage of the new developments in spatial econometric theory that enable
researchers to better understand the impact of public policy, while controlling
for the geographic spillovers and simultaneity problems that inevitably
undermine precise measurement. &lt;br/&gt; Providing a better understanding of
the economic impact of the New Deal is highly valuable on at least two general
levels. First, despite the significance of the Great Depression and the New Deal
to U.S. economic history, very little is known about the economic consequences
of President Roosevelt's experiment. Therefore, this research will add
significantly to the history of the Great Depression. Second, the usefulness of
government spending to stimulate a stagnant economy remains a deeply
controversial modern public policy debate. Thus, one of the central goals of
this research project is to shed light on this question by looking to a time
when government intervention was likely to have the greatest impact - the Great
Depression.&lt;br/&gt;