* 0214927
* Special Projects: Proofs as Programs
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Zena Ariola, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Caroline E. Wardle
* 06/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

EIA-0214927&lt;br/&gt;Ariola, Zena&lt;br/&gt;University of
Oregon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Special Projects: Proofs as
Programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Oregon at Eugene has been
provided with support to organize a summer school on the increasingly important
paradigm of proofs-as-programs. According to this paradigm a typing assertion M:
A has several "isomorphic" interpretations. In the computational interpretation,
M is a (functional) program and the type A is its specification. In the logical
interpretation M is a proof of the proposition A. The discovery of the
connection between the two interpretations is due to Curry, Howard, and
DeBruijn. Fifty years later, this connection between proofs and programs is now
established as the foundation of many formal systems and automated techniques
for reasoning about programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
school is to prepare interested graduate students, academics, and software
engineers for conducting research in the area. The curriculum will include basic
foundational material for all attendees; advanced material for those interested
in new research directions; and a review of various tools together with
experience in using them for various tasks for those interested in practical
applications. In more detail, the curriculum will include the following three
major categories of lectures:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Background: This material
consists of well-established results developed in the late 80's and early 90's.
This background information will provide an introduction to the essential
concepts and methodologies of the paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Advanced
Topics: This material consists of more recent results that extend and generalize
the earlier work. This will provide students with insights into research and
open questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Applications: This material will
demonstrate how theoretical results can be used by practitioners in various
fields of computer science. This will provide students with skills in the use of
formal methods to reason about and generate solutions to practical problems,
such as verification of hardware protocols and Java specifications.&lt;br/&gt;