* 0214965
* Strategic Coordination Among American Voters
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Walter Mebane, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2005
* USD 99,171.00



Recent analysis of National Election Studies (NES) data has produced
surprisingly strong evidence of the existence of a large-scale noncooperative
equilibrium among eligible voters (i.e., electors) in American presidential and
House elections, with the equilibrium being supported by all electors having
rational expectations about the election outcome (Mebane 2000a; Mebane and
Sekhon 2002). Mebane and Sekhon refer to such a noncooperative equilibrium that
is supported by all electors having rational expectations as "coordination." The
analysis using survey data extends and refines the evidence in favor of such
strategic coordination previously produced using aggregate district-level and
time series data in connection with models of the American political economy
(Alesina and Rosenthal 1989; 1995; Alesina, Londregan and Rosenthal 1993). The
models of coordination purport to explain important political phenomena such as
policy moderation, divided government and midterm loss. The emphasis on rational
expectations and noncooperative equilibrium represents a substantial departure
from the large related literature on ticket splitting. Mebane (2000a) and Mebane
and Sekhon (2002) demonstrate that models of strategic coordination fit
presidential year and midterm individual-level survey data significantly better
than do nonstrategic models. Notwithstanding the results that strongly suggest
the existence of strategic coordination, important questions remain concerning
the validity of the models of coordination that have been tested so far. Mebane
and Sekhon propose to extend the research they have already completed to explore
and hopefully resolve some of these concerns. The theoretical and empirical
models use common knowledge assumptions about individual voters that are
unrealistic and unbelievable. In reality a coordinating voting equilibrium must
depend on in- stitutions such as public opinion polls to aggregate and broadcast
information. Mebane and Sekhon propose to weaken the information assumptions of
the current models, especially by bringing in adaptive learning. Regarding the
treatment of policy positions in current empirical models of coordination,
questions arise regarding the models' assumption that all candidates of the same
political party have the same positions and regarding the way the models treat
the dimensionality of the policy space. Mebane and Sekhon propose to estimate
models that use more flexible assumptions about policy positions. The
policymaking institution assumed in Mebane (2000a) and Mebane and Sekhon (2002)
ignores many features of the presidency and Congress that might affect electors'
beliefs, strategies and behavior. Mebane and Sekhon propose to investigate the
consequences of shifting from the current emphasis on the national share of the
legislative votes (in particular House votes) each party receives to the share
of seats, and in particular to the threshold of having a majority of seats.
Another set of concerns center on the question: "are the effects of coordination
large enough to be important?" Mebane and Sekhon (2002) supply an answer for the
effect coordination may have on midterm cycles. They propose more generally to
investigate the consequences of voters having equilibrium as opposed to
unstructured beliefs about expected election outcomes. Mebane and Sekhon propose
to address these concerns by completing two kinds of tasks: (a) develop- ing a
suite of new coordinating model specifications that will be, as in Mebane
(2000a) and Mebane and Sekhon (2002), at once equilibrium theoretical models and
structural econometric models to be estimated using NES data; and (b)
constructing simulation models that use NES data to let the simulations as
closely as possible match the distributions of choices, preferences and
information that exist in recent American electorates. Mebane and Sekhon propose
to write software that will be freely available and easy to use, so that other
researchers will be able to use the estimation technology of Mebane (2000a) and
Mebane and Sekhon (2002). They also plan to make freely available the proposed
simulation software.



