* 0214103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Environmental Regulation in Latin America: Economic Internationalization and Political Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Robert Keohane, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,968.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation investigates
whether environmental regulation entails different marginal costs for
internationally-oriented firms than for domestically-oriented firms. Two
explanatory models generate competing expectations about the relationship
between globalization and environmental regulation. One posits a positive
relationship between the two, and the other offers a negative prediction of a
"race to the bottom." Hypotheses from these models are tested using an across-
industry, cross-national research design to determine the relation of an
industry's international economic ties to the degree of regulatory stringency
for that industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also explores the role of
comparative institutional factors, including divided government and party
discipline, in shaping incentives for politicians to either pursue the public
good of environmental protection or shelter particular interest groups from the
burden of environmental regulation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected
from nine industries in four Latin American countries, as well as on the
environmental policymaking institutions of those states. This research will
contribute to the debate about globalization and domestic regulation by
providing empirical data on environmental regulatory stringency across
industries and by systematically testing the relationship between economic
internationalization and regulatory strength. More broadly, this project may
inform the study not only of environmental standards in developing countries,
but of other social regulation and economic policies as well. &lt;br/&gt;