* 0214491
* Partial Insurance and Consumption Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Luigi Pistaferri, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2004
* USD 121,318.00

The main objective of this research proposal is to study the changes in the
distribution of household consumption in the US over the 1980-1995 period. This
is an interesting period to study due to the dramatic increase in income
inequality widely analyzed in the labor economics literature. There is an open
debate on the welfare implications of increasing income inequality. One view is
that the increase in income inequality is worrying because it implies declining
living standards. Another view is that one should rather focus on consumption
inequality because consumption is a better measure of welfare than income. The
theory suggests that household consumption depends on permanent, not current
income, which differs from the former due to temporary fluctuations. The
theory's main insight is that absent formal markets for insuring against income
losses, individuals use personal savings to "self-insure" against temporary
shocks. Thus, if the increase in income inequality is mostly due to temporary
factors, the welfare effects of increasing income inequality are less serious
than originally thought. The extensive research on the evolution of income
inequality in recent years has not been paralleled by comparable research on
consumption inequality. The existing research has reached contrasting
conclusions (some papers find an increase in consumption inequality, while
others find little or no change), or made little attempt to interpret the
empirical findings using theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of
three parts. First, it uses a variety of microeconomic data sets to analyze
trends in consumption inequality and contrast them with trends in income
inequality in order to explain why different papers reach different conclusions
about the main facts of the consumption distribution, focusing on definitional
issues and sample selection. Second, it provides evidence (already available in
preliminary work) that consumption inequality increases at a slower pace than
income inequality over the period of study. One possible interpretation is that
most of the increase in income inequality is indeed of temporary nature (income
instability). However, labor economics studies have reached the conclusion that
income instability and permanent income inequality have increased at similar
rates over the period of interest. If anything, permanent inequality outpaces
transitory uncertainty. Third, it investigates the empirical validity of an
alternative interpretation, that the increase in income inequality is (at least
partly) due to permanent factors but there exists "partial insurance" against
income shocks over and above personal savings. This form of insurance is
provided informally through a variety of channels: social and financial
institutions, family network, and rational use of other family choice variables.
The investigator provides estimates of the extent of partial insurance against
income shocks and assesses how the availability of insurance opportunities
changes over time and across skill groups. The empirical analysis will be
conducted on two data sets, the Consumer Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;