* 0214411
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Loss Aversion
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Daniel Kahneman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 198,534.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates loss aversion, which is one of the central
concepts in the decision making and behavioral economics literatures. Loss
aversion is said to occur when a loss of a given magnitude has more influence on
choices than does a gain of the same magnitude (for example, most people will
refuse a gamble with equal chances to gain or lose $100). Numerous studies have
shown that loss aversion plays a key role in important real-world phenomena,
such as the endowment effect, the status quo bias, the equity-premium puzzle in
financial economics, the tendency to hold on to 'losing' stocks while selling
'winners', the discrepancy between valuations of public (especially
environmental) goods by willingness-to-pay for them or by the compensation
demanded to give them up, legal principles of compensation for damage, failures
of negotiations, and many others. &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates whether a
positive-negative asymmetry analogous to loss aversion occurs in the experience
of decision outcomes (i.e., is loss aversion a mistake?). Preliminary evidence
reported in the project description suggests that experiences of decision
outcomes do not always show the good-bad asymmetry that would be expected from
loss aversion. If loss aversion turns out to be a mistake, this work would
require a major rethinking of the nature of loss aversion, a concept that is
currently taught to almost every business student in the United States, and
which plays an important role in many other social science curricula, including
economics, public policy, law, and psychology. In addition, the possibility that
loss aversion in choices could in some cases be a mistake, in the sense that it
does not reflect an asymmetry in experience, would require a wide-ranging
reanalysis of the many practical decisions where loss aversion has been found to
play a significant role. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal investigator: Schkade,
David&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID
: 0213481&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Understanding loss
aversion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates loss aversion, which is
one of the central concepts in the decision making and behavioral economics
literatures. Loss aversion is said to occur when a loss of a given magnitude has
more influence on choices than does a gain of the same magnitude (for example,
most people will refuse a gamble with equal chances to gain or lose $100).
Numerous studies have shown that loss aversion plays a key role in important
real-world phenomena, such as the endowment effect, the status quo bias, the
equity-premium puzzle in financial economics, the tendency to hold on to
'losing' stocks while selling 'winners', the discrepancy between valuations of
public (especially environmental) goods by willingness-to-pay for them or by the
compensation demanded to give them up, legal principles of compensation for
damage, failures of negotiations, and many others. &lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates whether a positive-negative asymmetry analogous to loss aversion
occurs in the experience of decision outcomes (i.e., is loss aversion a
mistake?). Preliminary evidence reported in the project description suggests
that experiences of decision outcomes do not always show the good-bad asymmetry
that would be expected from loss aversion. If loss aversion turns out to be a
mistake, this work would require a major rethinking of the nature of loss
aversion, a concept that is currently taught to almost every business student in
the United States, and which plays an important role in many other social
science curricula, including economics, public policy, law, and psychology. In
addition, the possibility that loss aversion in choices could in some cases be a
mistake, in the sense that it does not reflect an asymmetry in experience, would
require a wide-ranging reanalysis of the many practical decisions where loss
aversion has been found to play a significant role.&lt;br/&gt;