* 0214287
* Doctoral Disseration Research in Political Science: A Theory and a Model of State-Dissident Interactions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Will Moore, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 01/31/2004
* USD 7,976.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation investigates
whether repression encourages or deters dissent. The current literature lacks
one single, coherent, theoretical, and empirically corroborated model of the
interactive relationship between dissent and repression. The Principal
Investigator posits a theory that accounts for the escalatory and deterrent
effects of repression on dissent and dissent on repression. The Principal
Investigator argues that political survival motives drive state and dissident
leaders to retain power and control over their respective supporters. This
motive leads them to examine one another's actions, their own previous actions,
and the outcome of previous interactions, estimate the costs of those
interactions, and react in ways that ensure their tenure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assuming that leaders choose from a strategy
set that contains both cooperative and hostile means, the Principal Investigator
proposes the conditions under which state and dissident leaders choose to act
violently and to act cooperatively. Controlling for the state of the domestic
economy, international economic forces, third party intervention, and the
effects of regime change, the Principal Investigator specifies a system of
equations that models state and dissident leaders' choices in response to one
another, while engaged in a sequential series of interactions. Using event data
and time series econometric techniques, empirical tests of the theoretical model
are performed in the countries of Chile, Brazil, Mexico, Nigeria, Afghanistan,
and South Korea. The design allows for both within-region comparison and across
region comparisons. &lt;br/&gt;