* 0214097
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Open or Closed For Business?  The Political Economy of Trade Protection in Developing Nations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Wendy Hansen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,802.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project moves beyond the existing
literature on the politics of economic reform and specifically trade policy by
focusing on the recent aggressive use of antidumping (AD) policy in the
developing world. Evidence suggests that governments have been simultaneously
"reforming" trade on the level of macroeconomic policy by slashing tariffs while
adopting "backdoor" mechanisms to reverse trade liberalization at the less
visible level of regulatory policy. There are not, however, adequate
explanations for variation in nations' sudden use of these policies, nor have
the determinants of the decision to provide protection been clearly identified.

The research combines an in-depth qualitative and quantitative comparison of AD
policy in three major developing countries-Argentina, Mexico, and South Africa-
with a large-n, cross-national statistical analysis of the political and
economic determinants of trade protection across the developing world. Focusing
upon variation in the decision to create a national AD agency and agencies'
subsequent general propensity to protect, the research sheds light upon the ways
in which interest group pressure and institutional context shape policy adoption
and implementation. In particular, the study fleshes out how characteristics of
the executive and the AD agency interact with other variables to affect the
policy process. The study draws upon a mixture of types of evidence, including
interviews with agency commissioners, industry leaders, organized labor
officials, and the lawyers who usually guide the AD petition and complaint
process; examination of AD agency records and statistics; and measures of
institutional factors including executive power, agency autonomy, and business
strength. Using these types of information, the study examines the variables
that influence trade protection policy on the basis of a comparative analysis of
national-level AD agencies across developing nations, and in-depth analyses of
national and sub-national factors-particularly characteristics of industries and
sectors.

The research is designed to contribute to the literature on the political
economy of trade policy in developing nations by examining the trade protection
policy process through the complex interactions of state and societal actors.
Moreover, the study enriches the endogenous protection theoretical framework,
which focuses on domestic interest groups' demands for protection and
governments' responses, by employing an integrated theoretical approach that
links interest group pressures to the institutions that potentially modify the
policy process.

