* 0214363
* Bioactive Polymer Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Jeffrey Koberstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2007
* USD 594,000.00

The proposed program of research centers on the molecular design and fabrication
of exciting new bioactive polymeric coatings that actively promote a desired
biological response. The fundamental approach adopted for creating boinductive
surface coatings is the delivery of precise doses of cell adhesion ligands,
growth factors and other cell signaling motifs onto the surface of a polymeric
biomaterial that is resistant to protein adsorption. Two novel polymer systems
are proposed for fabricating bioinductive polymer surfaces: surface-active beta-
functional block copolymers and functional hydrogels prepared by end-linking
end-functional macromonomers. The synthesis of both complex materials systems
takes advantage of the exceptional capability of the recently developed
technique of atom transfer radical polymerization to prepare functional
materials with high precision and efficiency. In addition to providing for
precise control of surface composition, the proposed materials have been
selected to allow for photo-patterning of bioactive functionality, an exciting
tool that will be applied to create materials that can direct the spatial growth
of cells into two- and three-dimensional patterns. Finally, a new method for
applying these bioactive coatings to polymer surfaces is described that is based
upon environmentally friendly supercritical fluids. The focus on supercritical
coating technologies illustrates illustrates how considerations of the
commercial applicability of the methods and materials selected have been
factored into the overall research program.

The success of this research program would have a positive influence on a broad
range of biomaterial technologies relating to tissue regeneration and repair,
medical implants and devices, and consumer products.