* 0214222
* Identification, Estimation and Computation in Multi-Unit Auctions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Martin Pesendorfer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 205,954.00

The research studies identification and estimation in simultaneous multi-unit
first-price auctions with and without combination bidding. The following issues
are pursued: First, theoretical properties of bidding equilibria are examined.
Conditions under which combination bidding may arise even in the absence of cost
synergies are explored. It is shown that combination bidding may also serve as a
tool to leverage market power across the different units. As a result, the
welfare consequences of allowing combination bidding in the first price auction
are ambiguous, and depend on the importance of the cost synergies. Second, it is
investigated under what conditions bidders' private information can be
identified from observed bid data under the assumption that bidders behave
optimally. It is shown that synergistic effects are not identified if bidders
are restricted to submit bids for stand-alone units only. A necessary condition
for identification of synergies is that bidders are permitted to submit a full
set of combination bids. Third, an estimation method is investigated that
enables to quantify private information and synergistic effects in multi-unit
auctions from observed bid data. The estimation method extends the single object
method by Guerre, Perrigne and Vuong (2000) which is based on the first order
condition of optimally chosen bids to a multi-object setting. Parametric
estimation methods are considered. Fourth, data on auctions held by the London
Transportation authority to award contracts to service bus routes have been
collected. Two special features of these auctions are that several bus routes
are auctioned at the same time, and that bidders may submit combination bids in
addition to stand-alone bids. In other words, the London bus routes market is an
example of a combinatorial auction. Fifth, the research develops numerical
methods to calculate equilibrium outcomes in multi-unit first-price auctions
under alternative auction rules. Specifically, equilibrium outcomes for auctions
with and without combination bids will be compared. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research complements recent theoretical advances in the design of multi-unit
auctions by studying the identification and estimation problem and providing
empirical evidence on a specific multi-unit auction market. The research is one
of the first attempts to study identification and estimation in multi-unit
auctions in general. It will advance empirical methods for multi-unit auctions.
In addition, the analysis will develop tools to assess properties of multi-unit
auction markets. Welfare gains (or losses) of permitting combination bidding in
the London bus routes market will be determined. The magnitude of cost synergies
and their effects on the efficiency of multi-unit auctions will be investigated.
The adequacy of the current awarding scheme will be investigated. It will
provide general guidance for markets in which multi-units are sold
simultaneously. &lt;br/&gt;