* 0214123
* Cliometrics Conferences, 2003, 2004, and 2005
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2006
* USD 90,014.00

The Cliometrics Conference brings together scholars performing frontier research
in the study of the history of the world's economies. Each year a group of 40 to
50 scholars who specialize in the application of economics and statistics to the
study of the history of economies are invited to the conference. The conference
is designed to give scholars feedback on their research. We urge scholars to
submit papers that are in relatively early stages of development. At the typical
conference twelve papers are selected for presentation and the papers are
printed and distributed to all of the participants in advance. All participants
agree to read all of the papers and attend all of the sessions. At the opening
of the session for each paper, the person who wrote the paper has five minutes
to introduce the paper and then the floor is opened for an intensive discussion
by all of the participants. Those who present their research at the conference
often suggest that the experience is like listening to 15 to 30 referees in one
setting. Thus, the scholar has an opportunity to get feedback from leading
scholars in the field in this setting. Scholars who attend but do not present
papers often find that they get helpful insights on their own research from
discussions with other participants during breaks and meals at the conference,
as well as during the actual sessions. Often, the discussions of the papers also
expand the breadth of knowledge for participants who do not specialize in
specific subfields of economic history. Another goal of the conference is to
provide a forum for scholars new to the field to get exposure for their research
and to meet more established scholars. Typically, about 15 to 30 percent of the
participants are assistant professors who recently received their degrees or are
advanced graduate students in the latter stages of writing a dissertation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cliometrics Conference plays an important role in
improving and disseminating research on the history of the world's economies.
The meetings bring together researchers in intimate sessions where active
discussion of economic history research is the rule. As a result, both
established scholars and scholars new to the field obtain extensive feedback on
their own research and also learn about new research by others. The conference
helps to speed the process of bringing research from its early stages to final
publication. Further, the conference serves to disseminate the results more
widely, as descriptions of the discussion are published and disseminated on the
world-wide web. The research discussed at the conference typically provides
historical context for current public policy issues, including globalization,
the role of government in the economy, technological change and its impact on
the economy, financial markets, and a host of other topics related to economies.
&lt;br/&gt;