* 0214687
* Cryptochrome, Calcium Waves and Side-Branch Formation in P. patens
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Edward Tucker, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 03/31/2004
* USD 75,125.00

&lt;br/&gt;Light activates a series of specific photoreceptors and initiates a
complex series of signal transduction events that result in dramatic
developmental, physiological, and biochemical changes in the plant. At least
three classes of light receptors (cryptochromes, phototropins, phytochromes) are
involved in sensing the ambient light conditions. While phytochromes absorb in
the red and far red regions, cryptochromes and phototropins absorb in the blue
and UV-A regions. Although Ca2+ has been identified as a key second messenger in
many signaling pathways, its role in photoreceptor signaling in a single plant
cell has not been established. In a previous study, calcium ratio imaging using
Fura 2 was used to measure cytoplasmic calcium in dark-growing caulonemal cells
of the moss Physcomitrella patens. Fortuitously, the UV-A light needed to
quantify calcium stimulated the photoreceptor system, making this approach an
important means to study the role that calcium plays in photoreceptor signaling.
P. patens mutants that are without cryptochrome genes have been made available
to us. Calcium signaling and side branch formation will be examined in these
plants to determine the role of calcium as a second messenger in cryptochrome
signal transduction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;