* 0214788
* Conference on Representations of Algebras and Related Topics, July 15 - August 10, 2002, Toronto, Canada
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Birge Huisgen-Zimmermann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

International Conference on Representations of Algebras and Related Topics, July
15 -- August 10, 2002, Toronto, Canada

The PI and the organizing committee plan to provide support for the
participation of as many junior US mathematicians as possible in the biennial
international meeting in Toronto this summer. Next to the presentation of
cutting-edge research, several series of overview lectures by leading experts
and an extensive workshop program aim at introducing start-up researchers to the
field. Central subjects are the geometry of module varieties, invariants and
deformations, homological developments -- specifically, derived categories,
representation type, including the in-depth exploration of pivotal classes of
tame or wild algebras. Among the applications -- their thorough documentation is
one of the highest priorities -- are the theories of complex semisimple Lie
algebras and algebraic groups, singularities and categories of perverse sheaves,
new insights into the structure of the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand category, as
well as the homological treatment of finite group schemes.

The representation theory of algebras has its origin in the study of 'groups',
originally certain collections of motions of space which allow for concatenation
and inversion. The next idea was to represent more abstract algebraic objects,
arising in theoretical physics and chemistry for instance, in terms of linear
motions of suitable spaces, to render their structure more transparent. In the
meantime, the scope of objects studied along this line has been dramatically
enlarged, and a big arsenal of methods to analyze such representations has been
assembled. Tools which have proved particularly effective include geometrical
and combinatorial setups, and variations of a general theme which can be
outlined as follows: One starts by establishing optimal situations, which can be
completely analyzed, and then measures the deviation of a more challenging
situation from the optimal ones to make headway in steps dealing with
progressive increases in complexity. Applications extend to almost all parts of
mathematics and provide the theoretical frames for models in theoretical
physics. In fact, some of the recent initiatives were prompted by physicists and
feed back into quantum physics.