* 0214507
* Workshop: Floristics, Phenology, and Frugivore Communities: A Pan-Tropical Comparison (Panama City, Panama; July 29 - August 2, 2002)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,11/30/2002
* Katharine Milton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2002
* USD 8,000.00

and maintained. In the most diverse habitats on Earth, the tropical rainforests,
primates and other frugivores (fruit-eaters) play important roles by dispersing
the seeds of many trees. In this symposium we will make a global comparison of
tropical frugivores and plant communities. We will bring together for the first
time researchers studying birds, bats, primates, elephants, and other animals
with plant ecologists to identify and compare the "keystone" plant species that
sustain a diversity of animals in different regions. By bringing together some
of the world's finest tropical biologists to compare their knowledge, this
symposium will try to create a tool for rapidly identifying the most important
species for maintaining biodiversity. We will also study the ways that the loss
of such species can affect ecosystems. There are three aims of the symposium:
first, to identify and compare the key plants which sustain rainforest animal
diversity; second, to identify those animals which are of greatest significance
to these plant communities; and third, to study the importance of these
interactions to conservation. The information collected in this forum will
advance the field of ecology and aid the scientific management of endangered
species and habitats. It will also bring students together with renowned
scholars in the field, and build international collaboration on conservation
strategies.

