* 0214436
* Preferences, Information and Incentives in Committee Decisions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Hongbin Cai, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 81,210.00

Committees play critical roles in collective decision-making such as in Congress
and in many other situations (e.g., board of directors, universities, jury,
sports judging): they gather and report information, propose and choose
policies. Severe incentive problems may arise in the committee decision-making
process when committee members have different policy preferences and/or
different information. In such circumstances, what are the important factors
affecting effective committee decision-making and how should committees be
structured to facilitate it? This research project will develop several
mathematical models of committee decisions to investigate various aspects of
these questions. The first model focuses on the informational role of
committees, in an environment where committee members may shirk in gathering
information and may distort reports of their findings to manipulate collective
decisions. Questions to study include how much information can be incorporated
in the decisions and what is the optimal decision rule and optimal committee
size. A second model is concerned with optimal voting rules for committees who
vote on policy proposals developed by an agent, focusing on trade-offs among
several effects: (1) information requirement for changing policies; (2)
distortions by the agent; and (3) the agent's incentives to gather good
information. In a third model, the bargaining approach is used to formulate the
idea that efficiency of the committee's decision-making deteriorates with
heterogeneity of its members' interests, because heterogeneity makes compromises
among members more difficult. The research project will also investigate why
monetary transfers are rarely observed in real world committee decisions, while
theoretically they can be quite useful because they can reduce distribution
effects of committee decisions by having winners compensate losers, thus
enabling the committee to focus solely on the efficiency aspects of its
decisions.

Understanding committee decision-making is important for understanding real
world institutions and policies, and may provide suggestions to make committee
decision-making more effective. In recent years, research on committee decisions
has broadened its scope to examine organizational features of committee
decisions. This research project builds on the existing literature and tries to
shed new light on several aspects of committee organizational structure. The
results of the project may generate theoretical and practical implications on
committee size, decision rules, voting rules, restrictions on transfers, etc.