* 0214211
* GC-MS for Catalysis, Combustion and Nanotechnology Research and Student Training
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 07/31/2003
* USD 59,120.00

A gas chromatograph coupled to a mass spectrometer (GC-MS) will be used in most
of the research as well as for a module in a new chemical engineering laboratory
course supporting improvement of the curriculum. In research, the system
provides a substantial enhancement to the existing studies into chemical
mechanisms in high-temperature hydrocarbon reaction systems and the development
of novel diagnostics and reaction processes for these systems. Current projects
that will use this equipment include catalytic combustion of methane and large
hydrocarbons, higher hydrocarbon and soot production in flames, mechanisms for
oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons, fuel processing reactions, structure-
reactivity relationships for nanoporous materials and more recently growth of
carbon nanotubes in flames and using catalytic template reactors. In all of
these systems the complex product mix with multiple species at each mass
requires a multidimensional analysis technique-a task for which the requested
GC-MS system is well suited. Enhanced capabilities will include high scan rate
for transient coupling studies, faster throughput, larger mass range and the
ability to export data for analysis, plus dual MS detectors including both
electron impact and chemical ionization. With the majority of students going on
to graduate and professional schools, a large portion of the mission is exposing
undergraduates to research. As part of the departmental development a new
research laboratory course that will include modules in the laboratories of
individual PIs is planned. The experiments using the proposed GC-MS would be
appropriate for this course providing training in separation techniques,
chemical kinetic analysis, quantitative methods and data analysis. The GC-MS
would facilitate the incorporation of undergraduates into our research projects
due to the ease of operation of the requested system and reasonably
straightforward analysis.