* 0214096
* Jury Nullification: When and How Juries Disobey the Law
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Irwin Horowitz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 12/31/2005
* USD 97,101.00

Juries have the implicit power to acquit defendants despite evidence and
judicial instructions to the contrary. The jury's right to decide a criminal
case by its own lights without fear of outside coercion and pressure has been a
hallmark of Anglo-American jurisprudence. To some observers of criminal cases
where juries nullified the evidence or instructions, jury acquittals in the face
of ostensibly strong prosecution cases were tantamount to racially-based jury
nullification. Others suggest that it is both possible and perhaps even probable
that such acquittals were really not jury nullifications of the law, but simply
instances of the prosecution failing to meet its burden of proof. This research
tests a model of jury nullification and involves four experiments that examine
the influence of judicial instructions and various fact and legal situations
that may provoke juries to nullify. The mock jury experiments, as guided by the
model, involve 1316 juror-participants using videotaped trials presented in a
realistic setting. The first experiment is an exploration of the effects of
jurors' emotional biases in reaching a nullification verdict. Jurors will view a
trial that has elicited nullification verdicts or a trial that has not. Jurors
will either be given standard (pattern) or nullification instructions by the
trial judge. Emotional biases will be primed by varying the attributes of the
victim who will be presented either in a neutral light or will be very
unsympathetic. A second battery of experiments will delineate three
nullification-relevant legal situations (i.e., unfair laws, unfair application
of law to the defendant, and violation of due process). While commentators have
argued that these situations tend to evoke the jury's nullification tendencies,
there is no extant empirical evidence that this is so. The studies also
investigate the impact of providing juries with nullification instructions as
compared to standard (pattern) judicial instructions. The researchers examine
the impact of these instructions on both the verdicts and dynamics of jury
deliberations within the context of the three categories of nullification. The
third proposed experiment explores the impact on a nullification decision of a
juror who argues that the jury should focus on a just outcome rather than solely
on an outcome that complies with the law (a trigger). The researchers
experimentally manipulate the presence or absence of a trigger in two trials and
analyze the effects on the jury's deliberations and verdicts. The research
proposed will provide empirical evidence as to when, why, and how juries nullify
and inform the debate as to whether juries should be informed of their power.