* 0214677
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Too Close for Comfort: Elite Cues and Strategic Voting in Multicandidate Elections
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* John Aldrich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2003
* USD 3,600.00

&lt;br/&gt;The act of voting is one of the most sacred acts in a democracy. It
is in the voting booth where citizens register their preferences over who should
lead their nation. In some ways it seems a clear and simple act.: one should
vote for the candidate they most prefer. However, in the presence of third
parties, the evidence shows that many third party supporters abandon their fIrst
preference to vote for their second preference. The mechanism behind this choice
usually lies in the situation in which a voter's fIrst preference has no chance
of winning so that voters do not want to cast a "wasted vote." Political
scientists have formalized this logic in mathematical terms, taking into account
the probability of a voter being decisive between pairs of candidates and their
difference in utility between these pairs. &lt;br/&gt;While many studies have
found that this model performs well in accounting for levels of strategic voting
in different elections, one problem plagues these studies, namely most do not
use a measure of the probability term that accounts for whether the voter will
be decisive between pairs of candidates. While the logic behind strategic voting
makes sense intuitively, the probability that one will cast a decisive vote will
always be close to zero in a large electorate, such as the United States. If
voters know that the probability of their vote being decisive is essentially
zero, then why would they not just vote for their first preference? Riker and
Ordeshook themselves acknowledged this problem and argued that people will
systematically inflate the probability of being decisive, thus the p term will
not be zero (1968). They argue that people might inflate the probability on
their own accord or because of messages sent by elites indicating that p is much
higher than it objectively is. &lt;br/&gt;Though this justification seems
credible, few studies have examined whether people do inflate probabilities in
the context of multicandidate elections (Blais, 2000) and whether elites play a
role in influencing the variables in the voter's calculus (Hsieh et al, 1997).
This research proposal address this question in the literature by examining
elite cues in multicandidate elections. The primary purpose of this research is
to show that one solution to the puzzle of why we even see strategic voting lies
in the efforts by elites to influence the probability and utility terms in the
individual's calculus. There are three key questions that the research seeks to
answer. First of all, do elites try to send signals to convince voters to
abandon their first preference and vote for their second preference? Second, are
these signals effective? Finally, are there individual and contextual factors
that account for who will accept such messages and who will not? &lt;br/&gt;The
first hypothesis is that third party voters respond to persuasive cues by elites
to abandon their first preference and vote for their second preference. Thus,
the individual's perception of the variables in the individual calculus will be
a function of the messages sent at the elite level. The results should show that
individuals who receive messages encouraging them to vote strategically exhibit
higher levels of such voting than individuals who do not receive these messages.
Second, the effectiveness of such messages will be contingent on contextual
factors, such as the source and type of message, as well as individual factors,
such as one's level of political sophistication, external and internal political
efficacy, and past voting behavior. An experimental design can clearly test
these hypotheses by randomly assigning subjects to control and treated groups.
&lt;br/&gt;This project makes several important contributions to political
science. First of all, the project builds on the literature on strategic voting
by filling in a missing part of the puzzle, the efforts by elites to influence
the variables in the voter's calculus. The project also speaks to the literature
on political persuasion. Most studies of persuasion look at the effect of
messages on respondent's opinions on &lt;br/&gt;various issues. This study
examines whether such messages can actually change the behavior of voters.
Finally, this project contributes to the campaign and election literature, where
the main fmding has been one of minimal effects for campaign messages. There
might in fact be a stronger effect of campaign messages once we examine voters
who have an incentive to switch their vote.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;