* 0214147
* Collaborative Research on Behavioral Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Matthew Rabin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 226,509.00

Although the rational-choice model used by economists has yielded an array of
insights across a broad range of human activities, research from psychology
suggests that it is inaccurate in some systematic and important ways. This
project will continue an agenda of integrating psychologically more realistic
assumptions about human behavior into formal economic models. Much of the
research will focus on intertemporal choice, and in particular on two specific
more realistic assumptions. First, whereas the rational-choice model assumes
that people do not change their willingness to delay gratification over time,
evidence suggests that, from a prior perspective, people would like to behave
patiently, while at the moment of action, people behave impatiently. Second,
whereas the rational-choice model assumes that people correctly predict future
tastes, evidence suggests people tend to exaggerate the degree to which their
future tastes will resemble their current tastes. This project will investigate
the implications of these errors in three distinct environments. First, the
project will study procrastination, both patterns of procrastinatory behavior
and policies designed to combat procrastination. Second, the project will study
distortions in consumption behavior when the pleasure generated by consumption
depends on one's accustomed or habitual consumption level. Third, the project
will study the consumption of harmful addictive substances, and in particular
whether and how these errors can cause people to hurt themselves by developing
harmful addictions (the rational-choice model can attribute harmful addictions
only to bad luck). The project will also investigate additional more realistic
assumptions.

This research, and the broader agenda of which it is a part, will dramatically
improve economic analysis, and promote a more realistic analysis of policies
designed to address savings behavior, addiction, procrastination, obesity, and
similar phenomena. For many questions, the standard rational-choice model
provides a satisfactory apparatus. But for other questions, such as why do
people procrastinate, develop harmful addictions, or are overweight, the
rational-choice model is importantly flawed, requiring implausible explanations
for observed behavior and leading to harmful policy recommendations. The
research demonstrates how economists can derive alternative more realistic
assumptions from research in psychology, and how these alternative assumptions
can provide better explanations for behavior, and yield more sensible policy
recommendations.