* 0214816
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanomaterials with High Strength for Fabrication of Microgears
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Mohamed Raffi, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project proposes a highly
innovative technique for using nanomaterials of high strength in fabrication of
microgears with end applications in medical instrumentation. The demand for
precision instruments required for medical diagnosis and microsurgical tools are
increasing continuously over the past decade to provide better service.
Endoscopes and microsurgical instruments have decreased in size from 25 mm to 10
mm over the past six years. The decrease in size of these instruments has become
possible due to the reduction in size of the drive systems employed. Electric
motor drives currently in use have evolved from a size of 10 mm to 2 mm. The
tiny gears used in these motors for torque transmission fail due to friction and
wear. Thus, there is a need for increased performance of the microgear
components in the micromotors. The mechanical properties of strength and
hardness are increased by fabrication of these microscale components using
nanocrystalline particles. This Phase I Project proposes a novel approach for
fabrication of the microgears with nanocrystalline copper. The feasibility of
the technique will be evaluated by fabrication of microgears (100 microns
diameter) and by the characterization of their physical and mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial applications of this project
will primarily be in the area of biomedical devices and instrumentation. Other
applications would include disk drives, toxic-gas monitors, camera-lens drives
and pagers.&lt;br/&gt;