* 0214337
* Collaborative Research: Behavioral Causes of Information Distortion in Supply Chains
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Elena Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 72,856.00

&lt;br/&gt;Managing a supply chain has been shown to be prone to systematic
errors that often lead to spectacularly dysfunctional outcomes. For example, the
drilling for oil and gas fluctuates three times more than the actual petroleum
production, the demand for machine tools is at least twice as variable as
automobile sales (the auto industry being the main consumer of machine tools),
and the production of semiconductors is much more variable than industrial
production as a whole (reported in Sterman 2000, pp. 666-667).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pattern of "oscillation, amplification, and phase
lag," known collectively as the bullwhip effect, has been also noted in
individual firms' supply chains (see Lee et al. 2000), as well as in the
laboratory Sterman (1989). Sterman's results demonstrated that individuals do
not act optimally even in the relatively simple laboratory setting, but
significantly underweight inventory they already ordered that has not yet
arrived (called the supply line). He concluded, "the key to improved performance
lies within the policy individuals use to manage the system and not in the
external environment. Even a perfect forecast will not prevent a manager who
ignores the supply line from over ordering." (Sterman 1989, p.
336).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bullwhip effect is costly because it causes
excessive inventories, poor customer service, and unnecessary capital
investment. We separate explanations of the causes of the bullwhip effect into
those that rely on participants' own cognitive limitations, their inability to
determine the optimal way to adjust their inventory position, and those that
rely on coordination, participants' beliefs about others' abilities or actions.
The experiments we propose to conduct will be using both traditional supply
chains with four participants and supply chains where a human participant plays
one of the roles, and the other three roles are played by computerized agents
programmed (and known) to act optimally. If deviations from optimal behavior are
caused by an individual's cognitions, behavior should be the same in the
treatments with all human subjects as with one human subject. If instead,
behavior is being caused by an individual's beliefs about the decisions his
supply chain partners make, behavior should be worse in treatments with all
human subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from our study can have
potentially broad implications on the type of decision support tools that should
be included in Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software. If behavioral causes
of the bullwhip effect are important than the recent focus on reducing
operational causes provides at best an incomplete solution. The question of what
information or tools can be effective in mitigating behavioral causes of the
bullwhip effect has not been addressed in the literature, and it is our hope
that this study will open the door to this new research agenda. &lt;br/&gt;