* 0214445
* Essays on Behavioral Finance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Markus Brunnermeier, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 176,106.00

This research contributes to the two central tenets of behavioral finance:
limits to arbitrage by professional traders, and cognitive biases of individual
investors. It consists of three projects. The first project provides an
innovative explanation for the persistence of mispricing by highlighting the
difficulty professional traders face in synchronizing their corrective trading
activity. Price correction is delayed because no individual trader wants to
trade early if others decide to postpone their trade. In this setting,
behavioral traders (whose trading is driven by psychological factors) will have
an effect on the price process because their actions are not immediately undone
by professional traders. The second project looks at a special form of
mispricing: a growing bubble. It is an experimental study that tests the
prediction that rational arbitrageurs would rather ride a bubble than trade
against it. This project also attempts to analyze the extent to which market
transparency of order flow and trading volume affects the persistence of
mispricing. The novelty of this laboratory experiment is that, in contrast to
the previous literature, we expect that bubbles will not die away even after
subjects have become more familiar with the game. The third project explicitly
models some behavioral biases. The study provides a new microfoundations based
explanation for the "disposition effect" which states that individual investors
are reluctant to realize losses. The study will show that this reluctance
follows naturally for individuals with time-inconsistent preferences over
capital gains and losses. The advantage of our approach is that it is more
parsimonious and hence is easier to test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
significant normative implications. Mispricing in general, and bubbles in
particular, are not only responsible for the redistribution of billions of
dollars, but their bursting causes market uncertainty and can even lead to
recessions. The recent technology bubble on the NASDAQ market is a vivid
reminder of these risks. The proposed projects will enhance the state of our
knowledge by scrutinizing rational and psychological forces that drive financial
markets and by highlighting the importance of transparency of trades.&lt;br/&gt;