* 0214107
* GC-MS for Kinetics, Catalysis, and Reaction Engineering Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Erdogan Gulari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 07/31/2003
* USD 62,794.00

This proposal requests funds to purchase a GC-MS system for use on research
projects directed by Professors Phillip Savage and three co-PIs at the
University of Michigan. These investigators share common interests in kinetics
and catalysis. A gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a mass spectrometric (MS)
detector is an extremely powerful analytical instrument. The GC can separate
individual sample constituents in a complex mixture of reaction products, and
the MS provides both universal and specific detection of the eluting compounds.
The combination of separation by GC and detection by MS allows the complete
resolution, qualitative identification, and quantitative analysis of even
complex reaction product spectra. This feature renders GC-MS invaluable for
experimental research in kinetics, catalysis, and reaction engineering. The
ongoing projects have broader impacts in industrial applications. The research
projects for which the GC-MS would be used include exploring the use of high-
temperature water as an environmentally benign reaction medium for different
industrial chemistries, reducing the formation of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins
during the production of pentachlorophenol, developing high-activity catalysts
and novel strategies for selective catalytic reduction of NOx, elucidating the
aging mechanism for petroleum asphaltenes, and preventing wax deposition in sub-
sea oil pipelines. The proposed activities are expected to advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning.