* 0214007
* Collaborative Research: A Strategic Approach to Local Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Annette Steinacker, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2005
* USD 52,844.00

The existing urban politics literature has classified development policies into
three types: location incentives that subsidize development; progressive
development policies that provide incentives but with strings attached; and
growth management restrictions. Unlike most of this extant work which has
examined one or at most two of the policy types in isolation, the researchers
treat growth policy as a continuum across these types, based on the distribution
of the costs and benefits of development among pubic and private actors. The
specific deals that cities negotiated with private actors can fall at any point
on this continuum, based on the combination of policy instruments used, the
concessions and extractions negotiated. Use of the bargaining perspective allows
them to unite these separate approaches to city growth issues by focusing on the
factors that increase a city's relative bargaining power -- enabling it to make
extract benefits from firms or forcing it to provide concessions to attract
growth. Applying the Nash bargaining model to development deals also can
incorporate insights from previous development research within a more rigorous
theoretical framework that leads to a very specific empirical specification.
City competition for development is captured by the relative values of the
city's and the firm's outside options -- the alternatives each would get if the
negotiated deal fell through. City bargaining power will depend on its inherent
attractiveness to different businesses, which determines the minimum value it
should accept in a deal; its need to reduce economic or fiscal problems, which
determines its time preference, and the risk aversion of the political actors
negotiating the deal. Identifying the sources of the city's bargaining power
will also lead to policy recommendations on how government institutions and
general development policies can be structured to improve the city's ability to
pursue both short term and long term development goals. The investigators also
extend this approach to address repeated play of the bargaining game with
different firms over time. This extension permits evaluation of the possibility
that cities can develop a reputation as a 'tough' or 'soft' agent, equivalent in
development policy to slow- or pro-growth areas. This bargaining approach is
investigated through empirical analysis and theoretical modeling. Predictions of
the model are tested with data collected from a national survey of development
officials in all incorporated places over 10,000 within 12 selected metropolitan
areas. The survey gathers information on the two most recent negotiated location
incentives deals. This facilitates the measurement of the outcome of the
bargaining model-the value of the negotiated agreements. Information on specific
firms is collected from archival sources, and matched to bargaining outcomes in
the data set. Additional information on city political, fiscal and economic
characteristics are merged into the final data set. Fieldwork in the 12
metropolitan areas add details about the negotiation process in practice and
data from city records. In addition, interviews with officials involved in
formulating development policy and carrying out development negotiations
provides the basis for case analyses of development negotiation. The anticipated
products of this research represent significant theoretical and methodological
advances in the urban politics field, as well as an applied framework for city
officials to improve pursuit of their development goals. Given that formal
modeling approaches to questions in the urban politics and public policy fields
have been limited, the work resulting from this research has the potential to be
groundbreaking in its extension of new methodological approaches to these
fields.

