* 0214465
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science:Thinking About Politics--A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) Study
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* John Zaller, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2003
* USD 12,000.00





This Doctoral Dissertation takes advantage of innovations in brain imaging
technology to investigate the neural substrates of political thinking. Studies
of expertise in other fields have demonstrated that novices and sophisticates do
not use the same mechanisms when thinking about problems (See Lieberman et al.
2001). Do political novices and sophisticates engage different parts of their
brain in thinking about political issues? More generally, what is the nature of
political thought? What are the regions of the brain that determine it? What
differences in regional activation correspond to thinking about "hot button"
issues (e.g. race and abortion) or humdrum issues (e.g. the size of national
parks)?

In this study, the principal investigator uses functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) to study political cognition and affect during three experiments.
The subject population consists of undergraduate political sophisticates and
novices. In the first experiment, the principal investigator shows subjects the
faces of white and black, famous and not famous, political and nonpolitical
persons. In the second experiment, subjects view images of whites and blacks who
are either value violators or value exemplars. The third experiment asks
subjects to answer a series of questions that are either political or
nonpolitical, and threatening, non-threatening, or racial. Using fMRI to measure
cerebral blood flow will allow us to infer the variety of cognitive and
affective processes that subjects use when they answer political questions

The functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) method in this dissertation
should allow us to discriminate neural roots of political behaviors that appear
identical and connect distinct behaviors that share cognitive underpinnings.
Doing so will shed light on the debate about the nature of political
sophistication as well as increase our understanding of specific issues like
race.

