* 0214369
* Collaborative research: Complex dynamics, criticality and cascading events in power system blackouts and communication networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Ian Dobson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 08/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

Large scale utility electrical power transmission systems such as the power
system of the Western United States can and do suffer cascading events leading
to widespread blackouts. These blackouts severely impact the public, commerce,
and government and are a vulnerability in the nation's infrastructure. Rather
than focusing on the detailed causes of individual blackouts, this project
addresses the global, complex system dynamics of a long series of blackouts. New
models, simulation and analysis methods will be developed to capture the
essentials of criticality, self-organization and cascading failure. Particular
attention will be given to the power tails of probability distributions of
blackout sizes that occur in North American blackout data and generally in
systems at criticality. These power tails imply that large, catastrophic
blackouts are much more likely than predicted by conventional risk analyses. The
project will develop new risk analysis methods and explore operating techniques
to mitigate the risks of major blackouts. Communication networks such as the
Internet also develop major cascading disruptions and work will also be pursued
in this application to maintain some focus on universal features of disruptions
in large, engineered networks of societal importance. The expected outcomes are
the ability to understand, statistically analyze and to some extent mitigate
major cascading disruptions in power transmission and communication networks.
The scientific outcomes are an improved understanding and new application of
complex system dynamics to the engineering and analysis of stressed networks.
Educational outcomes include the training of undergraduate and graduate students
in a multidisciplinary team.