* 0214315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Dynamics of Dominance: Party Government Duration and Change in Parliamentary Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Kaare Strom, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2003
* USD 7,732.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation addresses the issue of party
longevity (in government) in parliamentary democracies. Some political parties
come into power and control government for less than a month, while others
maintain power for decades. This project conducts cross-national quantitative
analyses of party government duration and change in eighteen parliamentary
democracies over fifty years. It examines party government in Japan, Norway, and
Sweden more closely to better understand factors that may be imperfectly
captured in the cross-national quantitative data. NSF support will be used to go
to Japan, collect and code the necessary data and conduct elite interviews and
archival work for further evidence on party government duration and change in
Japan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The duration of party government has significant
implications for policymaking and governance, for the very nature of democracy,
yet it has not been rigorously studied -only cabinet duration has been carefully
examined. This project uses a theoretic framework based on understanding party
government as an equilibrium outcome of the strategic interaction among
political actors. Party government duration is a function of the stability of
the equilibrium and changes in the preferences and beliefs of parties,
parliamentarians and voters. Hypotheses derived from a model of party government
and the existing literature on parliamentary democracies, electoral systems, and
voting behavior are tested using cross-national quantitative analyses and more
in- depth case studies of three countries. Both existing data and newly
collected and operationalized variables will be included in the analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation research made possible by this grant
allows the co-Principal Investigator to collect and code data on party
government in Japan in a manner that is standardized with other large cross-
national databases of parliamentary democracies. The data collected will be made
publicly available and will be useful for scholarship of Japanese politics that
seeks to compare Japan to other parliamentary democracies as well as for cross-
national quantitative scholarship on parliamentary and coalition government. The
research helps promote the study of Japanese politics in the context of broader
comparative study of parliamentary democracies and helps develop a better
understanding the nature of democracy in parliamentary democracies and the
dynamics of party government and political party systems. &lt;br/&gt;