* 0214403
* Social Interaction and Investor Behavior in Stock Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jeremy Stein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 333,298.00

This project investigates whether investor behavior in stock markets is
influenced by social interaction. One channel through which social interaction
might influence investors is that they spread information and ideas about stocks
to one another directly, through word-of-mouth communication. However, in spite
of their familiarity, such hypotheses about social interaction have received
little direct support in stock-market data. In an effort to bring large-sample
evidence to bear on these questions, this project conducts two studies of social
interaction and investor behavior in stock markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first study investigates the idea that stock-market participation by households
is influenced by social interaction. A simple model is built in which any given
"social" investor finds it more attractive to invest in the market when the
participation rate among his peers is higher. The model predicts higher
participation rates among social investors than among "non-socials". The theory
is tested using data from the Health and Retirement Study. Social households are
defined as those who interact with their neighbors, or who attend church. The
investigators test whether the social investors are indeed substantially more
likely to invest in the stock market than non-social households, controlling for
other factors like wealth, race, education and risk tolerance. The investigators
also test an auxiliary prediction of their model that the impact of sociability
is stronger in states where stock-market participation rates are higher.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second study investigates word-of-mouth effects on the
holdings and trades of money managers. The idea is a very simple one, premised
on the assumption that fund managers who work in the same city are more likely
to come into direct contact with one another, and hence to exchange ideas by
word-of-mouth. Consider for example a fund manager working for the Fidelity fund
family, which is located in Boston, and her decision of whether or not to buy,
say, shares of Intel in a given quarter. Our basic prediction is that this
decision will be more heavily influenced by the decisions of fund managers
working for the Putnam family, which is also located in Boston, than by the
decisions of fund managers located in other cities. Using a large database of
mutual fund holdings, the investigators look to see whether a mutual-fund
manager is more likely to hold (or buy, or sell) a particular stock in any
quarter if other managers from different fund families located in the same city
are holding (or buying, or selling) that same stock. In these regressions, we
are able to control for the distance between the fund manager and the stock in
question and for heterogeneity in investment styles. Finally, in a model in
which investors spread information and ideas about stocks directly to one
another by word of mouth, it takes time for ideas about stocks to travel over
large distances, much as with a contagious disease. The investigators can test
for such trading dynamics by checking whether a given fund manager's trades
responds to the trades of other fund managers with more of a lag when these
other managers are located in more distant cities.&lt;br/&gt;