* 0215670
* Development and Testing of a Deep-Water, Acoustically-Linked, Moored-Buoy Seafloor Observatory
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Robert Detrick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,085,418.00

0215670&lt;br/&gt;Detrick&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award to
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts provides funds to develop
and test a prototype deep-water, acoustically-linked, moored-buoy seafloor
observatory. The system will consist of a discus buoy on a single-point, deep-
water mooring, equipped with a satellite link for 2-way communication to shore
and a high-speed acoustic modem for 2-way communication with sensors on the
seafloor and on the mooring itself. The suite of sensors, at two seafloor nodes,
will include an ocean bottom seismograph (OBS), an acoustic current profiler
(ADCP), hydrothermal flow meters with associated temperature, chemical and
pressure sensors and a conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) instrument. All will
be interfaced to two acoustic modems, and they will transmit data to the surface
buoy of the mooring, from which they will be transmitted daily to shore together
with meteorological data from sensors on the surface buoy and current meter data
from instruments installed on the mooring. The mooring will be deployed for a
15-month demonstration project in the vicinity of the Nootka Fault, where
complementary observatory experiments will be carried out under separate support
from the Keck Foundation. The project is supported by the Division of Ocean
Sciences at NSF. Cost-share support from non-federal funds will be provided for
approximately 30% of total project costs.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;