* 0215384
* Miniaturized Portable Flow-Through Amperometric Immunosensor Device for Fast Field Analysis of Rodent Viruses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Plamen Atanassov, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 389,933.00

A grant has been awarded to University of New Mexico to develop a prototype
sensor to detect hantavirus infections in field. It will be a rapid, hand held,
automated device, which gives a quantitative determination of viral infections
in small mammals. As a result of this development several functioning devices
will be tested in field conditions. Currently samples from wild populations must
be collected in the field and returned to the laboratory for testing, often
taking days or weeks. The work initially will be focused on the optimization of
a sensor for fast (10-20 min) determination of viral infections in the field and
will be extended towards the development of an automated portable system to be
used in field stations or other remote sites. The next stage of the research
will include miniaturization of a portable system and developed for rapid on-
site determination of the viral infection in mammal samples in field research
environments anywhere rapid viral detection is needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will include the evaluation of the disposable sensing element, optimization
of sensor column assembly and flow-injection system, engineering of the
prototype of the sensor, optimization of the assay procedure and determination
of optimal time for incubation, flow rates and temperature, development of fast
assay for hantavirus infections in blood samples, characterization and
validation of the assay procedure and comparing it with the conventional
techniques. Further work would include the miniaturization of the existing
manually operated device and make it automated. To accomplish this task a micro-
controller, micro pump, disposable sensing element and a battery system will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a multidisciplinary team
from the University of New Mexico's (UNM) Department of Biology, Department of
Chemical and Nuclear Engineering and Department of Microbiology to develop the
proposed instrumentation. Conventional techniques for determination of viral
infections (immunoblot) are qualitative, require relatively long process times
(24 hours) and must be conducted under laboratory conditions. The awarded
research will result in a sensor, which can be used in cases when the
application of conventional immunoassay techniques is limited or impossible. The
sensor will be developed using disposable flow electrodes and is a means to
conduct fast assay for hantavirus infection with an electrochemical detection.
Therefore, while employing different available immunochemicals, a variety of
disposable elements can be designed for different kind of infections. The
resulting device from this project can be used for fast analyses of other
viruses or metabolites under field conditions, in mobile units and may be
applicable to detection of certain biological weapons. The sensors can also be
used for rapid analyses in conventional conditions of biological, physiological
and analytical practices. The University of New Mexico is a Hispanic serving
institution. A summer NIH/NSF workshop to attract minority and underrepresented
students will be applied.&lt;br/&gt;