* 0215542
* Ecology, feeding competition, and social relationships of Phayre's leaf monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Andreas Koenig, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Kay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 297,022.00

Nonhuman primates are the most social among all organisms and exhibit the
broadest range of variation in social organization. Consequently, research on
the behavior and ecology of nonhuman primates has been most influential in
addressing questions as to why organisms including humans live in groups in the
first place, why they live in groups of particular sizes, and what factors
influence the social relationships among group members. Leaf-eating monkeys are
particularly interesting, because the relationship between their ecology and
social organization is not consistent with current theory. Feeding on supposedly
large abundant resources, they should live in large groups and exhibit weak
dominance relationships. Quite often, however, they live in small groups with
strong dominance hierarchies. The study is following up new explanatory ideas to
resolve this controversy examining (i) whether indirect feeding competition or
infanticide or both constrain group size of Phayre's leaf monkeys
(Trachypithecus phayrei) and (ii) whether resource distribution, feeding
competition, and female reproductive success conform to the predicted female
social relationships and dispersal patterns.&lt;br/&gt;Research is conducted at
Phu Khieo Wildlife Sanctuary, Northeastern Thailand harboring eight sympatric
primates including two leaf monkeys (T. cristatus, T. phayrei) and four macaques
(Macaca arctoides, M. assamensis, M. mulatta, M. nemestrina). The study area
(156,000 ha) is undisturbed including two major habitat types (hill evergreen
and dry evergreen forest). In the long range this setting will allow comparisons
within primate genera and species of similar body size across habitats as well
as across species and genera of similar body size within the same habitat. The
study is based on a collaboration with researchers from two Thai Universities
(Kasetsart and Mahidol University, Bangkok) and officials from governmental
agencies (Royal Forest Department, Bangkok). Per year it will involve a minimum
of two local staff, two recent graduates and one post-doctoral researcher and
provide the opportunity for thesis research. The study will foster cooperation
within Thailand and with the United States, support conservation efforts in the
sanctuary, and provide training and career opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;