* 0215831
* Acquistion of Advanced Test Equipment for Infrastructure Materials Reliability, Risk Assessment and Performance Enhancement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Luoyu Xu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2004
* USD 146,037.00

This proposal is for the acquisition of advanced physical and chemical testing
equipment to characterize structural performance of current and emerging
infrastructure materials. The equipment requested would facilitate both
acquisition of performance data on new materials and development of a
mechanistic understanding of the relationships between physical and chemical
processes that lead to failure. Physical challenges to the nation's
infrastructure are being presented by several forces: (i) deterioration due to
aging, (ii) security threats by malicious or terrorist actions, and (iii)
demands for increased capacity and safety. Examples include bridge and roadway
structures, pipeline conveyance of gas, petroleum, chemicals and water, aircraft
and aerospace structures, automotive structures and, management of nuclear
materials and wastes. Common amongst all of these examples are the needs for
improved mechanistic understanding, in-situ monitoring, prediction and
prevention of structural failure under environmental conditions. Common chronic
stresses to these systems that must be mitigated include loading, thermal
cycling and chemical environmental reaction, many of which may occur
simultaneously and have currently poorly characterized synergistic effects.
Acute stresses include sudden impact and high temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;The set
of materials that has been the focus of our research, based on national
infrastructure challenges are Portland cement concrete systems used for highway
and building construction and also used as the basis for treatment of nuclear
wastes. This also includes composites and reinforced polymer laminates used in
building and transportation structures and structural rehabilitation. The
equipment requested will facilitate non-destructive evaluation of material
performance, and local inorganic and organic compositional testing to assess
corrosion and other failure mechanisms that result from chemical changes in
materials (e.g., during thermal stresses, chemical attack). The specific
equipment requested includes (i) laser ablation unit for an existing inductively
coupled plasma-mass spectrometer to facilitate elemental and isotopic profiling
in materials, (ii) a thermogravimetric analyzer mass spectrometer system to
determine organic composition as a function of environmental stresses, and (iii)
an ultrasonic non-destructive analyzer to assess internal fracture formation
during testing.&lt;br/&gt;The project team includes participation of faculty
from the Departments of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Physics. &lt;br/&gt;The requested
equipment will support and enhance ca. $10 million dollars per year of current
sponsored research and training, including an NSF IGERT program in Risk and
Reliability Engineering and Management. Complimentary collaborative linkages are
provided with Sandia and Oak Ridge National Laboratories, DOE, Halliburton, and
Tennessee Department of Transportation. &lt;br/&gt;$130,000 in matching funds
are provided by Vanderbilt University for the $141,000 requested from NSF with a
total project cost of $271,000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;