* 0215535
* Characterization of Xyloglucan Galactosyltransferase Homologs in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Wolf-Dieter Reiter, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 342,000.00

The extracellular matrix (or "cell wall") of higher plants plays numerous
protective and growth-regulating roles during the life cycle of a plant.
Furthermore, plant cell wall material represents the most abundant source of
newly synthesized biomass on earth making it an important renewable source of
energy, and the raw material for industrial applications ranging from textile
production to wood processing. Despite this importance of plant cell walls both
from a basic and applied point of view, little is known about the synthesis of
cell wall material on the molecular level. Plant cell walls consist primarily of
polysaccharides representing long strings of sugar moieties that are attached to
each other by enzymes referred to as glycosyltransferases. One of the most
important and challenging areas in plant cell wall research is the
identification of genes encoding these glycosyltransferases, and the
determination of their function. To address this issue by a genetic approach,
mutants of the plant model organism Arabidopsis thaliana were isolated which
showed alterations in the composition of their cell wall material. One of these
mutants turned out to be unable to synthesize normal xyloglucan (the major
hemicellulose in most higher plants) because of a defect in a specific
glycosyltransferase. An evaluation of the Arabidopsis genome sequence indicated
the presence of ten coding regions with substantial structural similarity to
this enzyme. These ten genes are expected to encode additional
glycosyltransferases in cell wall synthesis. In our future research, the
functions and properties of most of these enzymes will be investigated via three
complementary approaches: (A) Determination in which parts of the plant these
predicted glycosyl-transferases reside. (B) The identification of mutant lines
which are defective in the activity of these enzymes. This will be followed by
an analysis of their cell wall composition and an evaluation for changes in
growth habit, physiology, and wall properties. (C) Production of the predicted
glycosyltransferases in microorganisms followed by enzyme assays to determine
their functions. The proposed experiments are designed to further our
understanding of cell wall synthesis in higher plants with the potential to
manipulate the cell wall composition of important crop plants to improve
digestibility of forage crops, facilitate the production of fibers for paper
products and clothing, and to improve the properties of cell wall components in
human nutrition.