* 0215373
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences - SCREMS
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Jonathan Bell, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 75,000.00

The Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the&lt;br/&gt;University of
Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) will&lt;br/&gt;purchase a distributed memory
parallel computer which&lt;br/&gt;will be dedicated to the support of
departmental&lt;br/&gt;research in the mathematical sciences. The
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigators intend to purchase a 64-processor
Linux&lt;br/&gt;cluster consisting of 32 dual-processor
computational&lt;br/&gt;nodes connected with a high-speed Myrinet network
and&lt;br/&gt;equipped with a significant amount of fast central
disk&lt;br/&gt;storage using a RAID controller. All researchers
plan&lt;br/&gt;to use the Message Passing Interface (MPI) to
provide&lt;br/&gt;reliable portability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will
be used for multiple research projects,&lt;br/&gt;including, in particular, the
areas of applications in&lt;br/&gt;semiconductor manufacturing, quantum
chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, computational neurobiology,
and&lt;br/&gt;constrained mechanical systems. The research projects
are&lt;br/&gt;unified by the need to use efficient parallel
computing&lt;br/&gt;to enable the solution of practically relevant
problems.&lt;br/&gt;The research areas addressed are of current
national&lt;br/&gt;interest and involve solution methodologies that
cut&lt;br/&gt;across these disciplines and will lead to more
efficient&lt;br/&gt;simulation techniques in other areas. The computer
will&lt;br/&gt;also play a role in the department's education
mission,&lt;br/&gt;the university's MARC U*STAR (Minority Access to
Research&lt;br/&gt;Careers) program, and in the principal
investigators'&lt;br/&gt;Research Experiences for Undergraduates activities,
by&lt;br/&gt;involving students at various levels in
contemporary&lt;br/&gt;methods in scientific computing. &lt;br/&gt;