* 0215570
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:From babbling to linguistically-relevant articulatory gestures: Continuity and variability of speech motor organization in infants and young children
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Ludo Max, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,950.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ludo Max, Ms. Margaret Earnest will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Her research includes three studies investigating the
control and coordination of lip and jaw movements in infants and children from 6
to 37 months of age. This work builds on increasing evidence that the transition
from babbling to meaningful speech is a crucial stage during which motor
constraints may determine important aspects of speech sound acquisition. One
major question related to this transition is whether it reflects a maturation
that is gradual and continuous or whether early speech requires an extensive
reorganization of the previously acquired motor skills. Therefore, two of Ms.
Earnest's studies will investigate developmental trends in (a) the respective
contribution of individual articulators (lips and jaw) to bilabial closing and
opening gestures, and (b) the typically asymmetric nature of these articulatory
movements during speech production. Her third study will examine the potential
neuromotor basis for infants' selection of the jaw as the primary articulator in
babbling and early speech production. Each of these three questions will be
addressed by recording movements of the lips and jaw with a camera-based
movement tracking system and comparing a variety of kinematic parameters across
different age groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research on the early
development of orofacial control for babbling and speech is significant for
several reasons. First, it will lead to new insights into the neuromotor
processes underlying speech development in children. Second, an enhanced
understanding of the different stages of speech motor development may be
critical for explaining commonly observed trends in the sequence of speech sound
acquisition during babbling and early speech. Third, given this potential
influence on the order of speech sound acquisition, the constraints imposed by
developing speech motor abilities may affect other aspects of language
development.&lt;br/&gt;