* 0215181
* SBIR Phase I:   Engineering Platform for the Nanoformulations of Water Insoluble Drugs Using Supercritical Antisolvent Process with Enhanced Mass Transfer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Poongunran Muthukumaran, Thar Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,901.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a flexible platform for nano-formulations of water insoluble drugs. As
the practice of medicine progresses towards "complete cure for diseases",
delivering new drugs to specific areas to target specific tissues becomes an
important objective of overall pharmaceutical research. Unfortunately many new
drugs have poor water solubility that reduces their bioavailability. Carefully
formulated nanoparticles and nanospheres are reported to have therapeutic
advantages such as bioavailability, ability to avoid reticuloendothelial system
(RES) removal, and direct tumor targeting. This project will develop the
Supercritical Anti-Solvent with Enhanced Mass Transfer (SAS-EM) Process for
producing nanoparticles of water insoluble drugs and encapsulating them in
biodegradable polymers as nanospheres. The three key steps in the Phase I study
include : (1) Phase behavior studies to identify the suitable solvent and
experimental conditions, (2) Particle formation studies where nanoparticles of
said drugs are produced using supercritical antisolvent process with enhanced
mass transfer, and (3) Characterization of the nanoparticles/nanospheres for
particle size, size distribution, and crystallinity. Light scattering techniques
will be used to measure the size distribution complemented with Scanning
electron microscopic visualization. X-ray diffraction measurements will be used
to describe the crystallinity.

The commercial applications of this project are in the area of pharmaceutical
drug delivery.