* 0215768
* BE/CNH:  Urban Trace-gas Emissions Study (UTES): Interactions Among Canopy Processes, Anthropogenic Emissions, and Social Institutions in the Salt Lake Valley, Utah
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Philip Emmi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2007
* USD 1,528,973.00

The majority of greenhouse gases and other atmospheric pollutants originate in
cities, but the linkages among urban vegetation, human activities, and the urban
airshed are poorly understood. Carbon dioxide and water vapor are greenhouse
gases that affect local, regional, and global climate, while volatile organic
compounds are pre-cursors to the atmospheric pollutants that form urban smog.
All of these gases are emitted by human activities and by vegetation in the
urban environment. Interdisciplinary collaborations of atmospheric scientists,
social sciences, urban planners, and ecologists are necessary to measure the
concentrations and emissions of these gases, to trace their origins, and to
evaluate the implications for effective management of the urban airshed. This
research project will be undertaken by a multi-disciplinary research team in
order to study the complex factors affecting emissions of carbon dioxide, water
vapor, and volatile organic compounds in the valley containing Salt Lake City,
Utah. An atmospheric measurement and monitoring program will be implemented
throughout the Salt Lake Valley in different land-use areas, such as industrial
areas, residential neighborhoods, and the intensively developed city center.
Analyses will distinguish the compounds associated with trace gas concentration
and emission, such as vehicular emissions, industrial emissions, contributions
from residential heating, and emissions from urban vegetation. After identifying
the factors controlling the different components in various land uses, the
investigators will develop a system-dynamics model that will facilitate
examinations of the urban system as a whole. The model also will assist in
quantitatively evaluating options for public policy and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although urban environments are ecosystems,
comprehensive studies of linkages between organisms and their physical
environments. This project will contribute to understanding of the high degree
of complexity in urban ecosystems, and it will provide a framework for
evaluating the multiple interactive factors that influence airsheds in a variety
of cities. Planners and decision makers from Salt Lake City and the state of
Utah will participate in this project, providing input into model development
and exploring policy implications of the research results. By applying
scientific measurement techniques to quantitative modeling and collaborating
with local decision makers, this project will evaluate the feasibility and
effectiveness of different approaches to reducing greenhouse gas emissions while
maintaining high air-quality standards. This project is supported by an award
resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.