* 0215724
* Acquisition of a high resolution ICP-MS for environmental research and training in Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Stephen Norton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2005
* USD 350,304.00

EAR-0215724&lt;br/&gt;Kreutz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support to
significantly enhance the elemental and isotopic analysis capabilities at the
University of Maine through the acquisition of a high resolution inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometer (HR-ICP-MS). The HR-ICP-MS will enable
environmental scientists and students at UMaine, as well as other educational
institutions and state agencies, to substantially broaden their
interdisciplinary research interests far beyond the current possibilities.
Specifically, a state-of-the-art HR-ICP-MS will enable the PIs to: 1)
Dramatically expand our element concentration and element ratio analysis
capabilities in aqueous matrices. Existing UMaine research strengths in
Quaternary science, environmental geochemistry, and marine biogeochemistry rely
upon accurate elemental determinations at part-per-trillion and part-per-
quadrillion levels. Each of these programs requires the sensitivity and low
detection limits offered by HR-ICP-MS to perform multi-elemental analyses
without time-consuming pre-concentration protocols; and 2) Perform rapid and
highly precise elemental isotope ratio determinations, or constrain isotope
ratios sufficiently for primary processes to be inferred. Isotope measurements
made with the HR-ICP-MS will be immediately used in several ongoing projects
investigating pollutant source and transport, biogeochemical processes, and
climate variability. We will develop a HR-ICP-MS Facility in the Sawyer
Environmental Research Center at UMaine for use as a regional resource. We plan
to acquire a Finnigan ELEMENT2, the only commercially available high resolution
single collector ICP-MS. In addition to its primary research focus, the HR-ICP-
MS will be used in a range of undergraduate and graduate programs at UMaine.
Integration of research and education will occur through graduate theses,
undergraduate courses, and independent undergraduate research projects under the
Honors Program and Capstone Experience program.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;