* 0215964
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Research and Education in Surface Science and Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jill Buckley, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 171,500.00

This award is for acquisition of a new state-of-the-art scanning probe
microscope (SPM) for the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology research
community. The instrument is an atomic force microscope (AFM) that can be
modified to operate in a variety of scanning modes, including phase-imaging
microscopy, electric force microscopy, magnetic force microscopy (MFM) and
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The principal investigators have
successfully used AFM imaging to support their research on ceramic film
fabrication and fluid interactions with geologic materials. Other researchers
will use the AFM for characterizing a variety of materials, including metal
surfaces, nanocomposites, self-assembled monolayers, carbon nanotubes,
buckyballs, and DNA. The projects described herein involve some 14 faculty,
several post-doctoral researchers, and many graduate students, from seven
different academic departments at NMT. The microscope will enhance graduate
student training and undergraduate teaching through experience with one of the
best surface characterization tools available. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;AFM
detects surface topography by monitoring molecular force interactions between a
probe tip and the sample. STM detects surface topography by monitoring the
tunneling current between an electrically conductive probe and the sample. SPM
offers resolution of surface features on the order of a few nanometers, the
highest of any imaging technique. An additional important advantage of SPM over
other techniques is the ability to image samples in air or under liquids without
extensive preparation. Environmental and biological samples may be examined
under near-natural conditions. Instruction in SPM techniques will be integrated
directly into existing graduate and undergraduate courses and into a new short
course. Budgeting for an instrument manager/trainer will ensure instrumentation
access for those with little or no prior experience with SPM techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;