* 0215549
* Workshop: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Gary Olson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 03/31/2003
* USD 29,936.00

This award supports a research consortium (workshop) of promising doctoral
students and distinguished research faculty in the field of human-computer
interaction. The consortium will be held in conjunction with the ACM 2002
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2002) in Minneapolis,
Minnesota, sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special
Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The goals of the workshop
include building a cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network
of colleagues spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers
by having experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible
for promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference.
Student participants will make formal presentations of their work during the
workshop, and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other human-computer interaction research, whether their
topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Student participants will also present
their work during the technical program of the CHI 2002 conference. Extended
abstracts of the students' work will be disseminated via publication in the CHI
2002 Extended Abstracts, which has wide print and electronic distribution.
Evaluation of the consortium will be conducted by ACM SIGCHI's conference
management committee, and results of the evaluation will be available to the
organizers of future consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-Computer Interaction
is a multidisciplinary field of increasing importance to science, commerce, and
society. This workshop contributes to the professional development of young
scientists, whose professional careers will be devoted to understanding how
computer systems and software can be designed to serve the needs of
users.&lt;br/&gt;