* 0215902
* Acquisition of a Sputter Deposition System for Thin Films Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Joost Vlassak, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 163,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program will support
faculty in the Applied Physics and Applied Mechanics groups at Harvard
University with the acquisition of a thin film deposition system with in-situ
stress monitor. The system will be used for the growth of metal films that range
in thickness from tens of nanometers to several micrometers, for a comprehensive
study of thin film mechanical properties. The main focus of this study is the
deformation behavior of elemental metal and alloy films. Basic deformation
mechanisms and interactions with microstructural features such as grain size,
grain orientation, grain boundaries, interfaces, surfaces, and dislocation
substructure will be explored. Alloy films will be used to investigate
precipitation hardening and the shape memory effect in thin films. The
deposition system will also support research on self-organized nanostructure
evolution and amorphous metallic films. Students at the undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral levels will use the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the IMR Program will
support faculty in the Applied Physics and Applied Mechanics groups in the
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard University with the
acquisition of a thin film deposition system with in-situ stress monitor. The
system will be used in graduate research projects on thin film mechanics, self-
organized nanostructure evolution, and amorphous metallic films. In addition to
the graduate research program, a special program will be set up to involve
undergraduate students in original thin films research in the framework of an
independent research course offered by the Division. The deposition system will
also significantly advance undergraduate education through the development of
special laboratory sessions for an Introductory Materials Science course. These
sessions will serve as a first introduction to thin film technology, but are
also intended to foster interest in advanced Materials Engineering
studies.&lt;br/&gt;