* 0215702
* BIOCOMPLEXITY:  High-Precision 13CO2/12CO2 Ratio Measurements Using an Optical Fiber Based Difference Frequency Generation Laser Source
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* David Carlson, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,323,445.00

This project entails the development, test, validation, and deployment of a mid-
infrared laser based gas sensor system for continuous in-situ measurements of
the isotopic composition of atmospheric carbon dioxide (13CO2/12CO2 ratio) with
a precision equal to or better than 0.1 per mil. A science team from the
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Rice University, and the University of
Colorado will utilize the latest developments in optical fiber technology,
recent advances in difference frequency generation (DFG), and multi-year
experience in carbon cycle research. The proposed DFG instrument will employ
commercially available telecommunication lasers which operate at room
temperature. Such a laser source presents significant advantages over more
traditional laser systems for achieving high measurement
precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be used to acquire high
precision atmospheric measurements of 13CO2/12CO2 ratios - a measurement
currently accomplished by a network of flask samples followed by mass
spectrometric analysis. These data are crucial for understanding terrestrial and
oceanic carbon sinks which requires an understanding of the distribution,
contribution, and evolution of regional and local CO2 source and sink processes.
High precision continuous measurements are needed to provide broad temporal and
spatial coverage, even though the isotopic precision is inferior to the flask
method (0.012 per mil) At present there does not exist a robust field-deployable
instrument capable of continuous 13CO2/12CO2 measurements with a precision of
0.1 per mil or better with verifiable accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
phase of this effort will focus on extensive laboratory testing to identify and
implement optimal experimental conditions and data acquisition and retrieval
routines. The next phase will focus on optimal packaging for field measurements,
and this will be followed by an extensive set of side-by-side comparisons with
state-of-the-art flask sample/mass spectrometric measurements carried out in the
field at the University of Colorado's Niwot Ridge Observatory site. Co-located
measurements will be carried out on both the ground and the University of
Colorado tower facility. The new continuous measurements will provide the
foundation for a long-term database from the Niwot Ridge site as well as the
necessary experience to further extend these new measurements to other venues
and platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential broad impacts in
the area of carbon cycle research. In addition, the new instrument and
associated new approaches can be adapted to other new research problems
requiring ultra high measurement precision. Moreover, a multifaceted educational
program with graduate and undergraduate students, high school students and
teachers, will transfer the understanding and use of this new laser and fiber
optic technology to a broader scientific community. The students will be
introduced to 1) the potential of optical fiber technologies and its
applications; 2) an overview of the carbon cycle; and 3) the challenges of, and
information content offered by, high precision isotopic ratio measurements of
CO2.