* 0215676
* International Conference on Advances and New Challenges in Earthquake Engineering Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Billie Spencer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 12/31/2005
* USD 106,000.00

A unique professional consortium called the Asian-Pacific Network of Centers for
Earthquake Engineering Research (ANCER) was established in 2001 in Seoul, Korea
by 7 existing national earthquake engineering research centers. The vision of
ANCER is to broaden the research and development impact and mitigation practices
through cooperative activities that can be best advanced on a center-to-center
basis over a large geographical area. ANCER will sponsor, for the first time of
this kind, the International Conference on Advances and New Challenges in
Earthquake Engineering Research in August 15-20, 2002. The Conference will
consist of two consecutive back-to-back meetings in Harbin and Hong Kong, China.
The common underpinning of both meetings is the application of advanced
technologies and new design philosophies/methodologies to address recent
challenges in earthquake engineering and hazard mitigation. This forward looking
intellectual exercise will involve multiple agencies and major universities from
the Asia-Pacific region, bringing together leading researchers in the field to
develop a clear picture of the current status in the field, as well as to
examine new opportunities on the basis of Asia-Pacific regional and global
cooperation. This project provides the funds to allow a delegation of US
researchers to participate in this important Conference.