* 0215523
* Diachronic Morphology in Cross-Linguistic Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Alice Harris, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2008
* USD 85,137.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Alice C. Harris will
conduct four years of linguistic research on historical morphology (changes over
time in the forms of words). The goal of the research is to discover the
universal forces that change the forms of words. Previous studies of historical
morphology have emphasized the languages of Europe and the Indo-European family,
but a broader database is more likely to reveal universals of change. This
project will continue Dr. Harris's earlier research on languages of the
Kartvelian and North East Caucasian families. It will also draw on published
discussions of historical morphology of many other language families. The method
that will be used involves cross-linguistic comparison of very similar changes
in very different languages. For example, it has been found that in a number of
unrelated languages, the third person singular form of the verb has been
generalized as the base of all persons and numbers, leaving the third person
singular verb with no special marking. In this research, both the similarities
and differences in such generalizations will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
understanding of how complex linguistic paradigms arise and are restructured
will tell us a great deal about the role of cognition in managing the use of
linguistic categories, such as tense and case. This study of morphological
change will thus contribute to a better understanding of language change
broadly. In addition, this study will contribute to morphological
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;