* 0215578
* Acquisition of a High-Resolution, Point-Focusing Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering System for Nanostructured Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Richard Register, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 01/31/2004
* USD 152,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program funds a major
enhancement of the capabilities for small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) located
at Princeton University. The award permits the acquisition of a point-focusing
SAXS instrument, which will be shared principally amongst users at Princeton and
the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT). This instrument uses double-
focusing mirror/monochromator optics to focus a substantial solid angle of
x-radiation to a small spot in the detector plane. This optical geometry
provides access to the very small angles needed to characterize structures with
size scales from 1-100 nm. SAXS also has the important advantage of being
readily adapted for in-situ measurements; cells for operation at elevated
temperature and a scanning calorimeter stage will be incorporated into the SAXS
system. Since this instrument permits detailed characterization of anisotropic
specimens with structure on the nanoscale, it will support a range of research
avenues where controlling the orientation of nanostructural features is the aim.
Projects at Princeton and NJIT which will this instrument will support are
directed towards: guided self-assembly of mesoporous silicates through applied
electric fields; templated crystallization in block copolymers; new
nanostructured organic/inorganic composites for proton exchange membrane fuel
cells; orientation of block copolymers and block copolymer/carbon nanotube
composites; and structure-property-processing relationships in crystalline
polymer fibers and crystallizable ionomers. The instrument will be used by
researchers ranging from postdocs to undergraduates, from Princeton, NJIT, and
elsewhere. Moreover, the modular nature of the SAXS system encourages the design
of new sample stages and modification of existing modules, thus allowing
students the opportunity to gain valuable experience in instrument
design.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program funds a major enhancement of the capabilities for
small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) located at Princeton University. SAXS is a
powerful technique for characterizing nanostructured materials (size scales from
1-100 nm), and fully complements existing electron and scanning probe microscopy
facilities at Princeton. The new SAXS instrument will be shared amongst users at
Princeton and the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) and elsewhere in the
study of organic, inorganic, and composite materials with applications as
diverse as nanoporous filters, membranes for portable fuel cells, and
biodegradable polymer fibers. The state-of-the-art instrument will be
incorporated into a facility with two existing SAXS systems (of complementary,
but more limited, capabilities). Users will include postdoctoral researchers,
graduate students, and undergraduates, the last of these through both
undergraduate research and by utilizing the instrument in an undergraduate
materials science laboratory course. &lt;br/&gt;