* 0215640
* The DLESE Program Center: Providing Infrastructure for a Distributed Community Library
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2002,09/30/2006
* Mary Marlino, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2006
* USD 11,390,111.00

This award is jointly funded by the Directorate for Geosceicnes and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources (National STEM Digital Library).
The Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) is a distributed,
community-based library dedicated to improving the quality, quantity, and
efficiency of teaching and learning about the Earth as a system at all
educational levels. As a community-owned library, DLESE is committed to the
principles of participatory governance and distributed library construction. The
DLESE Program Center (DPC) supports the DLESE mission and the DLESE community by
serving as an integrator for community efforts and by providing the basis for
program continuity. These integrating and continuity functions are achieved
through the provision of technical infrastructure and community support
services. The DPC work objectives for this performance period are to: (1)
Develop an operational library backbone infrastructure that is tailored to
specific geoscience education needs; enables distributed collections and
services to act as an integrated whole; and interoperates with other library
efforts such as NSDL. (2) Support community capacity building by providing
tools, components, and services that enable the development of high-quality
collections of teaching and learning resources by community members. (3) Enable
systemic change as articulated by the national geoscience educational reform
documents through the development of innovative resource discovery interfaces
and services. (4) Promote overall library awareness to increase the use of
library services by educators and students. (5) Conduct ongoing library
operations, including support for community operation of diverse collections and
services. (6) Support broad-based community governance. (7) Promote and support
DLESE diversity initiatives. (8) Support distributed library evaluations of user
experiences, library collections and services, and educational effectiveness.
These objectives are informed by the DLESE governing bodies and the broader
community, the results of work to date, and the overall library vision as
articulated in the DLESE Strategic Plan. The objectives will be measured against
two-year and five-year benchmarks for library functionality. These benchmarks
were crafted with broad community input, and articulate the stages necessary for
library development, growth and sustainability. Meeting these benchmarks
requires significant technical developments in the first half of the performance
period, with a transition towards an increased operation focus in the latter
half. Constant throughout is continued support for DLESE governance and the
distributed library building effort. DLESE governance processes are designed to
involve community members in all major decisions and to maintain a balance
between centralized and decentralized responsibilities. The effort will advance
geoscience education by: (1) Establishing DLESE as the premier, trusted source
for high quality geoscience education resources. (2) Promoting sustainable
library growth through community capacity-building and community participation
in library governance, development, and operations. (3) Enabling the library to
serve as a catalyst for geoscience educational reform by (a) promoting broad and
equitable access to quality geoscience education resources, (b) supporting
geoscience literacy goals and Earth systems perspectives, (c) integrating
research and education through increased access to and understanding of Earth
systems data and data analysis tools, and (d) contributing to the body of
evidence on the value and efficacy of digital libraries.