* 0215820
* MRI: Acquisition of Microscopy Instrumentation for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Elizabeth Kutter, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 182,868.00

Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Drs. John T. Longino, Elizabeth M. Kutter, and Erik
V. Thuesen at The Evergreen State College to acquire a variable-pressure
scanning electron microscope, an inverted compound fluorescent microscope, and a
stereomicroscope, including motorized drives and computer interfaces that allow
remote operation over the internet. The Instrumentation will be used In studies
of tropical biodiversity, microbial processes in biofilms, and ecophysiology of
marine zooplankton. John Longino's research focuses primarily on ants, here and
in Costa Rica. The variable-pressure scanning electron microscope and
stereomicroscope equipment will be used to finish a taxonomic revision of the
Costa Rican Crematogaster, one of the major genera of arboreal ants. The
products will be both traditional published work and image-rich identification
guides on the web. Elizabeth Kutter will use the fluorescent microscope to study
phage infections of bacteria in biofilms - very widespread, elaborate
communities of convoluted towers and fluid channels that are largely resistant
to antibiotics and disinfectants. Erik Thuesen is investigating the ability of
gelatinous zooplankton to survive in low-oxygen environments. He hypothesizes a
facilitated diffusion mechanism which will be investigated using fluorescent
microscopy to examine the distribution of mitochondria.

Science teaching at Evergreen is strongly research oriented. Many Evergreen
faculty members carry out research and teaching programs that rely substantially
on microscopy, and their ability to expand and move in new directions will be
greatly enhanced by these instruments. In addition to the microscopy-intensive
research of the P.I.'s, a number of other faculty involve their students
actively in smaller-scale, locally-funded research projects and presentations,
many of which involve sophisticated microscopy. This includes research into
harmful algal blooms, environmental microbiology and soil biology. The
instrumentation will also be used in ways beyond these specific research
activities, attracting a broad range of students through exposure to exciting
images and concepts and improving access for underrepresented groups of
students, especially at our Tacoma campus, which serves a high proportion of
inner city students. The remote control capabilities will support serious
research projects in bioremediation and microbiology already initiated at the
Tacoma campus and expand microscope use from laboratory to classroom. Teaching
at Evergreen is also inherently and intentionally interdisciplinary, and the SEM
and other microscopes will serve as foci for full-time programs integrating arts
and sciences.