* 0215852
* Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* James Grover, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 287,636.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sophia Passy
(PI), Drs Grover, Marshall, Wilk, and Nelson (Co-PIs), and Drs Arnott, Burleson,
and Smith (Senior Personnel) from the University of Texas at Arlington to
purchase a confocal scanning laser microscope. The instrument will be used for a
broad range of applications, including subcellular localization of molecules;
monitoring ion channel clustering patterns; cytoskeleton visualization; emission
fingerprinting, 3D reconstruction, and detection of gradients in biofilms. The
unifying theme underlying these diverse research endeavors is the search for a
relationship between structure and function in the organic world, which remains
one of the most fundamental questions in biology.&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will
be employed for the study of: 1) biofilm spatio-temporal dynamics as a product
of small-scale proximate ecological processes of species dispersal, growth, and
competition, and ultimate broad-scale environmental constraints of shear stress
and nutrient limitation; 2) spectral fingerprinting of live algal communities
developing in the freshwater plankton and benthos for the purpose of developing
a new biomonitoring approach; 3) chemical and neural mechanisms that control
cardiovascular and ventilatory reflex responses to environmental stimuli in
fish; 4) three-dimensional reconstructions of sperm shape and structure through
optical sectioning of the sperm cytoskeleton to assess the influence of
variation in sperm shape on sperm motility and competition; 5) spinal cord and
peripheral nerve regeneration by fabricating tissue engineered scaffolds that
deliver drugs, proteins, growth factors, and DNA to support and regulate
neuronal regeneration; 6) molecular mechanisms used by bacteria to establish and
maintain Mg2+ homeostasis, and the consequences of disrupting these mechanisms,
and 7) intracellular pathways involved in the regulation of ion channels and how
alterations in the functional state of channels affect cellular functions under
conditions of chronic pain and inflammation. This microscope will also provide
the basis for the development of a new graduate course in Molecular Cytology and
enhance existing courses such as Limnology and Phycology. &lt;br/&gt;The Biology
Department at the University of Texas at Arlington has well established a
specialized microscopy facility, the Center for Electron Microscopy, where
generations of researchers and students have received training and explored the
wonders of the organic and nonliving micro-cosmos. The addition of a confocal
microscope to this facility will open new avenues for novel and
interdisciplinary research, which should come as no surprise given that confocal
microscope technology only became commercially available in the early 1980s,
with its use largely limited to medical studies. Hence, there are still a number
of unexplored fields in biology, ranging from physiology and signal transduction
to aquatic ecology and evolution, which will vastly benefit from the new
approaches that confocal microscopy offers.&lt;br/&gt;