* 0215798
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Household Economies:  The Role of Animals in a Historic Period Chiefdom in Coastal California
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Jeanne Arnold, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,881.00

In this dissertation project, Anna Noah (UCLA) will analyze large
zooarchaeological collections from Island Chumash households. The data were
recovered by Professor Jeanne Arnold's 1995-1997 NSF-supported Santa Cruz Island
household archaeological research. With the exception of two sites in the
Northwest Coast and Plateau regions, respectively, no other project has produced
such a large and undisturbed collection representing simultaneously-occupied
complex hunter-gatherer households. The excavated deposits date to California's
Spanish period between 1782 and about 1820 and exhibit substantial cultural
continuity with underlying Late period deposits. The data derive from commoner
houses at three specialized bead-manufacturing villages and from an elite house
within a village known ethnohistorically to have been a major trading port and
home to an elite lineage. The port site also contains a dense stratum of animal
remains and artifacts that may represent refuse from a feast that followed
abandonment of the elite structure.

Noah will identify approximately 35,000 fish, mammal, and bird bones and animal
procurement tools from nine Chumash households representing the four villages.
The UCLA Zooarchaeology Laboratory will identify another 25,000 bones. Because
the sample is divided among nine households and several strata, the large sample
size is crucial for reliable statistical results. Four-fifths of the faunal
assemblage is fish bones, representing up to 100 species, making identification
very time-consuming. A work-study student will assist with shellfish analysis,
comparing the elite household and hypothesized feast strata.

The fact that these data are provenienced to individual houses allows questions
to be addressed that normally can be broached only with cemetery data and then
only incompletely. By comparing households, the research will examine how the
political and economic systems in a simple chiefdom were integrated in terms of
acquiring and distributing animal food products. It will determine the extent
and status of subsistence-oriented occupational specialization, focusing on
fishing and sea mammal hunting. How food distribution was carried out within
Chumash society, including the possibility of elite provisioning, will be
explored. The use of animal products such as meat, fat, and furs in defining
status will be ascertained by seeking evidence for status-related differences in
access to these items. The nature of feasting in this kind of simple chiefdom
society, actively threatened by colonial domination, will be investigated by
determining the types of foods employed, how they were acquired and prepared,
and what other artifacts were deposited with the food remains.

This project offers a singular opportunity to study subsistence specialization,
differential access to status animals, and feasting in a simple chiefdom reliant
on fishing, hunting, and gathering. Only in the Northwest, where households were
constituted very differently, have similar topics been systematically addressed,
providing important data for comparative analysis. The research will fill a gap
in our understanding of the evolutionary processes by which occupational
specialization develops and elites become progressively differentiated from
commoners. The study results will be available to the Chumash community,
providing significant new information to these direct descendants about the
lives of their ancestors.