* 0215620
* Optical Chemo-Sensing for Civil and Mechanical Systems, An Interdisciplinary Exploratory Research Project
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Masoud Ghandehari, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2003
* USD 40,038.00

In the past few decades, R&D efforts have resulted in production of high
performance materials, which are stronger and more durable than before. We have
also learned that many deterioration processes in our structures involve
deleterious chemical reactions, rate-controlled by ionic transport, which lead
to degradation of the physical properties of the material. Developments in
sensing technology in the past decade have enabled us to measure the physical
damage caused by these chemical reactions. However, with a few exceptions, tools
for real-time monitoring and evaluation of the chemical environment of the
system from within are not available. Availability of this information will help
optimize repair and replacement strategies, and it will lead to significant
reductions in rehabilitation costs. Development of a family of fiber optic
chemical sensors for real-time distributed monitoring of civil and mechanical
systems is proposed. The proposed chemical sensor comprises an optical fiber
with a sensitive fluorescent polymer cladding/coating, whose absorption and
emission properties are altered by interaction with its environment. This
interaction that leads to emission of specific wavelength by the target-specific
fluorophore, provides a highly selective and sensitive process for distributed
chemical sensing of chlorides, calcium, oxygen, pH and more.