* 0215389
* SCREMS:    A Parallel Computer Cluster For Multiphysics &amp; Multiscale Modeling of Subsurface &amp; Surface Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Malgorzata Peszynska, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2004
* USD 80,644.00

The Center for Subsurface Modeling (CSM), part of the Texas&lt;br/&gt;Institute
for Computational and Applied Mathematics at The&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas
at Austin, will purchase 64 PCs, a&lt;br/&gt;control workstation, as well as a
storage device, in order&lt;br/&gt;to constuct a parallel computing platform
capable of&lt;br/&gt;100 Gflops. The network for the cluster (high speed
Myrinet&lt;br/&gt;network (1Gbit) and a 100Mb ethernet network) is already
in&lt;br/&gt;place. This platform will be dedicated to research in
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences being led by CSM. Projects that
will&lt;br/&gt;use this platform include large-scale multiphysics
modeling&lt;br/&gt;of subsurface processes, multiscale modeling of flow
in&lt;br/&gt;extremely heterogeneous rocks, finite element coastal
and&lt;br/&gt;ocean modeling, parallel terascale iterative solvers,
and&lt;br/&gt;Discontinuous Galerkin discretization methods. A
substantial&lt;br/&gt;component of each of these projects is the development
of&lt;br/&gt;new scalable parallel algorithms as well as
implementation&lt;br/&gt;and testing of both proof-of-concept as well as
of&lt;br/&gt;production-quality codes for simulation of cases driven
by&lt;br/&gt;energy and environment applications. A dedicated&lt;br/&gt;limited-
access resource greatly expedites such development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Subsurface Modeling, part of the Texas&lt;br/&gt;Institute for
Computational and Applied Mathematics at The&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at
Austin, will purchase equipment needed&lt;br/&gt;to construct a medium size
parallel computer capable of&lt;br/&gt;100 billion arithmetic operations per
second. This computer&lt;br/&gt;will be dedicated to research in the
mathematical and&lt;br/&gt;computational sciences being led by CSM.
Researchers&lt;br/&gt;involved in the project have decades of experience
in&lt;br/&gt;development of robust, accurate and fast
computational&lt;br/&gt;techniques. The new cluster will allow for large-
scale&lt;br/&gt;computational modeling and testing of such techniques
which&lt;br/&gt;promise to improve ability to understand, predict,
monitor,&lt;br/&gt;and control natural and engineered processes occuring
in&lt;br/&gt;surface and subsurface. Significant examples
include&lt;br/&gt;optimization of oil and gas recovery, analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;contamination and remediation scenarios in subsurface
and&lt;br/&gt;surface waters like aquifer and coastal environments.
The&lt;br/&gt;access to a dedicated computing resource will&lt;br/&gt;greatly
expedite such development.