* 0215881
* Acquisition of a High-Speed, High-Sensitivity Ellipsometer for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Stephen Creager, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 78,568.00

This grant supports purchase of a phase-modulated spectroscopic "Picometer"
ellipsometer from Beaglehole Instruments. With response times on the order of 1
millisecond and adsorbed mass sensitivity on the order of 2 ng/cm 2, this high-
speed, high-sensitivity instrument will be used to study in real-time the
assembly and organization of soft materials at interfaces over both short and
long time scales. This instrument will also be used to monitor adsorption events
at polymer-modified interfaces. A set of projects that will benefit immediately
from the capabilities of this instrument include the analysis of the assembly of
polymer amphiphiles, the growth of surface-confined polymers, the dynamics of
redox molecules at electrodes, and the morphology of thin films of
optoelectronic polymers. The spectroscopic ellipsometer will be housed in the
recently created Surface Characterization Laboratory, located in the Chemical
Engineering Department. Post-doctoral researchers and graduate and undergraduate
students from several disciplines (the Chemical Engineering, Bioengineering, and
Environmental Engineering and Science Departments) currently utilize this multi-
user facility.

The scientific projects underway impact important areas, such as advancing the
technology for molecular electronics and optoelectronic polymer devices,
creating (bio) separation agents designed at the nanoscale, and tailoring
interfacial layers that can screen antigenic displays on cells. These research
projects will enable expansion of the diversity of students working in the
Surface Characterization Laboratory to include students from Chemistry and
Materials Science & Engineering, thus providing a truly interdisciplinary
training environment. The Picometer and associated facility will be available to
faculty and students from nearby non-Ph.D. granting colleges that have an
association with Clemson's Chemical Engineering Department through the Research
Exploration programs. The Picometer will also help to grow the Surface
Characterization Laboratory into a state-of-the-art facility in the area of
advanced materials research, a core research theme at Clemson University.