* 0215228
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences [SCREMS]
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Harvey Segur, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2005
* USD 75,000.00

The Departments of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics at&lt;br/&gt;the
University of Colorado will conduct research efforts&lt;br/&gt;that will
purchase two "compute engines", one for each of&lt;br/&gt;two departments, that
incorporate these advances. Among&lt;br/&gt;advances in computing capacity two
are crucial for the&lt;br/&gt;problems of interest here: (i) increased size of
memory now&lt;br/&gt;allows for realistic computations of some physical
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;that evolve in time in three spatial dimensions;
&lt;br/&gt;and (ii) increased computational precision makes feasible
a&lt;br/&gt;new class of fast algorithms that were infeasible
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) A goal of one project is the development of
fast and&lt;br/&gt;accurate algorithms for solving practical problems
in&lt;br/&gt;dimensions three and higher. The two main tools in
this&lt;br/&gt;development are representations with a low separation
rank&lt;br/&gt;(a numerical version of separation of
variables).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) A goal of a second project is prototyping
new algorithms&lt;br/&gt;and developing new models for moderate to high
Reynolds&lt;br/&gt;number flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) A third research
project, on the behavior of a granular&lt;br/&gt;medium in two and three
dimensions, draws on the classical&lt;br/&gt;kinetic theory, extending it to the
case of inelastic&lt;br/&gt;collisions, and gives explicit expression for
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;quantities such as stress and granular
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific problems of immediate interest
include:&lt;br/&gt;(a) geophysical and astrophysical fluid flows, driven
by&lt;br/&gt;the competing influences of planetary rotation,
variable&lt;br/&gt;gravity, and magnetic forces; (b) granular flows, such
as&lt;br/&gt;occur in avalanches or sand-piles or landslides; and
(c)&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic wave propagation near irregularly
shaped&lt;br/&gt;bodies. Aside from these immediate applications,
a&lt;br/&gt;longer-term goal is to train students to use these
new&lt;br/&gt;machines well. The University of Colorado
recently&lt;br/&gt;created two new graduate programs, designed to
train&lt;br/&gt;scientists and engineers in advanced computational
methods.&lt;br/&gt;These two machines will help to make these new
programs&lt;br/&gt;more effective.