* 0215662
* Acquisition of Cryo-Preparative Instrumentation for an Electron Microscopy Core
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Thomas Phillips, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 144,371.00

Phillips- 0215662&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas E.
Phillips to fund the purchase of three cryo-preparative instruments: (i) a high-
pressure freezing machine, (ii) an automated freeze-substitution and low
temperature embedding processor, and (iii) a cryo-ultramicrotome. Conventional
chemical fixation using aqueous fixatives cause unnatural changes in the fine
structure of cells. Conventional fixation and embedding techniques at room
temperature are also well known to interfere with immunocytochemical
localization of target antigens. Cryo-fixation at ambient pressure results in
the formation of ice-crystals that destroys the fine structure in all but the
most superficial 10-20 mm of tissue. Freezing at very high pressure increases
the depth of tissue without ice crystal damage to over 200 mm. The combination
of cryo-fixation and freeze-substitution results in not only a truer
preservation of tissue fine structure but also a greatly enhanced
immunoreactivity. For samples which can not be fixed using high-pressure
fixation, such as those collected in the field, conventional fixation followed
by cryo-ultramicrotomy has been demonstrated to show much higher
immunoreactivity than specimens dehydrated and embedded in plastic resins.
&lt;br/&gt;To maximize the impact of this technology, these instruments will be
housed in a multi-user electron microscopy facility for use by all researchers
on our campus. Furthermore, investigators at other regional institutions will be
able to use these instruments to prepare tissues that they can then examine on
their home campuses. Examples of the type of research to be performed with this
equipment include the Phillips laboratory's plan to freeze plant seed tissues to
examine the pathway that both endogenous and exogenous transgenic proteins
travel through plant cells. The Baskin laboratory studies how a plant organ
attains a specific and heritable shape. High pressure freezing will allow this
lab to define the role that the filaments of the cell's cytoskeleton play in
determining the shape of the root. &lt;br/&gt;The sequencing of the complete or
partial genomes of a growing number of bacteria, plant and animal species has
created a wealth of information concerning what proteins are made by these
different organisms. The next big breakthrough will be to determine the function
of each of the proteins. The first steps in this process are determining in
which cells the proteins are expressed and where exactly within the cell the
proteins are located at different developmental or physiological stages.
Electron microscopic immunocytochemistry offers a way to visualize the precise
location of specific proteins and non-protein antigens within cells. These cryo-
preparative instruments will not only increase the chances that our antibodies
will recognize their target proteins but also ensure that the location that we
find those proteins in accurately reflects their distribution in living cells.
&lt;br/&gt;