* 0215509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The Effect of Affective Experience in Investment Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Lisa Feldman Barrett, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;More Americans than ever before - about 125 million - are currently
participating in acts of investing. In spite of the growing popularity of
investing and of the constant ebbs and flows of emotions in the world of
investing, the actual effect of emotion on investment behaviors has not been a
major subject of scientific research. The purpose of this project is to explore
and examine the role of emotion in investment
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the relationship between
affect and two dimensions that can be used to describe investment decision
making: defensiveness-aggressiveness and overreaction-underreaction.
Specifically, it is predicted that positive feelings may promote aggressive
investment decisions, defined as a tendency to focus primarily on obtaining
possible gains rather than preventing possible losses in decision making (for
example, concentrating investment on a set of high-return assets), whereas
negative affective states will foster defensive investment decisions, defined as
a tendency to focus primarily on avoiding possible losses rather than obtaining
possible gains in decision making (for example, diversifying assets or pursuing
low-risk assets). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another prediction is that positive
feelings may promote a response pattern of underreaction, defined as a tendency
of being relatively insensitive to market signals in making decisions (often
failing to respond to meaningful signals), whereas negative affective states may
foster a response pattern of over-reaction, defined as a tendency of being
overly sensitive to market signals (often responding to meaningless signals).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to test these hypotheses in an
Internet-based stock investment game combined with an experience-sampling
procedure. Thus, the study will investigate the role of affect in decision
making in an ecologically valid way. If successful, it will have both
theoretical and practical implications. By exploring the critical role of
affective experience in decision making process, this research will enrich the
decision making literature that has been overly cognitive in nature. It also may
help investors enhance their understanding of how, when, and why affective
experience influences investment decision making.&lt;br/&gt;