* 0215897
* Acquisition of a High-Throughput Proteomics Robotic Workstation for the Cornell University Bioresource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Kelvin Lee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 240,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Cornell University to acquire a high-throughput
robotics platform which will perform two-dimensional protein electrophoresis
(2DE) gel spot picking, spot digestion, digest clean-up and spotting to matrix
assisted laser-desorption ionization target plates (MALDI) for mass spectrometry
(MS). This robotics platform will be housed in and managed by the Cornell
University Biotechnology Resource Center (BRC) and it will be accessible by any
investigator at Cornell or at any other institution. The Cornell BRC is a
shared-use and fee-for-service facility encompassing nine core services and
generating $1.5 million in income during FY 2000/2001. The robotic workstation
will enhance the capabilities of the core facility by providing a state-of-the-
art instrument which will automatically perform many of the laborious steps
required in proteomics experiments. Although the definition can be interpreted
broadly, 'proteomics', in this case, refers to the ability to measure changes in
the protein expression of a given biological system with the goal of relating
such changes to various disease states, metabolic states or other features of
biological interest. The acquisition of this instrument will have a positive
impact on the research programs of many of the investigators at Cornell and at
any other institution interested in using this resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the field of proteomics, proteins are collected from biological samples of
interest with the goal of identifying changes in protein expression that may be
interesting. For example, proteins may be collected from various tissue sources
with the goal of identifying changes that relate to the presence or absence of a
particular disease. After collection, the proteins are often separated into a
unique fingerprint of protein expression that serves as a barcode for that
particular sample. These fingerprints or barcodes of protein expression can be
compared with the goal of identifying changes in this pattern. Once proteins of
interest are identified within this barcode, the proteins must be excised from
their polymer matrix, digested with chemicals and placed onto metal plates which
can be placed inside separate instruments for analysis. These steps of excision,
digest and spotting to metal plates is very laborious and the high-throughput
proteomics robotic workstation will be able to perform all of these steps
automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cornell University is uniquely positioned to
benefit from an integrated proteomics robotics platform because of the
relatively large number of established laboratories and investigators that are
committed to proteomics. This commitment is reflected by the newly established
Cornell Proteomics Program which is a faculty-led, University-wide Program. The
CPP currently includes eleven core faculty from eight different units at Cornell
spanning a number of different Departments, Colleges and Research Facilities.
The acquisition of this instrument will have an important impact on several
specific federally-funded research projects (NSF, NIH, USDA) which are being run
by Proteomics Program faculty. Many of these projects involve graduate student
research assistants that are female or from other underrepresented minorities.
Further, many of these graduate student research assistants are funded through
NSF Graduate Research Fellowships. Further, this instrument may be used in
laboratory teaching activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;