* 0215937
* Coping with Community-Based and Personal Trauma: National Response Following September 11th
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 589,987.00

At some point in their lives, most people encounter stressful events that can
have a major impact on the course and direction of their lives. However, after
decades of research, it is clear that many assumptions held in society about how
individuals respond to life's traumas have not survived empirical test. For
example, in contrast to widely held myths about the coping process, the data
fail to demonstrate universal reactions to stressful life events. Despite the
popular belief that emotional and cognitive responses to stress follow a clear
pattern, there is little empirical evidence for an orderly sequence of stages of
response. Understanding the general process of coping will be enhanced through
examination of group and individual differences, as well as similarities, in
response to a variety of negative life experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator started a longitudinal investigation of early emotional,
cognitive, and social responses to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
Using an anonymous Web-based survey methodology, stress and coping data were
collected from a large nationally representative sample of adults and
adolescent/parent dyads (with an over-sampling from 4 cities that have
experienced community-based trauma: New York City, Oklahoma City, Miami, and
Littleton, CO) at 9-14 days, two months, and six months following September 11.
This project continues the prospective study, following the sample with four
specific aims: 1) To investigate the psychological and social processes that
help explain individual differences in response to a national traumatic event;
2) To identify early predictors of long-term adjustment to both the 9/11 attacks
and subsequent events that may occur; 3) To compare responses to the 9/11 events
among individuals who have previously experienced a traumatic event (either
personally or in their communities) with those who have not previously
encountered trauma; and 4) To investigate prospectively the psychological and
social processes that help explain variation in response to various stressful
life events more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unparalleled nationwide
impact of the September 11th attacks, coupled with the large and representative
nature of the existing national sample and the early collection of emotional,
cognitive and social responses to these events, provides a remarkable
opportunity to examine longitudinally how individuals and communities respond to
stressful life events more generally. Such an examination can be conducted
without several specific methodological limitations that have plagued prior
research (e.g., small or demographically homogenous samples). Information
collected in this effort can illuminate the coping process more generally so as
to advance future conceptual work in this area. Moreover, it can further the
understanding of the unique needs of traumatized individuals and provide
information to help identify individuals at risk for subsequent difficulties.
With these data in hand, educational and intervention efforts that are designed
and implemented among health care professionals and the community at large can
be better informed, more cost-effective and more sensitive to the needs of the
populace.&lt;br/&gt;