* 0215873
* Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Research Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Marek Urban, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 133,000.00

This award from the Major Instrumentation program supports the University of
Southern Mississippi with the acquisition of an environmental scanning electron
microscopes with energy dispersive X-ray capability. The instrument provides a
means of high magnification, high resolution analysis of polymeric materials
with minimum sample preparation. Low vacuum technology favors polymer analysis
because non-conductive polymeric surfaces can be imaged. Imaging does not
require that the specimen be coated with a conductive material, thus, saving
time and resources. Furthermore, samples with high water content can also be
imaged with low vacuum technology. Recent developments in low vacuum electron
microscope design provide a number of advantages. Sample chambers can now
accommodate samples up to eight inches in diameter. A simple command on the
computer controller allows selection of either low or high vacuum chamber
pressures. New electron microscopes are equipped with a number of automated
features that improve performance and lifetime of the microscope components.
Automated features now include focus, stigmation, gun saturation, gun alignment,
contrast, and brightness. These adjustments were previously made manually by the
operator and had detrimental impact on filament lifetime when multiple operators
utilized the same electron microscope. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
scanning electron microscopes (SEM) require that samples are free from
contaminates, dry, stable in a high vacuum environment, and electrically
conductive to provide for successful analysis. The labor-intensive sample
preparation techniques required to obtain useable samples often resulted in the
creation of artifacts, thus obstructing the accurate analysis intended. The
advent of the Polymer age in which we live further complicated SEM analysis.
Almost all polymers are non-conductive, many are not stable under high vacuum,
and some are sensitive to the electron beam. These problems led to the invention
of a new generation of SEM. These environmental/low vacuum scanning electron
microscopes (ESEM/LVSEM) have overcome a number of the problems encountered in
traditional SEM analysis of polymers. ESEM/LVSEM utilize partitions to separate
high vacuum areas and low vacuum areas of the SEM. &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of
an ESEM/LVSEM at the University of Southern Mississippi will aid in
characterization of polymers developed for a wide range of applications. The
incorporation of energy dispersive X-ray unit purchased in 1999 will enhance the
capabilities by allowing for elemental analysis of polymers and other materials.
This will accelerate the advancement of research by providing a technologically
advanced tool capable of utilization by multiple operators in our research
center. &lt;br/&gt;