* 0215359
* Localization and Functions of Novel Proteins in Cyanobacterial Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Himadri Pakrasi, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2008
* USD 833,273.00

Photosystem II, a membrane protein complex in cyanobacteria and chloroplasts,
mediates a unique reaction in the biosphere, oxidation of water to molecular
oxygen. Although the exact molecular mechanism of photosynthetic oxygen
evolution remains elusive, it is known that a cluster of manganese, calcium and
chloride ions is essential for this activity. The long-term goal of this project
is to define the roles of various protein components of photosystem II in the
mechanism of water oxidation. Proteomic analysis of a highly active PSII
preparation from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803 has identified four novel
proteins, Sll1390, Sll1252, Sll1414, Sll1130, as well as the PsbP and PsbQ
proteins, which were previously thought to be present only in higher plant and
green algal chloroplasts. This project includes detailed biochemical and genetic
studies to determine the cellular localization, and functions of the above
proteins in cyanobacterial and plant photosystem II.

By harvesting solar radiation, the photosystem II complex contributes to half of
the biomass production on our planet. During the past year, X-ray crystal
structure of a cyanobacterial photosystem II complex has been described at a
3.8A resolution. However, a more detailed understanding of the organization and
functions of the protein components of photosystem II are necessary to fully
comprehend the mechanism of photosynthetic O2-evolution. The proposed
experiments are expected to complement anticipated higher resolution X-ray
crystallographic analysis of photosystem II to gain such a level of
understanding. These experiments will also shed new light on the evolution of
the form and function of photosystem II from cyanobacteria to higher plants. In
addition, this project will provide state-of-the-art research opportunities to a
number of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees.