* 0215189
* SBIR Phase I:  Assistive Reading Device for Persons with Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Irene Schipper, PAGEFLIP
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project proposes to
further improve an assistive device for reading that is currently under
development at the company. The device, an electromechanical page turner, allows
people with upper extremity impairment to conveniently and easily turn pages of
a book in either direction. With the touch of a button, the page turner can
automatically grab the next page, turn it, and keep the book opened flat during
the entire process. If necessary, an alternate activation method can be
employed, such as a sip-and-puff switch, chin switch, or foot pedal. There are
three key phases of the page turning process : page engagement, page restraint,
and page transport. In its current form, the page turner prototype offers
superior solutions to each of these phases and addresses the limitations of
commercially available systems. Several key research problems must now be
addressed in order to improve the reliability of the apparatus. The problems
center on the unit's turnstile element which serves two principle functions:
page restraint and page transport. The turnstile is necessary to hold the book
open flat, as well as to move a page from one side of the book to the other. The
turnstile-on-paper and paper-on-paper frictional properties are important
considerations for successful operation of the page turner. The goal of the
Phase I Project is to investigate optimal contact pressure between the turnstile
and the book page, as well as to exxamine the bending stiffness, coefficient of
friction, and the mechanical characteristics of paper. To achieve the stated
goals, experiments are proposed to test a variety of paper materials and book
sizes, and to develop computer models that will help in parametric studies of
the design. The experimental and computational results will be validated with
the standard test methods recommended by the U.S. Trade Association of the Pulp
and Paper Industry (TAPPI) and Japan Industrial Standards (JIS). The results of
this investigation will allow the company to optimize the design and thereby
improve the performance and reliability of the page turner.

The commercial applications of this project are in the area of assistive home-
care technology for the elderly and disabled. A page turner would be
particularly beneficial to people with limited bilateral upper extremity
function caused by neurological impairment, musculoskeletal problems, and
generalized weakness. The proposed device would serve to enhance their quality
of life by improving their independence in this activity of daily living.