* 0215622
* Kinship and Behavior in Wild Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* John Mitani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 01/31/2007
* USD 271,387.00

This project investigates the effects of kinship on the behavior of wild
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Kinship plays an important role in determining
how animals and humans behave. Evolutionary theory predicts that genetically
related animals will develop close affiliative ties through the process of kin
selection. Empirical observations are often consistent with this prediction.
Despite the match between theory and observation, the explanatory power of kin
selection continues to be debated. While some question whether the effects of
kin selection have been overestimated, others continue to show how kinship can
be used to explain the evolution of several aspects of animal social behavior.
This research will provide behavioral observations of chimpanzees living in an
unusually large community at Ngogo, Kibale National Park, Uganda. These
observations will be combined with genealogical information derived from
laboratory analyses of genetic markers from known individuals. Together, these
data will be used to address five, unresolved questions regarding the impact of
kinship on wild chimpanzee behavior and demography: (1) does kinship affect
patterns of cooperation among male chimpanzees?, (2) do male and female
chimpanzees associate non-randomly with their genetic relatives?, (3) do male
chimpanzees share meat reciprocally with kin?, (4) are community males more
closely related to each other than are females?, (5) do male chimpanzees use
calls to recognize their genetic relatives? This project has broad theoretical,
empirical, and practical significance. Theoretically, this research will
contribute to the development of evolutionary models that are constructed to
explain why animals behave in the way that they do. Empirically, this study will
fill important gaps in our understanding of the behavior of our closest living
relatives. Practically, research activities will help to safeguard one of the
last vestiges of rainforest in East Africa; training and support of graduate
students and Third World scientists will ensure that these conservation efforts
are maintained in the future.