* 0215723
* Development of a Down-hole Magnetic Susceptibility Logger and Soil Magnetic Laboratory for Archaeological and Soils Investigations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Rinita Dalan, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 92,173.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
award, Dr. Rinita Dalan will collaborate with Bartington Instruments Ltd. to
develop a down-hole magnetic susceptibility logger appropriate for
archaeological and other near-surface applications. Surficial processes affect
soil magnetic properties and in depositional contexts it is possible to use
magnetic variation over depth both to identify individual buried surfaces and to
gain insight into the factors responsible for their magnetic alteration. Based
on preliminary data, Dr. Dalan believes that humanly modified surfaces can be
distinguishable in this way. Thus, in principle, a magnetic susceptibility
logger could be used as a prospection device to locate and to determine the
extent of archaeological sites. Because the logger currently under development
can measure sections up to 1.6 meters in depth and be inserted within a 1"
diameter hole, it has the potential for widespread
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with Bartington Instruments Ltd. Dr Dalan will
help to develop a stage two prototype. Both field and laboratory tests will be
conducted and experiments will compare the performance of the second-generation
prototype to the original and be used to provide advice on further improvements.
Performance will be evaluated in terms of a number of variables including
repeatability (noise), sensitivity, stability and resolution. In addition, speed
and ease of field operation as well as flexibility of application will be
evaluated. Field and laboratory tests, together with analysis and presentation
will be conducted over a period of 1.5 years. The southern lake Agassiz Region,
an archaeologically important area easily accessible to Dr. Dalan provides a set
of diverse soil and sedimentary environments and thus offers an excellent test
situation. Three/four sites, most archaeologically examined and pedologically
described give a controlled context. In addition to down hole measurements,
sediment samples will be collected for laboratory
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important for several reasons. It
will provide archaeologists and soil scientists with the ability to quickly and
easily plot variation in magnetic susceptibility over depth and offer insight
into the sediment characteristics responsible for this variation. It will also
play a significant role in undergraduate student training. Dr. Dalan will
actively involve Moorehead State University undergraduates in both laboratory
and field aspects of the research. The project provides an excellent vehicle to
teach principles of archaeology, geophysics and soil science and hopefully will
provide an experience which encourages students to pursue careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;