* 0215426
* Policy Networks and Federal Enforcement: Do Local Networks Enhance NPDES Permit Enforcement?
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* John Scholz, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/2005
* USD 201,063.00

This research investigates the little-studied interaction between federal
agencies and local policy networks concerned with the same policy arenas. The
project extends Ostrom's (1990) framework to develop the hypothesis that dense,
overlapping, locally-oriented networks of shareholders involved in "governing
the commons" will increase both enforcement and compliance with' federal
regulations. While Ostrom's analysis clarifies the potentially adverse impact of
central regulatory policies on local institutions that "govern the commons",
this project investigates the potentially beneficial impact that local networks
may have on federal policies in the more complex federal system in America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water resource management provides the critical research
site for observing the interaction between two institutional approaches to the
governance of water usage; the EPA's "first generation" federal permit system
created by the Clean Water Act of 1972, and the local watershed management
networks and institutions that have evolved during the last decade to resolve
pollution and water usage issues not addressed by the federal permit system
(Kraft and Vig 2000). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the complex institutional
environment of the U.S. Federalist system, water policy networks may involve
pollution dischargers, stakeholders affected by pollution, and in particular the
elected and administrative officials from federal, state, and local institutions
that have local jurisdiction over water management issues. Effective networks
can provide cooperative advantages to its members comparable to those of the
self-organized institutions studied by Ostrom (1990). We explore three
implications of this perspective for the interaction between local networks and
federal enforcement: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Local Sanction Hypothesis: Effective
networks increase compliance.&lt;br/&gt;*Magnification Hypothesis: Effective
networks increase the deterrence impact of enforcement actions on compliance.
&lt;br/&gt;* Concentration Hypothesis: Effective networks increase inspection
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these hypotheses, the project
integrates two independent traditions that study opposite halves of the
enforcement system: the democratic control of bureaucracy literature that
analyzes political influence on regulatory enforcement actions, and the
deterrence literature that analyzes the deterrence effects of enforcement
actions on compliance. The first phase of research uses regression analysis
based on available archival records of all permit holders to test the
hypotheses, while the second phase develops direct measures of local networks
for a sample of permit holders to provide a more intensive analysis:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase One: The first phase analyzes quarterly enforcement
and compliance data from the EP A's Permit Compliance System (PCS) for the full
period for which data are available, from 1994 to present. The required
supplementary data on permit holders and local policy networks will be appended
from census and governmental databases. We apply Feinstein's detection-
controlled estimation procedure (Feinstein 1989, 1990) to simultaneously
estimate enforcement actions and compliance responses for all major permit
holders active throughout this period. Empirical results from phase-one analysis
are then used for developing the phase-two sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase
Two: The second phase has five specific goals: I) develop survey-based data on
the local policy networks relevant to the permit enforcement and compliance
system for a sample of permit holders, 2) calculate survey-based measures of
network capabilities and analyze the link between these measures and the county-
level factors from the previous analysis, 3) repeat phase one tests with the
improved measures, 4) extend phase one tests to include the analysis of beliefs
and attitudes related to compliance, and 5) develop confirmatory case studies in
four selected communities. The project will produce journal articles in the
fields of the political economy of institutions, bureaucratic controls, and
enforcement and deterrence theory. Detailed efficiency analysis of
&lt;br/&gt;enforcement will be directly relevant to EPA enforcement policies.
Finally a book will integrate project findings with the broader research context
of the design of governance institutions, with a focus on the advantages,
limitations, and interactions between federal and local approaches to "governing
the commons." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;