* 0215451
* Doctoral Research in Political Science: Business Interests, Political Parties and the State in Post-Socialist Europe
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Xiaobo Lu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,239.00





This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation studies the causes of
varying forms of political corruption observed in post-socialist Eastern Europe.
Most attention in the academic literature has hovered around the orthodox debate
about institutional reform and the related policy issue of privatization.
Consequently, throughout the 12 years of reform, the continued large involvement
of the state in the economy has received little consideration and its resulting
impact is not well understood.

Increasing evidence suggests that such interactions, collaborations, and often
collusion and violence between the state and economic actors are widespread.
These interactions can be classified according to their form. However, what
causes these interactions to assume a particular form is one of the major
puzzles facing political scientists studying post-socialist states. This study
is designed to explain outcomes in various countries. Since empirical evidence
shows that extensive relations between the state and the leading 200 firms, are
a given in post-socialist economies, how can we explain the widely varying
outcomes of such links? When do links with the state facilitate firm development
(Poland), when do they spiral into widespread asset-stripping (Romania) and when
do they create a class of interest holders that is ready to enter into a violent
conflict with the state (Bulgaria)?

This study approaches the questions above by proposing a theory that links the
patterns of access to political power and alternation in government (IV) and the
resulting dynamic of state actor-economic actor interaction (DV). The research
has testable hypotheses generated through close case studies and original data
on the network connections between firms and the state in Poland, Romania and
Bulgaria. It uses regression analysis to test these hypotheses against a larger
set of post-socialist cases. This study will contribute to the debate on state-
economy relations in post-socialism by providing a framework through which to
explain the differences between various countries. The data, research and
conclusions are also a valuable asset to inquiries on the behavior of political
parties, interest groups and bureaucracies in post-socialism.

