* 0215232
* Collaborative Research: California Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Cheryl Peach, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2007
* USD 823,397.00

This award provides support to establish a COSEE Center in California with three
distributed complementary partners: the Lawrence Hall of Science on the campus
of the University of California at Berkeley (informal science partner), Scripps
Institution-University of California San Diego (research partner) and Monterey
Peninsula College (a public community college and formal education partner) in
Monterey. The activities of the proposed COSEE will be organized around four
primary initiatives: 1) an outreach effort based at Scripps to engage ocean
scientists in K-14 education and the interpretation of their research, 2) the
development of an undergraduate course Communicating Ocean Science designed to
increase the involvement of undergraduates, graduate students and scientists in
educational outreach, 3) the development of an Ocean Careers web site and 4)
developing and testing an Ocean Immersion Site for K-12 education based at
Scripps to serve the large and culturally diverse population of the San Diego
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of this COSEE will enhance the integration
of research and education in California by linking some of the best ocean
science researchers in the world to science education in both formal and
informal settings. The California COSEE's focus on working with schools and
school districts in the diverse San Diego area will provide additional resources
to strengthen science education and increase access to knowledge and careers
among underrepresented populations. Several of the initiatives in this proposal
will add diversity and balance to the mosaic of approaches and activities to be
implemented by the COSEE network. In particular, the extension model is a unique
'user-centered' approach to getting more scientists involved that clearly needs
to be developed and its effectiveness assessed. The undergraduate course in
communicating science has potential as a professional development vehicle for
college faculty, graduate students and undergraduate majors; this component is
being co-funded by NSF's Division of Undergraduate Education. The DUE's Advanced
Technology Education program is also providing co-funding for the Careers
website at Monterey Peninsula College. &lt;br/&gt;