* 0215927
* Acquisition of Supercritical Fluid Extraction and Countercurrent Chromatography Equipment for the Development of a "Green" Natural Products Isolation Laboratory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Craig Dodson, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 08/31/2004
* USD 77,742.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Mesa State College will acquire preparative scale
supercritical fluid (SCF) extraction equipment, preparative scale centrifugal
countercurrent chromatography (CCC) equipment with UV detector, and accessories
. This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas: a) plant secondary
metabolites as mediators of trophic interactions in a tropical forest community;
b) phytochemical investigation of cryptobiotic crusts and their alleged
allelopathic interaction with non-native grasses; c) phytochemistry of
neotropical piper species related to piper cenocladum and their role in defense
against attine ant species; d) caterpillars of the Costa Rican rain forest; e)
chemical mediation of trophic cascades in alfalfa and implications for
biological control; and f) development of methodologies utilizing supercritical
CO2 as a reaction solvent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The green approach to natural
products isolation that will be developed with this equipment is timely and will
benefit students in their future employment. In addition, these techniques could
be of great value to scientists in the developing nations of Latin America whose
immense biodiversity represents a wealth of undiscovered natural products of
enormous potential. Therefore, scientists from Latin America who would otherwise
not have access to SCF and CCC equipment will collaborate with the PI.