* 0215093
* SBIR Phase I:Use of Inducible Antimicrobial Peptides for Rapid Diagnosis, Prevention, and Management of Disease in Finfish Aquaculture
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,03/31/2003
* James Carlberg, KENT SEATECH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2003
* USD 99,548.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I Project proposes to
develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for management of infectious
pathogens in finfish such as the hybrid striped bass (HSB). HSB aquaculture has
become the fourth largest form of U.S. fish production. Prior research by the
investigators on the molecules involved in the innate, non specific immunity of
HSB has led to the discovery, cloning, and characterization of a novel,
cysteine-rich, antimicrobial peptide (AMP) that has been named bass-hepcidin.
Hepcidin homologs are present in many finfish species. Bass-hepcidin is strongly
expressed in the liver upon experimental challenge with the devastating
aquaculture pathogen Streptococcus iniae. Phase I research objectives include:
1) synthesis and purification of the peptide, 2) development of a polyclonal
antibody and ELISA assay), 3) testing of the minimum inhibitory concentration of
the peptide against important aquaculture, agriculture, and human pathogens, and
4) measurement of gene expression in finfish tissues in experimental challenges
with pathogenic bacteria using Northern blots/rtPCR. If successful, this project
will allow development of cost-effective test kits for rapid diagnosis of
bacterial and fungal infections in several species of cultured finfish.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of aquaculture. On a
worldwide basis, disease costs aquaculture producers more than $3 billion
annually. The development of a cost-effective immunoassay will allow rapid
diagnosis of bacterial and fungal infections in HSB and other commercially
important cultured finfish.