* 0215393
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Genomics Facility in Support of the URI Environmental Biotechnology Initiative
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* David Nelson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Rhode Island to acquire an
automated DNA sequencer and supporting equipment. The Environmental
Biotechnology Initiative (EBI) at the University of Rhode Island was developed
to promote biotechnology at the institution through research, teaching, and
outreach. Four central facilities are envisioned for the EBI - Imaging, Genomics
and Proteomics, Transgenics, and Bioinformatics. This grant award will establish
the URI Genomics Facility by providing funds for the acquisition of a DNA
sequencer and ancillary equipment dedicated for sample preparation.
Additionally, funds to support the hire of a Research Associate to manage and
operate the facility are provided by this award and matching funds from the
University of Rhode Island. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation and
Research Associate will support the currently funded research activities of the
three Principal Investigators (PIs) and eight other major users in five separate
departments in three different colleges at the university. The funded research
projects of the PIs include: studies of gene regulation in the causative agent
of Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi), studies of gene regulation in Vibrio
anguillarum (a major bacterial pathogen of farmed salmon and other fish),
determination of the bacterial species succession of Narragansett Bay,
identification of the microbes that inhabit the deep ocean biosphere,
determination of the regulation of the molecular mechanisms of osmoregulation in
fish, identification of the microbes that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of
salmon, and population genetics of selected marine finfish (e.g., haddock and
tautog). The establishment of the Genomics Facility will allow user directed DNA
sequencing with more rapid turnaround and lower costs then is presently
available to URI-based investigators, who are forced to contract with other
academic or commercial sequencing facilities. It also is anticipated that
numerous other investigators at URI will make use of the
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to study life at the DNA level has
fundamentally changed almost every aspect of research in the life sciences. The
high sample throughput afforded by automated DNA sequencers allows researchers
to address questions concerning genetic diversity and gene regulation that were
unapproachable only a few years ago. The Genomics Facility also will play an
integral role in training our students in state-of-the-art research
methodologies and the art of scientific investigation. The Research Associate
will work with interested faculty to develop and refine laboratory exercises in
molecular biology that include the theory and practice of the DNA sequencer
purchased with these funds. Additionally, it is anticipated that the acquisition
of Genomics Facility will enhance the ability to attract new graduate students.
URI has actively engaged in the recruitment of students from under-represented
groups for some years to enhance the number and quality of such students in our
graduate programs in the biological sciences. The availability of this core
facility to support the research training of all students is expected to enhance
recruitment and retention of students from under-represented groups. The
combination of improved research infrastructure and training opportunities will
enable URI faculty to better compete for research funds, new faculty, and
students. &lt;br/&gt;