* 0215775
* MRI-RUI: Acquisition of the C1 Confocal Microscopy System for Cellular Analysis in the Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Shyamal Majumdar, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 144,058.00

Abstract:

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert A. Kurt at Lafayette College to purchase
a Confocal Microscopy System. The confocal system is capable of three-color
fluorescent imaging and three-dimensional cellular analysis. Consequently, three
different proteins can be analyzed with respect to each other and their location
within a cell. This is ideal for studying protein-protein or cell-cell
interactions and to discern the potential function of recently identified
proteins. With the acquisition of this instrument many exciting projects can be
carried out. The Confocal Microscopy System will enable Lafayette faculty to
modify and enhance courses to include training in sophisticated research
techniques, expand the areas of research for both students and faculty, and
finally contribute to the advancement of knowledge within the field of
biological science by exploring molecular and cellular interactions as they
occur within living cells.

The research projects to be performed with this instrument will focus on a
variety of biological sciences including cellular, molecular, developmental
biology and immunology. Some of the projects supported in this proposal include
an examination of the molecular organization of G protein coupled receptors and
associated molecules during T cell migration. For this project proteins utilized
by T cells for migration will be labeled so that protein-protein interactions
can be investigated as the T cells respond to chemokines. The chemokine receptor
signaling cascade in T cells is poorly defined, thus this project should uncover
some of the basic steps utilized for T-cell migration. Another project that will
be carried out with the microscope will be an examination of the cross-
regulation between T cell and chemokine receptor signaling pathways. This
project will examine the interactions between proteins utilized by both the TCR
and chemokine receptor signaling pathways in order to understand how these
different pathways influence each other. Neural development and communication in
Drosophila melanogaster is another area of research and training that will be
enhanced with the confocal microscopy system. In particular the instrument will
aid in the studies of bang-sensitive mutants. One project will investigate the
effects of these mutants on mitochondria and their function. Another set of
experiments is to examine the ability of third instar larvae of bang-sensitive
mitochondria to maintain their electrochemical gradient.

The broader impact of the proposal is that these projects will be carried out by
undergraduate students and as a result facilitate the research, research
training and education of students for careers in science. Some of the research
training activities in the Department of Biology at Lafayette College include
Independent Study, Honors Thesis, the Excel Scholar Program, and research-
oriented courses such as Electron Microscopy and Tissue Culture courses. Thus,
the Confocal Microscopy System will be utilized to further strengthen the
curriculum and research in Biological Sciences at Lafayette College. The Biology
Department has a long history of encouraging student participation in research.
By graduation many majors have had at least two semesters of extensive research
experience. Often, this in depth exposure to research fuels a desire to pursue
post-graduate study. Additionally, several courses will be modified to include
training in specimen preparation and analysis with confocal fluorescence
microscopy. Consequently, it is anticipated that there will be three faculty
members and approximately fifty students each year that will use the instrument.