* 0215946
* Acquisition of a FEI Quanta 400 Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope with Oxford E400 EDS  in Support of Research and Training in the Life and Physical Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* John Beneski, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2005
* USD 275,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. John
T. Beneski at West Chester University to purchase an Environmental Scanning
Electron Microscope with an EDS system. The addition of this equipment to West
Chester University will significantly increase the research opportunities for
our faculty and students (particularly in the sciences), enhance our ability to
attract new students from the widest diversity of backgrounds, enhance our
ability to train students in state-of-the-art marketable skills, and provide new
opportunities for our faculty and students to collaborate with scientists from
the local high-tech corridor of biotechnology-related industries.&lt;br/&gt;The
new electron microscope will be used extensively by faculty and students in the
Departments of Biology, Geology &amp; Astronomy, and Chemistry to investigate a
wide variety of problems including: (1) a taxonomic investigation of bryophytes;
(2) the formation, structure, composition, and physiology of urine spheres in
uricotelic vertebrates; (3) the examination of various halophilic bacteria
isolated from ancient (250 mya and older) surface sterilized salt crystals; and
(4) the dynamics of Mid-Cretaceous ocean circulation. Dr. Beneski will provide
additional opportunities for students by actively promoting independent student
research projects and internships. In addition to research and training, the new
SEM/EDS will be used as a recruitment tool for attracting new science majors
from both traditional and non-traditional backgrounds. To accomplish this, Dr.
Beneski will expand the hands-on demonstrations and tours that showcase the
imaging technologies available in the Center for Advanced Scientific Imaging;
these demonstrations and tours are presented to the potential students that
regularly visit the University as part of existing programs targeting area high
schools, transfer students, and underserved groups.&lt;br/&gt;West Chester
University's continued growth in providing state-of-the-art imaging technologies
and resources not only serves the immediate and future needs of our faculty and
students in the sciences, it also mirrors a growing emphasis on the sciences and
technology by the State of Pennsylvania and PA State System of Higher Education.
Both of these institutions expect West Chester University to recruit and train
more students in the sciences and technology. The acquisition of the requested
equipment is a critical step in the continued development of Center for Advanced
Scientific Imaging as a key resource for research and research training at West
Chester University. &lt;br/&gt;