* 0215545
* Role of Accessory Proteins P50/P55 in SnoRNP Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* E Stuart Maxwell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 07/31/2006
* USD 419,301.00

The small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) play essential roles in eukaryotic ribosome
biosynthesis. Critical snoRNA functions include directing cleavage of the pre-
ribosomal RNA precursor and guiding the modification of specific nucleotides in
the ribosomal RNAs. More than 100 snoRNAs have been identified in the nucleolus,
thus establishing the snoRNAs as the largest class of small stable RNAs found in
eukaryotic cells. Investigations have demonstrated that the box C/D and H/ACA
snoRNAs exhibit evolutionarily conserved sequences and folded structures
characteristic of each family. Each of these RNA motifs bind family-specific
proteins to establish the snoRNA:protein (snoRNP) complex. Both the box C/D and
H/ACA snoRNA motifs and their associated core proteins are required for snoRNA
processing, snoRNP transport, and snoRNA-guided nucleotide modification of
ribosomal RNAs. Most recently, two novel accessory proteins have been identified
that are also essential for snoRNP synthesis. Accessory proteins p50 and p55
interact with the snoRNP core complex in the nucleoplasm and regulate snoRNP
production. Despite their critical nature, nothing is yet known about how
p50/p55 function in the synthesis of new snoRNP complexes. Therefore, the goals
of this research are twofold. First, p50/p55's role in snoRNP biogenesis will be
examined in vivo in the Xenopus oocyte nucleus. Microinjection experiments will
determine the possible role of these accessory proteins for snoRNP assembly in
the nucleoplasm as well as their potential function in transporting mature
snoRNP complexes into the nucleolus. Second, structural studies will define the
interactions of p50/p55 with the box C/D core snoRNP complex, providing
mechanistic details of accessory protein function in regulating the snoRNP
biosynthetic pathway.

p50 and p55 are the first identified snoRNP accessory proteins essential for
snoRNP biosynthesis. Defining their functional roles will provide fundamental
insight into the snoRNA/snoRNP biosynthetic pathway. The involvement of p50/p55
in other nucleoplasmic events such as chromatin remodeling and RNA synthesis has
suggested that p50 and p55 are multifunctional proteins and may serve as
"molecular bridges" to coordinate various processes in the eukaryotic nucleus.
Therefore, this research has the potential to impact our basic understanding of
RNA metabolism in the eukaryotic nucleus and reveal new regulatory paradigms of
gene expression.