* 0215417
* Lon-Mediated Regulation of Type III Protein Secretion in Pseudomonas Syringae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Hutcheson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The pathogenicity and host range of Pseudomonas syringae, a plant
pathogenic bacterium, has been linked to the activities of a type III protein
secretion system (TTSS) that essentially injects bacterial proteins into cells
of its host. These injected proteins alter the host cells to assist the growth
of the bacterium in susceptible plants, but in resistant plants these proteins
serve as a signal to initiate cellular defense mechanisms associated with
disease resistance. The assembly of the TTSS in P. syringae is induced during
the interaction with host cells and is coordinated by a complex genetic
regulatory system. Positive- and negative-acting regulatory factors that control
assembly of the TTSS have been identified. This project will elucidate how these
regulatory factors transduce signals produced during the interaction with the
host to regulate and coordinate assembly of the TTSS. This research will
determine how the activity of a specific regulatory protease is controlled
during the disease process, define the role of another regulatory protein, HrpV,
in coordinating the assembly of the TTSS, examine a possible gating mechanism
controlling when proteins are released from the bacteria, and elucidate how the
activities of key transcriptional factors are modulated. The proposed
experiments will provide new insight into molecular mechanisms for controlling
bacterial disease and disease resistance in plants, but since several bacterial
pathogens of mammals use a very similar mechanism, this research may have
application to managing bacterial diseases of mammalian hosts. &lt;br/&gt;