* 0215443
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS) - Beowulf Linux Cluster Project
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Thomas Lucas, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 45,961.00

NSF Proposal Number: DMS-0215443&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Kawczak, Cai, Lucas, Sun, and
Zhu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Mathematics at the University of North&lt;br/&gt;Carolina at Charlotte will
purchase computer equipment&lt;br/&gt;which will be dedicated to the support of
research in the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences. The equipment will be used for
several &lt;br/&gt;research projects, including in particular: a)
fast&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for wave scattering in layered media
for&lt;br/&gt;electronic packaging and geophysical exploration, b) a PDE
&lt;br/&gt;based nonlinear least squares approach to imaging
in&lt;br/&gt;diffusion tomography, c) tests for comparing mark-
speciffic&lt;br/&gt;hazards, d) pricing lookback-Asian options. The
newly&lt;br/&gt;established Ph.D. program in Applied Mathematics
is&lt;br/&gt;developing very rapidly and so are the demands for
the&lt;br/&gt;computing power coming from the body of graduate
students&lt;br/&gt;and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematics
Department has played a prominent role in&lt;br/&gt;the University's recent
change in status to a doctoral status&lt;br/&gt;by the state and continues to do
so as the University&lt;br/&gt;aggressively pushes its next goal of becoming
designated&lt;br/&gt;as Research Extensive. The availability of a high
performance&lt;br/&gt;computing server will be an integral part of the
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Department's continuing push to be at the forefront of
the&lt;br/&gt;University's research enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;