* 0215690
* Acquisition of an Analytical Ultracentrifuge for Use in Biochemistry, Structural Biology and Polymer Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Daniel Raleigh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 223,115.00

&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to the State University of
New&lt;br/&gt;York at Stony Brook under the direction of Dr. Raleigh for the
acquisition of an analytical ultracentrifuge.&lt;br/&gt;The analytical
ultracentrifuge was first developed more than 50 years ago&lt;br/&gt;and its
invention lead to a Nobel Prize. Since that time it has evolved&lt;br/&gt;from a
custom made piece of specialized apparatus to an essential
everyday&lt;br/&gt;tool for the investigation of basic biochemistry and
chemistry. Analytical&lt;br/&gt;ultracentrifugation is the method of choice for
studying the properties of&lt;br/&gt;large molecules that associate in solution.
It is applicable to biological&lt;br/&gt;and non-biological systems and it is
now an important research tool in&lt;br/&gt;biochemistry, structural biology and
polymer science. The ranges of&lt;br/&gt;applications of this technique are
immense and are rapidly increasing.&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of an analytical
ultracentrifuge will complement major ongoing&lt;br/&gt;initiatives in polymer
science and in structural biology and biochemistry&lt;br/&gt;at SUNY Stony
Brook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Ten investigators representing five academic
departments at SUNY Stony&lt;br/&gt;Brook will conduct basic research projects.
Their research interests span&lt;br/&gt;the range from the development of new
materials, to biology, polymer&lt;br/&gt;chemistry, enzyme mechanisms, protein
dynamics and folding, and viral&lt;br/&gt;assembly. Together they supervise more
than 90 researchers. Professor Chu&lt;br/&gt;will use the instrument in his
investigations of novel vesicle structures&lt;br/&gt;and surfactants formed by
modified fullerenes. These new materials have a&lt;br/&gt;range of potential
applications including delivery agents. Professor Kisker&lt;br/&gt;will use the
ultracentrifugation in her studies of DNA repair while&lt;br/&gt;Professor de
Los Santos will make use of the instrument in his studies of&lt;br/&gt;damaged
DNA. DNA repair is essential for maintaining the correct
genetic&lt;br/&gt;information. Mutations are the primary cause of hereditary
diseases, as&lt;br/&gt;well as cancer, and may also be involved in aging.
Professors' London and&lt;br/&gt;Smith will investigate fundamental issues in
membrane protein structure and&lt;br/&gt;folding and the ultracentrifuge will
play an important role in their work.&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated that 30 % of all
proteins are membrane proteins but very&lt;br/&gt;little is known about their
structure and folding despite the fact that&lt;br/&gt;they play a central role
in many important biological processes. Professor&lt;br/&gt;Raleigh will use the
instrument in his studies of the process of protein&lt;br/&gt;folding. The
protein-folding problem refers to the mechanism by which an&lt;br/&gt;initially
unfolded protein achieves its final functional structure. It has&lt;br/&gt;long
been known that the linear sequence of aminoacids dictates the
final&lt;br/&gt;folded structure of proteins but the rules that govern this key
assembly&lt;br/&gt;process are still not understood. Professor Sampson will use
the instrument&lt;br/&gt;in her studies of the important enzyme cholesterol
oxidase, which is used&lt;br/&gt;as a cholesterol sensor. Professor Sampson and
Professor Tonge will make&lt;br/&gt;use of the instrument in their basic studies
of enzyme functions while the&lt;br/&gt;laboratory of Professor Scarlata will
apply the instrument to studies of&lt;br/&gt;viral assembly. Professor
Schindelin will use the ultracentrifuge in his&lt;br/&gt;studies of the proteins
involved in the biosynthesis of critical
molybdenum&lt;br/&gt;cofactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The consortium of
investigators who will make use of the analytical&lt;br/&gt;ultracentrifuge
study fundamental problems in biology, biochemistry and&lt;br/&gt;polymer
chemistry. Many biologically important molecules as well as many&lt;br/&gt;man
made macromolecules work in tandem with closely associated
partners.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the detailed nature of these interactions is
key to&lt;br/&gt;understanding these complex systems. An analytical
ultracentrifuge is&lt;br/&gt;required for these studies. Examples taken from
work at SUNY Stony Brook&lt;br/&gt;include studies of critical proteins involved
in the repair of damaged&lt;br/&gt;genetic material, the assembly of viruses,
the behavior of novel new&lt;br/&gt;materials made from C60 ("buckyball"
derivatives), and studies of the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental processes by which
proteins acquire their biologically active&lt;br/&gt;state. The instrument will
also greatly enhance the infrastructure for&lt;br/&gt;training graduate students
at SUNY Stony Brook and will also benefit&lt;br/&gt;researchers at nearby
Brookhaven National Laboratory