* 0215809
* MRI/RUI Proposal for Instrumentation of Environmental Research Laboratories
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Mary Roth, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2004
* USD 366,364.00

Through the Major Research Instrumentation Program, 18 instruments will be
purchased to provide an instrumentation framework for an integrated
environmental research program at Lafayette College. The acquisition of these
instruments, when coupled with the existing equipment and the recently initiated
renovation of the laboratory space within the department, will produce a
laboratory environment in which faculty can conduct high quality research
related to the environment and provide advanced undergraduate students the
opportunity to explore the underlying scientific and technical principals for a
wide range of environmental measurement techniques.

The project provides the advanced instrumentation required to adequately address
the research needs of the sophisticated environmental problems facing the world
today and provides training opportunities to undergraduates in research related
to the environment. Faculty members will use the proposed equipment to expand
their current environmental research programs of which most are conducted with
undergraduates. In addition, the proposed equipment would benefit up to 21
courses offered by 7 faculty at Lafayette College. Approximately 200
undergraduate students per year are enrolled in these courses and will use the
equipment to develop valuable laboratory and research skills. Typically 12 to 18
of these students will carry these skills into Independent Study courses, Thesis
projects or sponsored research with faculty during their junior or senior years.
A majority of these research students will continue their research in graduate
programs.

The intellectual merits of this project are threefold: the enhancement of the
research opportunities for both faculty and advanced undergraduate students; the
improvement of student learning; and development of new pedagogical methods of
laboratory instruction.

The broader impacts of this project include the development of outreach programs
directed primarily towards underrepresented groups encouraging participants to
explore environmental studies, the dissemination of pedagogical developments
through conference presentations and journal articles, the development of multi-
and interdisciplinary courses within the environmental programs offered
institution wide and the training of undergraduate researchers who will carry
their experience on to various industries or graduate programs.