* 0215878
* Development of a High Resolution Universal Resonance Raman Probe for Challenging Systems in Chemistry and Materials Science
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Peter Chen, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Wade N. Sisk
* 01/31/2007
* USD 377,065.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Prof. Peter
C. Chen of Spelman College will develop a high resolution universal resonance
Raman probe for studies in chemistry and materials science. The probe, which
would use nonlinear resonance Raman spectroscopy for the selective
identification and studies of species, would be able to provide resonance Raman
spectra over an exceptionally broad range of input wavelengths (220-1800 nm).
Furthermore, this instrument will be able to provide this information with very
high spatial, spectral and temporal resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
universal resonance Raman probe will be useful for non-intrusive probing of
challenging but important samples such as high temperature, highly reactive gas
phase samples that may contain complex mixtures and interfering species. Such
challenging conditions are found in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and related
processes for creating new high-tech materials. Undergraduate students from
groups that are underrepresented in the sciences (Spelman College is an
historically black women's college) will help design, construct and test this
new instrument on a CVD system. These CVD experiments will be carried out in
collaboration with scientists at Microcoating Technologies, a private company
that specializes in combustion CVD. &lt;br/&gt;