* 0215693
* Acquisition of a Quantum Design PPMS for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 178,598.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program provides supports for
acquisition of a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS).
The PPMS is essential for a broad research collaboration between the Physics and
Chemistry Departments at Rutgers U., New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT),
various other universities, a national laboratory, and industrial labs. The
instrument will be used in a wide range of research, including research on the
microscopic electronic/magnetic/structural inhomogeneity found in functional
oxides, and its corresponding roles in the macroscopic physical response of
these materials, such as magnetoresistance, magnetic permeability, piezoelectric
constants, and linear/non-linear optical characteristics. The success of these
research activities will depend on a speedy characterization of various material
properties, and the PPMS will be essential for this purpose.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPMS will be directly used for education of
undergraduate students as well as high school students from underrepresented
groups. New experiments for an undergraduate class will be developed at the
Department of Physics &amp; Astronomy (Rutgers U.). In addition, T. Tyson at
NJIT will incorporate magneto-transport and other magnetic experiments on
superconducting cuprates to a seven-week summer workshop for high school
students in the Newark area. Sabya Guha (Technician at Rutgers) will manage the
maintenance and operation of the PPMS so that the safety of inexperienced
students/users will be ensured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation
program supports Rutgers Univ New Brunswick with the acquisition of a Quantum
Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS), a multi-functional and
user-friendly instrument. The PPMS can be used for measurements of a wide range
of physical properties in complex materials. It will be essential for a broad
research collaboration between Physics and Chemistry Departments at Rutgers, New
Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), various other universities, a national
laboratory, and industrial labs. Modern electronic and magnetic devices often
utilize the physical response of materials when subjected to external influences
such as magnetic or electric fields, pressure, or optical irradiation. Recent
investigation suggests that the large-scale physical response can be drastically
enhanced in materials with microscopic electronic/magnetic/structural
inhomogeneity. Thus, this enhanced response in microscopically inhomogeneous
materials can provide the scientific underpinning for future technologies. The
research will focus on understanding as well as controlling the inter-
relationship between the microscopic inhomogeneity and macroscopic physical
response. The success of this project will critically depend on a comprehensive
characterization of various materials, and the PPMS will be essential for this
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPMS will be used directly for the education
of undergraduate students as well as high school students from underrepresented
groups. New experiments for an undergraduate class will be developed at the
Department of Physics &amp; Astronomy. Furthermore, T. Tyson at NJIT, will add
magneto-transport and other magnetic experiments on superconducting cuprates to
a seven-week summer workshop for underrepresented high school students in the
Newark area &lt;br/&gt;