* 0215759
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Proteome Analysis Core
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Bernlohr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 490,891.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Minnesota-St. Paul, under the
supervision of Dr. David A. Bernlohr to purchase equipment and technology in a
dedicated facility termed the proteome analysis core. The resources allocated to
the proteome analysis core will be used to develop a core facility for rapid,
quantitative, high-volume detection of proteins from plants, animals, insects
and bacteria. The rapid detection and identification of large numbers of
specific proteins from mixtures and extracts is technically difficult, but is
essential for a variety of biological applications including bio-identification,
evaluation of treatment or conditions (bio-responses) and assessment of
development (crop growth). The first goal of the project is to provide
researchers with the experimental technology necessary to assess expression of
fluorescently labeled protein samples using nano-scale separation methodologies.
The second component of the technology is the utilization of a robotically
driven sample analysis workstation that will interface with an existing mass
spectrometry facility. The combination of fluorescence-based protein detection
coupled with rapid sample identification via mass spectrometry allows the user
accurate identification of large numbers of proteins for a variety of basic and
translational research needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proteome
analysis core will instruct researchers on the use of differential in-gel
electrophoresis for the analysis of fluorescently labeled proteins. The
researcher will in turn be able to identify changes in protein expression or
protein modification (precursor-product relationship). Using a robotically
driven analysis system, target proteins will be harvested from the gel,
enzymatically digested, and the produced peptides spotted onto a MALDI plate.
The peptides are subsequently analyzed via mass spectrometry and using genome
databases, identify proteins of interest. The short time of analysis coupled
with robotically driven workstation allows for scale-up and the analysis of
hundreds of samples of proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major theme of the
proteome analysis core is one of training and education. As opposed to an
analytical service facility, the proteome analysis core trains students,
postdocs, and faculty such that they themselves can manage a project. As such,
the technology has broad significance for training students in such diverse
research areas such as crop and animal science, horticulture, bioremediation,
and environmental science. Because the proteome analysis core will be physically
located in the BioDale technology corridor on the St. Paul campus of the
University of Minnesota, it will be adjacent to other facilities linked to
Genome Analysis, Imaging, Mass Spectrometry and Bioprocess Technology. Course
work, both during the academic year and during summer session, are being planned
to train students in proteomics and mass spectrometry. During the summer,
minority scholars participating in the Life Sciences Undergraduate Research
Program will make use of the proteome analysis core through workshops and their
own research projects. The availability of such a training site will allow the
Univesity of Minnesota to attract, train, and recruit underrepresented
minorities into our undergraduate and graduate programs and ultimately into
science and technology based careers.&lt;br/&gt;