* 0215297
* Acquisition of a high resolution, sector field, ICP-MS and laser ablation system
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Gregory Ravizza, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2006
* USD 313,040.00

EAR-0215297&lt;br/&gt;Ravizza&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support
to the University of Hawaii's School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology
(SOEST) for acquisition of a high resolution, sector field, inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometer (HR-SF-ICPMS) and laser ablation system. The mass
spectrometer is a versatile instrument for trace analysis in a wide variety of
natural materials including seawater, sediments and rocks. The laser ablation
unit allows direct trace analysis of many solid materials, eliminating the need
for time consuming and expensive chemical dissolution procedures. At SOEST this
instrumentation will be used to advance research efforts in chemical
oceanography, paleoceanography, geochemistry and volcanology. Analyses of trace
metals in seawater will be used to better quantify the rate of supply of dust to
the surface ocean and it solubility. This information is required to test
current hypotheses that trace metal availability limits biological productivity
in large portions of the open ocean. Trace element analyses of biogenic calcium
carbonate precipitated by marine organisms will be used to improve our ability
to reconstruct the history of ocean temperature changes and fluctuations in
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Paleoceangraphic data of this sort are used
to establish the magnitude and rate of climate variability prior to significant
human impact. Data of this type is an essential component of efforts to discern
between natural climate variability and human-induced climate perturbations.
Trace element and isotope analyses of marine sediments will be performed in
order to elucidate the geologic history of chemical weathering. A better
understanding of chemical weathering is a necessary part of the geologic
community's effort to understand those natural processes that have maintained an
atmosphere capable of sustaining macroscopic life for hundreds of millions of
years. Sediment geochemistry studies that document concentrations of platinum
group elements in the environment will also be conducted. Available data
indicated these metals are released from automobile catalytic converters and are
enriched in widely distributed areas of the globe. These, and related efforts in
environmental geochemistry, are part of the research community's contribution to
assessing the importance of emerging human impacts on the global environment.
The mass spectrometer and laser ablation system will also contribute to the
research program of several volcanologists and petrologists at SOEST. These
investigators use trace element data in conjunction with other data sets to
understand melting in the deep earth, and the magmatic differentiation
processes. These processes are responsible for producing volcanic activity at
the surface of the Earth. Research efforts include studies of seafloor
volcanism, explosive volcanoes in island arc settings, as well as the unique
natural laboratory provided by active volcanism on the big island of
Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;