* 0215942
* MRI: Parallel Computing Environment for Computational Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Damian Rouson, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Hans G. Kaper
* 07/31/2006
* USD 173,673.00

Proposal Numer DMS-0215942 &lt;br/&gt;PIs: St. John, Baumslag, Cleary, and
Rouson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaborative effort among members of several &lt;br/&gt;Departments and
multiple institutions, all parts of the City &lt;br/&gt;University of New York
(CUNY). The group effort includes the &lt;br/&gt;Department of Mathematics, the
Department of Computer Science,&lt;br/&gt;and the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at City College of&lt;br/&gt;CUNY; the Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, Lehman&lt;br/&gt;College of CUNY, the Department of Computer
Science of the&lt;br/&gt;Graduate Center of CUNY, and the Department of
Mathematics of&lt;br/&gt;the Graduate Center of CUNY. The research tool that
serves as&lt;br/&gt;the hub for the planned activity is a large Beowulf
computational&lt;br/&gt;cluster, to be housed at City
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research projects are genetic
algorithms in&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial group theory, evolutionary tree
reconstruction in&lt;br/&gt;computational biology, computer experiments on
parafree groups,&lt;br/&gt;modelling turbulent fluid flows arising in the early
stages of&lt;br/&gt;combustion, and questions and simulations in computer
networking.&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will be administered under the Center for
Algorithms&lt;br/&gt;and Interactive Scientific Software (CAISS) at City
College. This&lt;br/&gt;cluster will also provide an important resource for
the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate students of CUNY, by giving
access&lt;br/&gt;to computing power not usually found at primarily
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research topics span
a wide range of computer science, &lt;br/&gt;computational science, and
mathematics. They share the common &lt;br/&gt;approach of involving both
experiments and theory, relying on &lt;br/&gt;exploitation of computational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;