* 0215046
* SBIR Phase I:  Liquid Phase Epitaxy of Potassium Tantalum Niobate on Low Dielectric Constant Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Vincent Fratello, INTEGRATED PHOTONICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Winslow L. Sargeant
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
Liquid Phase Epitaxy (LPE) of potassium tantalum niobate (KTN) on a cubic
perovskite substrate. This film material will have much higher electrooptic
coefficients than current generation lithium niobate waveguides. This project
proposes to develop new, low dielectric constant substrate materials that will
enable better matching of the effective microwave dielectric constant to the
optical dielectric constant of the film material and lower bias fields. In Phase
I, the researchers will identify congruently melting substrate materials with
suitable lattice parameter match to KTN that can be grown by the Czochralski
method. Various flux systems and growth conditions will be tested to find those
most conducive to LPE growth of good quality films. Electrooptic devices are
used in communications, analog and digital signal processing, information
processing, optical computing and sensing. Devices include phase and amplitude
modulators, multiplexers, switch arrays, couplers, polarization controllers,
deflectors, correlators and sensors. The proposed work will enable electrooptic
modulators and innovative new device applications with lower costs, smaller
footprints and lower power budgets. All this contributes to improvements of the
infrastructure of the Internet and more rapid, lower cost deployment, especially
in the local loop.