* 0215745
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of an X-ray Microanalysis System with WDS Spectrometer for Elemental Analyses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* William L'Amoreaux, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 226,587.00

This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports the acquisition of an
X-ray microanalysis system with extended range parallel beam WDS spectrometer to
augment the current research activities of a diverse faculty within CUNY and
centered at the College of Staten Island. The new system includes two integrated
components. The first of these components is an X-ray microanalysis system that
utilizes energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to collect, identify and map X-ray
spectra from the samples. The electron beam from the SEM gun interacts with a
sample, exciting elements in the sample. The sample then emits secondary
electrons and X-rays. The energy of the X- rays emitted is element specific.
Through the EDS system, it is possible to simultaneously collect secondary
electrons (to obtain a three-dimensional image of a sample) and K a energies of
> 0.1 keV (also emitted following excitation by the primary electron
bombardment) and to obtain an accurate map of the distribution of elements
within a sample. These elements include those of atomic mass equal to or greater
than Be. The second component to be acquired is a parallel beam wavelength
dispersive spectroscopy (WDS) system. The WDS system allows for the detection of
elements from < 10 keV, that is, for light element detection. The equipment will
be used in collaborative research efforts related to elemental distribution
within polymers and biopolymers. Research topics include analysis of the
alignment of metals in nanotubes, binding of metals to sediments, and
distribution of metal bioaccumulated by aquatic and terrestrial organisms.

This instrumentation acquisition supports a number of educational activities
both at the College of Staten Island and the City University of New York. This
includes its use in an Advanced Microscopy course "Instrumental Methods in
Chemistry" and undergraduate research activities through the Independent Studies
and Honors Thesis programs. Additionally, the instruments will support research
activities in the College of Staten Island's NSF-funded REU program on Polymers
and Biopolymers, as well as the Center for Environmental Science. As the
Departments of Biology and Chemistry have an established interdisciplinary
approach to research and teaching, the instruments will also be used in graduate
education and training in the NSF-supported IGERT program on Nanostructural
Materials and Devices.