* 0215695
* Acquisition of Impact Testing Equipment for Material and Structural Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Eric Hill, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2004
* USD 107,260.00

This award is for the acquisition of an instrumented low to medium-velocity
impact testing equipment (Instron Dynatup Model 8250HV Impact Test System). The
equipment will be used to enhance the research capability in the areas of
mechanics of composite materials and structural mechanics, particular for
aeronautics and aerospace engineering applications.

This acquisition will have a broad impact on improving research environment of
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU), which is an undergraduate
institution. A multi-disciplinary research team is formed with five
investigators from four engineering and technology departments. Several on-going
as well as planed research projects will be conducted using this equipment,
including "Damage Identification for Laminated Composites Caused by Low Velocity
Impact Using C-scan NDT," "Impact Damage Detection on Filament Wound Pressure
Vessels Using Acoustic Emission," "Impact Response of New Cross Cell Sandwich
Panels," and "Impact Behavior of Modified Adhesive Bonded Joints."

This acquisition will also have a significant impact on professional development
of the investigators. Three of the five investigators are junior faculty
members. Although they have demonstrated some success in their respective
research areas, they have not yet established reputations in their research
fields. This has also reduced their competitiveness in external funding
solicitations. This award will provide them a much-needed equipment for their
research activities and eventually makes them more competitive in research
funding solicitations.

While the main purpose of acquiring this impact equipment is to enhance the
capability of ERAU in advanced materials and structures research programs, this
acquisition will have an extensive impact to strengthen the educational quality
of the university both at the undergraduate and graduate levels. With this
advanced impact equipment, the investigators will be able to conduct more
research projects. Students in the involved departments will be exposed to the
most current research progress in the field. Such an exposure will significantly
enhance the departments' capability to prepare students for entry into advanced
degree programs and/or careers in aerospace/aeronautical science and
engineering. The increased research activities by the investigators will also
provide an excellent opportunity to directly train our students by involving
them in these projects through research assistant programs (both undergraduate
and graduate).

