* 0215644
* CSEDI Research - Fine Structure of the Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 244,074.00

This is a collaborative study of the deep mantle between the disciplines of body
wave seismology, computational geodynamics, and isotope geochemistry. The
project will systematically survey seismic data sets and compare waveform data
with synthetics for a range of models (including tomographic, hybrid, and
convection models). An assortment of modeling techniques have been assembled to
take advantage of many different types of seismic phases to constrain dynamic
models. With the release of two large datasets (South African array and Saudi
Arabian network) along with the ever expanding IRIS and East African PASSCAL
experiments, there will be an excellent opportunity to study the underpinning of
the African continent from bottom-to-top. A concerted effort will be made to
formulate, study, and apply dynamic models of the lower most mantle, especially
the upwellings African superplume. Both 2-D (including a cylindrical geometry)
and 3-D Cartesian finite element, mantle convection codes will be used to
understand lower mantle and core mantle boundary dynamics. Spherical models of
convection that have the history of plate motions imposed as boundary conditions
will also be used. Model quantities (such as temperature, chemistry, phase,
melt, and anisotropy) will be mapped into two and three dimensional seismic
velocity fields. These predictions will be tested directly with body wave
phases. Previous interdisciplinary work between seismology and geodynamics has
allowed has supported the hypothesis that there are three types of structures
within the lower most mantle where plumes arise: thermo-chemical super plumes,
thermal upwellings which have ULVZ at their base, and thermal plumes which erupt
through old subducted slabs. A new goal of this continuing research project is
to use seismological observations and dynamical models as new organizing
principles for interpreting the geochemistry of plume-related basaltic lavas.
The seismology and geodynamics will be used to predict maps (predicted plume
provinces) which will be tested with the geochemistry of MORBs and
OIBs.&lt;br/&gt;