* 0215160
* Formation of a Novel Nickel-Iron Cluster and its Biological Role in Acetate Activation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* David Grahame, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 385,000.00

Methanogens are microorganisms that produce methane gas as the end product of
their metabolism, and they are critical to a wide range of anaerobic
microbiological decomposition processes. Such processes include digestion in
ruminants and other animals, decay in natural aquatic environments, and man-made
processes such as those used for municipal and industrial waste treatment. For
our society, methane, on one-hand poses potential problems as a greenhouse gas,
while at the same time it also serves as an extremely useful, clean-burning
fuel. Nearly two-thirds of the methane produced in Nature is derived from
decomposition of acetate by methanogens, and this project is contributing new
molecular details of how these organisms carry out cleavage of the carbon-carbon
bond in acetate. &lt;br/&gt;Acetogenic and methanogenic microorganisms carry out
synthesis and breakdown of large quantities of acetic acid from one-carbon
precursors/products under anaerobic conditions using a highly unusual enzymatic
process in which the carbon-carbon bond of acetic acid is activated. Nickel
plays an indispensable role in this process, serving as a component of a unique
Ni-Fe/S cluster at the active site of a 5-subunit-containing multienzyme complex
(designated ACDS for acetyl-CoA decarbonylase/synthase) responsible for acetate
cleavage in species of Methanosarcina. The Ni-Fe cluster is bound to the beta
subunit of the complex, which also is the site for binding of substrates CoA and
acetyl-CoA. Although it is now clear that Ni is an essential element for carbon-
carbon bond activation, structural information on the Ni-Fe center is lacking,
and little is known about the steps involved in formation and assembly of the
Ni-Fe cluster. Such information is critical to develop a clear understanding of
how Ni functions in the activation of acetate. The goal of this project is to
identify steps in the pathway of assembly of the ACDS beta-subunit active site
metal cluster by characterizing the role of the accessory protein ACDS-ORF in
the process of Ni insertion into the Fe-containing apoenzyme. Incorporation of
nickel is monitored by spectroscopic methods and enzymatic functional assays.
Additional proteins that participate in the assembly of the beta-subunit Ni-Fe
center are being sought by a combination of molecular biological two-hybrid
assays and standard biochemical methods of fractionation and analysis. Detailed
knowledge of how nickel functions as part of the Ni-Fe active center in the ACDS
beta subunit will be obtained from experiments to characterize the coordination
environment of nickel. X-ray absorption spectroscopic methods (Ni EXAFS and Ni
L-edge spectroscopy) are providing the geometry, number of ligands to Ni, their
chemical nature, and average bond distances. Site-directed mutagenesis
experiments are being used to identify amino acid residues serving as potential
ligands to Ni, and mutants will be characterized for their ability to bind Ni,
undergo changes in coordination environment and to function in acetate
activation. The results from this project will provide new information on the
structure, function and formation of an unusual Ni-Fe/S cluster, leading to a
better understanding of its biochemistry and its unique physiological role in
catalyzing the activation of acetate. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;