* 0215342
* Conjugated Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Christoph Weder, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 468,000.00

It is expected that the introduction of conjugated cross-links between
conjugated macromolecules can lead to macromolecular networks with most
interesting optic and electronic characteristics. However, the knowledge base
regarding the synthesis and processing of well-defined materials with this
structural motif is very limited. Thus, a research program is proposed, which is
focused on the design, synthesis and exploration of well-defined conjugated
polymer networks. The proposed research addresses the synthesis and
investigation of different classes of polymeric materials, including
poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) (PPE_ and poly(thiophene) (PT) deriavatives, and
various fields of potential applications. The envisioned activities will be
focused on organometallic hybrid materials in which metal-ligand interactions
between the conjugated macromolecules and metals allow the controlled formation
of conjugated cross-links. This general framework is particularly attractive,
since it readily permits synthetic access to the desired target materials
through ligand-exchange reactions and also allows for adequated processing
schemes. On the one hand, it is intended to directly utilize functionalities
that are integral part of the polymer backbones as binding sites, such as the
ethynylene moieties comprised in the PPE. The latter form stable complexes with
a variety of metal centers, including Pt(0) and Pt(0), which will form the
conjugated cross-links. On the other hand, it is envisioned to also integrate
specific ligand sites into the conjugated polymer. Bipyridine moieties, which
are readily integrated into the polymers under consideration and from stable
complexes with a variety of metal centers, represent an illustrative example.
Initially focusing on charge-transport characteristics, electrical conductivity
and nonlinear optic response, it is planned to systematically investigate the
influence which the cross-links exert on the electronic and photophysical
properties of the novel materials.

The research in this proposal contributes new and original ideas to the current
international effort in the fields of chemistry, materials science, and physics
of conjugated polymers. It is anticipated that it will provide firm answers to
the fundamental questions how conjugated cross-links can be conveniently
introduced into these materials without compromising their processability, and
how this structural motif can be employed to influence the material's optic and
electronic characteristics in a beneficial way. Because of the exemplary and
fundamental character, the research is expected to provide a broad intellectual
basis for the future design, synthesis and application of functional materials
with unusual and unique optic and electronic properties. With the aim to develop
innovative and stimulating curricula at undergraduate and graduate level and in
an attempt to integrate research and education, the proposed research is
complemented with a number of educational elements. The latter are intimately
related to the research activities of the PI and include the creation of
undergraduate research opportunities, the development of a new cutting-edge
course on photo- and electrofunctional polymers, and the development of a
pioneering outreach program - the 'Polymer Science Days' - which is implemented
in collaboration with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. The proposed
initiatives complement 'routine' teaching assignments and address the
development of innovative and stimulating curricula.