* 0215962
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of Range-Scanning Equipment and of Data Servers for the Reconstruction of Large-Scale Scenes from 3D Range and 2D Color Data.
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Charles Ehlschlaeger, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2004
* USD 159,307.00

EIA-0215962&lt;br/&gt;Ioannis Stamos&lt;br/&gt;Charles
Ehlschlaeger&lt;br/&gt;CUNY Hunter College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI/RUI:
Acquisition of Range-Scanning Equipment and of Data Servers for the
Reconstruction of Large-Scale Scenes from 3D Range and 2D Color
Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, addressing the problem of
3D-photorealistic reconstruction of large-scale scenes in a tightly integrated
system that features novel registration, segmentation, modeling, and
visualization algorithms, tackles the following issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Nonplanar segmentation, &lt;br/&gt;2) Automatic registration between 3D and 2D
data sets,&lt;br/&gt;3) Integration of the data sets, and &lt;br/&gt;4)
Simplification of the complex geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
requests the acquisition of a highly accurate range-scanner that can provide
dense 3D data of outdoor scenes. Proposed is a system that operates on an input
sequence of calibrated and uncalibrated 3D range and 2D image data. The system
will segment the range and color images, extract their features, establish
topological relationships between features, and derive global topological
relationships between features in the final 3D geometric model. The whole
process will be fully automated except for the range-to-image registration
process that requires minimal user interaction. The expected output consists of
a complete photorealistic model of the scene. The resulting 3D models will be
utilized in geospatial; the acquired data will also be used for teaching
purposes in CS and Geography departments. Aided by the Center of the Analysis
and Research of Spatial Information (CARSI), urban areas of downtown New York
and the interior of Grand Central Station in Manhattan are being used as
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;