* 0215717
* Acquisition of a Magneto-Optical Cryostat for Terahertz Studies of Semiconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* James Heyman, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 104,800.00

This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports instrumentation for
research in ultrafast optics and semiconductor physics as well as undergraduate
research training at Macalester College. The instrumentation is a 7 Tessa
superconducting magnet cryostat with optical access. Initial research will use
the instrument to support a NSF-funded program to study spin and charge dynamics
in semiconductors. The Projects include ultrafast THz spectroscopy of spin-
dynamics in semiconductors; time-resolved measurements of magneto-plasma
oscillations in semiconductors; and quantum transitions in strongly driven
semiconductor quantum wells and heterostructures. The PI is building an
ultrafast THz system with spectral bandwidth of 0-30 THz at Macalester College.
This acquisition will significantly strengthen the capabilities of the system,
permitting investigation of spin phenomena and other magnetic phenomena. The
research projects have a common objective of providing education and research
training opportunities for advanced undergraduate students and will permit
hands-on training in photonics and experimental materials physics. Student
research training will also be enhanced through use of the instrument in
advanced courses, independent projects and senior honors projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the switching rates in electronic devices are pushed to
ever-higher frequencies, it becomes increasingly important to understand carrier
transport phenomena in semiconductors on picosecond and femtosecond time-scales.
Using ultrafast terahertz spectroscopy it is possible to impulsively excite a
semiconductor with a femtosecond optical pulse or single-cycle electromagnetic
pulse and record the resulting motion of charge in time. This allows the study
of semiclassical phenomena such as carrier scattering and charge oscillations in
semiconductors and semiconductor heterostructures on time-scales, which will be
crucial to future devices. In addition, this technique is well suited to the
study of quantum phenomena such as electronic transitions in semiconductor
quantum wells and heterostructures (intersubband transitions) and spin
transitions. Intersubband transitions are of interest for quantum coherent
electronics and for the development of mid- and far-infrared semiconductor
lasers. Spin-transport devices in which an electron's spin, rather than its
charge, is used to control transport are of intense current interest. Among the
most promising systems are quantum wells in narrow-gap semiconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;