* 0215898
* BE/CNH: Conference on Robustness of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Thomas Park, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/29/2004
* USD 32,514.00

Coupled natural and human systems may be viewed mathematically as dynamical
systems (systems of differential or difference equations) in which humans are
involved either as parts of the system or by influencing some processes, whether
intentionally or not. Alternatively they may be considered as complex systems --
collections of agents engaged in rule-governed behavior. In either case,
robustness refers to the stability and resistance to perturbation of such
dynamical or complex systems as they evolve in state space. A dynamical system
is said to be structurally stable if reasonably small perturbations to the
system result in a new dynamical system with the same qualitative dynamics. The
concept of robustness raises questions that lie outside the purview of stability
theory, such as the interplay of system organization and system dynamics.
Processes like adaptation and positive feedback can increase the robustness of
living systems and coupled natural and human systems, but the linkage between
efficiency and robustness may be an inverse one in which optimal efficiency is
at the expense of robustness in the face of changing environmental conditions.
In some cases, robustness may be an emergent property of evolved systems, or it
may be possible to engineer systems to enhance their robustness. To address
these issues, this award will sponsor a conference to be held at the Santa Fe
Institute in the Spring of 2003. The conference will bring together scientists
from a range of disciplines, including physics, mathematics, computer science,
earth and climate science, ecology, anthropology and archaeology, to discuss
theoretical research and case studies, with emphasis being placed on comparative
discussion of the case studies. Papers will be circulated in advance and
presented in a single forum attended by all conference participants. Results of
the conference are expected to be published&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robustness
of coupled natural and human systems has become a matter of increasing concern
as the modern industrial system's impact on the natural systems of the planet
becomes more and more apparent and issues of sustainability become paramount.
This conference will contribute to explorations of robustness in coupled natural
and human systems at scales ranging from planetary (climate) and macroscales
through the mesoscale of sociocultural systems to the microscopic scale of
disease microevolution. Participants will explore the association of different
spatial scale with varying temporal scales, and they will help answer a number
of critical questions, including whether robustness is best assessed by analysis
of existing data or through simulation modeling, how engineered systems compare
to complex adaptive systems in terms of robustness and/or a calculus of costs
and benefits, and under what circumstances robust systems are most likely to
develop. Through this conference, participants and other scholars will develop
new insights into and new approaches for investigating robustness in coupled
natural and human systems. Broader impacts of this project include the expansion
of an interdisciplinary network of scientists to explore this important topic in
a collaborative framework. The results of their discussions and subsequent
collaborative activities could ultimately yield many practical benefits for land
and resource managers as well as others who have responsibilities associated
with maintaining environmental quality. This project is supported by an award
resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;