* 0215240
* SBIR Phase I:   Production of Fullerene Radiopharmaceuticals Using Nuclear Recoil
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* John Alford, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Projectproposes to
develop methods for producing fullerene radioisotope carriers using the nuclear
recoil implantation method. A persistent problem in the safe delivery of
radioisotopes to cancer tissue is the premature leakage of the radioisotope and
the damage it causes to healthy tissues such as bone marrow. Currently, when
radioactive metals are used in the body for diagnostic or therapeutic
applications, organic chelates must be employed as carriers for the metal atom.
However, current chelates do not bind with 100% efficiency, and potentially
toxic radioactive metal atoms can be lost in vivo. Because of their unique cage
structure, fullerenes do not suffer this deficiency and offer a novel
alternative method for entrapping radioisotopes and producing labeled compounds
useful for medical imaging and therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial
applications of this project are in the area of cancer radioimmunotherapy. Given
the recent advances in the design of monoclonal antibodies for targeting cancer
and in the clinical successes of several new radioimmunotherapy treatments, the
field of radioimmunotherapy is currently poised for rapid growth and
commercialization. A superior radioisotope carrier would be a welcome addition
to the current arsenal of radiopharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;