* 0215358
* Atmospheric Adjustment to Generalized Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Peter Bannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 553,352.00

A theoretical investigation of atmospheric adjustment to generalized forcings
will be carried out by the Principal Investigator. Atmospheric adjustment is
defined as the response of a moist compressible atmosphere to a prescribed
forcing. Immediately after an instantaneous forcing of arbitrary shape, the
atmosphere will, in general, be in a state of geostrophic and hydrostatic
imbalance. The study of atmospheric adjustment describes the subsequent tendency
of the air to achieve a state of geostrophic and hydrostatic balance. It is an
extension of the classic problem of geostrophic adjustment to include the
effects of compressibility and to allow for nonhydrostatic and moist processes.
The forcings studied will be completely general and include momentum, mass,
thermal, and moisture forcings. The impact of the time scale of the forcing will
also be assessed. Thus, the research will provide insight into the fundamental
workings of the atmosphere. The solutions also will shed light on the dynamics
of clouds, mesoscale convective systems, and other nonhydrostatic circulations
driven by moist convection. Although both heating and moistening correspond to
an addition of buoyancy to the air mass, there is a fundamental difference. An
addition of heat can be transformed to other forms of energy that can be
propagated away; an addition of water must be conserved and cannot be
transformed (in the absence of phase changes) and propagated out of the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A suite of linear problems will be used to examine
the full effects of compressibility in the adjustment to generalized forcings.
Initial value and Fourier transform techniques will be used to solve for the
linear time-dependent problems analytically. The energetics will be examined and
the partitioning of the energy between the acoustic, gravity, and Lamb modes and
the balanced final state will be assessed. These solutions provide a benchmark
to test the dynamical cores of mesoscale, cloud, and forecasting
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These analytic solutions of the linearized
adjustment problem will be supplemented by numerical investigations. These
numerical studies will address the effect of nonlinearities on the atmospheric
response and enable solutions with a more realistic base-state atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also will develop an anelastic model that
eliminates the acoustic and Lamb waves. This new model will be an advance over
existing models in that it will conserve mass, moisture, and energy. Numerical
experiments will document the merits of these anelastic equations in comparison
to the fully compressible equations. Thus in addition to providing insight into
the dynamics of the atmosphere the research will help to benchmark and develop
nonhydrostatic models, which are the foundation for numerical weather forecast
models.