* 0215557
* Conference:  The Global Genome Question: Microbes as the Key to Understanding Evolution and Ecology; October 11-13, 2002, Longboatkey, Florida
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* David Relman, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2004
* USD 30,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Relman (Stanford University) and
sponsoring organization the American Academy of Microbiology (Washington, DC)
for a colloquium entitled "The Global Genome Question: Microbes as the Key to
Understanding Evolution and Ecology," October 11-13, 2002, in Longboatkey, FL. A
group of 30-40 invited scientists will participate; spending 2 days in
deliberations designed to produce the intellectual material for an analytical
and comprehensive report. The primary objective is to map out a new research
paradigm that departs from analysis of the genomes of cultivated microbes and
moves toward understanding the relationship and interplay among the genome and
community evolution and dynamics.

Microbes carry enormous genetic wealth and biological aptitude. Humans have
already exploited the biochemical competence and versatility of these tiny
creatures in medicine, agriculture, ecology, and studies of evolution. But while
investigators tap into the tremendous resources stored in microbial genomes,
more questions--and some problems--have become apparent. Many of these
difficulties are typical of any rapidly growing enterprise; still others are
specific to this new scientific arena. The unparalleled benefits of genome
science make it critical that important questions receive coordinated attention
and that issues are resolved. Building on the groundbreaking work of sequencing
individual genomes in the laboratory, scientists know that much more can be
learned from a new research approach that focuses on (1) understanding genomes
in an evolutionary and ecological context and (2) addressing evolutionary and
ecological questions using genomics-enabled methods and analyses. Population
dynamics, recombination, and lateral gene transfer look to be driving forces of
genomic and ecosystem evolution. If so, genome evolution and ecosystem dynamics
are part of the same process--a process that can be understood through the study
of communities of microorganisms in environments, rather than individual strains
or isolated systems in the lab.



