* 0215581
* Center for Magnetic Self-Organization in Laboratory and Astrophysical Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Robert Rosner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* C.  Caldwell
* 02/28/2009
* USD 11,229,107.00

This award funds the Physics Frontiers Center for Self-Organization in
Laboratory and Astrophysical Plasmas. At the heart of the center's program is
the engendering of new collaborations between plasma physicists and
astrophysicists to examine six phenomena within the unifying theme of magnetic
self-organization. The six research topics are dynamo activity, magnetic
reconnection, magnetic helicity conservation and transport, angular momentum
transport, ion heating, and magnetic chaos and transport. Each phenomenon occurs
in the laboratory and in many astrophysical venues. The occurrence of each is
not in doubt, but the physics mechanisms are poorly understood or unknown. All
six phenomena can occur as part of one process. None can be understood in
isolation of the others. Thus, there is tremendous gain from collective study of
these six topics, united by the theme of magnetic self-organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out by a core Center group of
24 physicists covering all the needed areas of expertise - laboratory plasma
physics and astrophysics, and experiment, computation, and theory. New links
between astrophysicists and plasma physicists, essential to solve the problems,
will be established. Recent advances in plasma physics,&lt;br/&gt;particularly
experimental measurement techniques and computation, and the wealth of
new&lt;br/&gt;astronomical data, imply that the present time is right for the
Center. Three core institutions, each with a group involvement, provide
complementary expertise&lt;br/&gt;and functions. The University of Chicago
provides astrophysical and computational expertise, whereas Princeton University
and The University of Wisconsin mainly provide complementary experiments.
Overall management responsibility will reside at the University of Wisconsin.
The key activities, applied to each topic, are to compare lab and astrophysical
observations, compare results from different experiments, perform joint
experiments, apply theoretical and computational tools developed in one venue to
other situations, and convene topical workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
will also initiate a new, professionally-evaluated, educational outreach effort,
building on a very successful lecture-demonstration series (the "Wonders of
Physics") at the University of Wisconsin. The Center expects to provide a pool
of young scientists with interdisciplinary training and enhance the connection
between plasma physics and the larger physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Physics Division
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;