* 0215647
* Short-Term Ssynaptic Plasticity Contributing to Learning: Roles of Neuronal Activity, Protein Kinases and Basal Synaptic Transmission
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Marc Klein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 315,675.00

Learning involves changes in the chemistry, function and structure of neurons in
the brain. In order to study these changes, it is first necessary to identify
the neurons that mediate the learned behavior and to determine the steps at
which communication between these neurons is modified. The next stage in
studying learning involves pinpointing exactly which molecules undergo
alteration, and what part these molecules play in the overall functioning of the
neurons. In this project a well-defined reflex behavior will be utilized in
order to investigate how learning modifies neuronal signaling. Habituation and
sensitization of defensive reflexes are two simple forms of learning that have
been studied extensively in the marine mollusc Aplysia, and the insights gained
have proven to be generally applicable to learning in higher animals as well.
Habituation of the reflex results from repeated activation of the sensory
neurons, and sensitization is largely caused by the action of the
neurotransmitter serotonin. The principal investigator will examine which steps
in the signaling process are altered by sensory neuron activity and by two
endogenous enzymes that are activated by serotonin. Prior work in the his
laboratory suggests that the two enzymes act at different steps in the signaling
process, and that different sets of neurons may preferentially make use of one
or the other of the enzymes. Experiments will be done by intracellular recording
from individual sensory and motor neurons and application of reagents that
affect the activity of these enzymes. This work will contribute to the basic
understanding of how the brain learns, and as such may have implications for
education. For example, the principal investigator has found that the two
enzymes affect signaling differently depending on how much neuronal activity
precedes the application of serotonin, suggesting that different learning
strategies might be appropriate in different circumstances.