* 0215920
* MRI:  Aquisition of Fast Response Gas Analysis Equipment For Advanced Automotive Emission Control and Diagnostic System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Amy Fleischer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2005
* USD 328,078.00

This MRI grant will be used to create a state-of-the-art experimental facility
for dynamic measurement, modeling, diagnosis and control of transient automotive
emissions. Catalytic exhaust after-treatment systems play a key role in reducing
automotive emissions, but to meet increasingly stringent legislated
environmental targets, (as specified in SULEV or OBD II for example), it is now
necessary to incorporate their dynamic behavior within the on-board engine
control and diagnostic system. To measure and model these dynamics
experimentally requires the state-of-the-art, dual-channel, fast-response gas
analysis equipment. The MRI grant will also be used to acquire a
hardware/software system for data acquisition, and for rapid prototyping access
to the engine management and diagnostic system, in order to be able to implement
and test the algorithms developed. It is believed that there are currently only
four facilities worldwide (within academia) that have fast response gas analysis
capability, one of which was constructed at the University of Sussex (UK), by
the principal investigator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinarity
inherent in a system which has an engine, electronic control, and the catalytic
after-treatment elements is reflected in the cross-departmental team of
investigators who come from the Mechanical, Chemical, and Electrical &amp;
Computer Engineering departments within the College of Engineering at Villanova
University. For each of these departments, the facility would strongly enhance
the Undergraduate and Masters student exposure to the automotive industry in a
geographic area, which is weak in this regard. The facility will be a regional
resource, and is supported by Drexel and Temple Universities as well as local
industry. Industrial support and cost share comes from a broad cross-section of
the automotive industry including end user Ford Motor Company, international
automotive consultants Ricardo Inc., locally based consultants, Environex, and
local catalyst manufacturer Johnson Matthey.&lt;br/&gt;