* 0215534
* CSEDI: Collaborative Research: Thermal, Petrological, and Seismological Study of Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Peter van Keken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 26,455.00

EAR-0215534&lt;br/&gt;van Keken &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the
world's earthquakes occur in subduction zones where oceanic lithosphere descends
into the mantle. Intermediate-depth earthquakes, which occur at 40-300 km depth,
and the transport of water into the mantle are intimately linked to metamorphic
reactions in the subducting lithosphere. The researchers propose to better
understand subduction-zone processes by integrating seismological observations
with thermal and petrological models. In order to test the dehydration-
embrittlement hypothesis for intermediate-depth seismicity, the investigators
will construct two-dimensional kinematic-dynamical thermal models for a set of
subduction zones that span a range in subduction parameters and that include
regions with significant along-strike variations in observed seismicity. Events
in global and regional seismicity data sets will be systematical evaluated and
relocated in order to test the hypotheses that (a) upper seismic zones are
confined to the subducting mafic crust, (b) lower seismic zones are related to
dehydration reactions in the subducting mantle, and (c) the forearc mantle is
aseismic. Petrologic models of subducting lithosphere will be created using new
phase diagrams and rock property data bases and the resulting layered seismic-
velocity models will be tested against observed dispersion of seismic body
waves. The amount and distribution of forearc mantle hydration
(serpentinization) will be quantified by integrating seismological observations
with mineral physics calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;