* 0215053
* STTR Phase I:   Low-Power VLSI Circuits for Large-Scale Neuronal Recording
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Kenneth Guillory, Bionic Technologies, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,964.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop the
technology necessary to produce low-power, low-noise VLSI amplifiers for large-
scale neural recording applications. Although there are many emerging multi-
electrode arrays for neuroscience and neuroprosthetic recording applications,
these arrays are practically limited by wiring densities and percutaneous
connections. In order for chonic neural recording applications to achieve
electrode densities in the 100 to 1000 electrode range, implantable amplifier,
signal processing, and multiplexing circuitry will be required. The existing
VLSI technology available for microelectrode recording is inadequate to create
implantable amplifier systems with this number of channels. These types of
implantable amplifier systems will also be necessary for emerging clinical
neuroprosthetic applications that will require chronic recording from large
numbers of neurons in the brain. In this Phase I project, novel CMOS techniques
will be developed for producing the necessary high-density, low-power amplifier
elements. In the follow on Phase II project, these techniques will be integrated
and fully developed into implantable amplifier systems for neuroscience and
neuroprosthetic research.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of biomedical device
and instrumentation. The implantable biopotential amplifier systems produced in
this project will be directly marketed to neuroscience researchers for use with
high-density microelectrode arrays. The technology will also be used in the
development of clinical neuroprosthetic applications.