* 0215753
* MRI:  Acquisition of High Speed Mixed Signal Test Equipment
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Oliver Collins, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2006
* USD 266,516.00

EIA 02-15753&lt;br/&gt;Collins, Oliver&lt;br/&gt;University of Notre
Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of High Speed Mixed Signal Test
Equipment &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, studying quadrature and Sigma
Delta modulation/demodulation, supports communications/signal processing
research for experimental validation using simulators. Experimental verification
of new ideas in Sigma Delta digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion
will be explored. Sigma Delta modulation allows an intrinsically linear two
level quantizer to reproduce a high resolution signal by shifting the
quantization noise away from the signal band for removal by filtering. The Sigma
Delta modulator tries to find the optimal sequence of +1's and -1's such that,
after filtering, the squared Euclidean distance between this sequence of +1's
and -1's and a given, identically filtered, discrete-time, unity-amplitude-
limited sequence filtering is minimized. The research aims to show that Sigma
Delta modulation constitutes a crude optimization algorithm and that practicable
techniques solve this optimization problem well enough to improve dynamic range
beyond the current state-of-the-art. The PI claims that the substantial
improvement will almost certainly expose the inherent nonidealities of even
single bit quantizers. Because of the bit-to-bit interactions produced by
reflections from imperfect impedance matches at its output, even single bit D to
A generates noise and spurious signals. The equipment requested, three pieces of
high speed, mixed signal test: a data generator, a network analyzer, and a
signal analyzer, will allow investigation of these effects and permit the design
of better single- and multiple-bit quantizers. The data generator will be used
as a stimulus source in a wavelength division multiplexing project; the superior
range of the network analyzer will contribute to a microwave remote sensing
project. Improvement in analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog bandwidth and
dynamic range is expected. The devices are important whenever digital
computation must be interfaced to physical world (e.g., getting the analog
signal radiated by an antenna). Since the digital revolution depends on these
conversions, the interface is critical to send and store information. Improved
performance and reduced complexity in manufacturing systems that depend on these
conversions, such as personal CD players, cellular telephones, high definition
TV, computer modems, deep communication systems would benefit us all. Moreover,
in addition to supporting research, the equipment will support enhanced projects
in three undergraduate courses and contribute to make the students attractive to
industry for both hiring and mentoring the required design projects.&lt;br/&gt;