* 0215923
* Acquisition of Plant Growth Chambers for Teaching and Research: Enhancement of New Life Sciences Building
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Claude dePamphilis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract: Mark Guiltinan (#0215923)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been
awarded to Pennsylvania State University under the direction of Dr. Mark
Guiltinan to develop a Plant Growth Facility consisting of six growth chambers
and a small greenhouse. The facility center will provide a physical home for the
graduate programs, and an organizing role for the enhancement of Plant Sciences
research, teaching and outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the center
will be to: provide state-of-the-art research facilities for a core group of
resident plant scientists, including current faculty and new hires; provide
collaborative space in the new building to members of the Plant Science Center;
develop and enhance collaborative interactions among plant scientists and with
researchers&lt;br/&gt;in other fields, at Penn State and elsewhere; improve the
Plant Physiology and Ecological and Molecular Plant Physiology graduate
education programs, and; develop outreach programs for the general public and
for pre-college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This center will support research
in plant sciences for diverse studies, but will be particularly important to the
growing number of plant scientists using the model plant species, Arabidopsis
thaliana. The completion of the Arabidopsis genome sequence, along with major
new funding programs in plant genomics at the NSF and USDA,&lt;br/&gt;have
brought us to a new era in plant research, requiring high throughput facilities
for functional analysis of genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Penn State has made a
priority effort to enhance the life sciences; enhancement of the Plant Sciences
Center will help us move forward on this path, by providing necessary facilities
and maximizing laboratory space in the main building. This will in turn help to
attract top faculty candidates who will be concerned about availability of such
facilities. The facility will provide for the first time, an interdisciplinary,
inter-college facility for high quality environmental growth of plants to
support the many plant scientists at Penn State. It will also serve our teaching
and outreach programs, providing a facility available to all for the growth of
plants.&lt;br/&gt;