* 0215786
* SGER:    Molecular Simulations of the Interface and Double Layer for Model Copper-Electrodeposition Baths:   Effects of Organic Additives
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* John Harb, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 06/30/2004
* USD 78,582.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop molecular dynamics simulations to
study the interface and electrical double layer for model systems characteristic
of copper electrodepostion baths containing additives. The intent is to
investigate the nature of the electrical double layer and the copper surface
using molecular modeling under the hypothesis that this is the most important
region for modeling electrodeposition. The approach will employ recent
computational advances and will explore novel methods in computational chemistry
and molecular dynamics. Molecular dynamics simulations will be used to study the
interface and electrical double layer for model systems characteristic of copper
electrodepostion baths containing additives. Experimental measurements show
important differences in double-layer capacitance, electrode polarization, and
copper deposition with small changes in the molecular nature of the additives.
Molecular dynamics simulations may be applicable for directly relating observed
behavior to molecular structure and intermolecular interactions. The educational
portion of the work will involve the mentoring and supervision of graduate
students. Electrodeposition is currently being used in the microprocessor
industry for submicron interconnects, and this work may have an impact on these
processes.