* 0215829
* Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cell Biology and Biophysics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Stefan McDonough, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 410,066.00

Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cell Biology and
Biophysics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been
awarded to Dr Peter J.S. Smith of the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL), Woods
Hole, for the acquisition of a confocal laser scanning microscope and image
analysis system with multiphoton excitation capability. The system is to be
housed in the MBL Central Microscopy Facility, making it available to a wide
community of resident researchers, including scientists from the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute, visiting and summer investigators, as well as by many
of the graduate- and postdoctoral-level education courses offered at the
MBL&lt;br/&gt;Several proposed research projects have already been formulated by
the investigating team, spanning basic biology to the biomedical sciences.
Amongst the resident community of the MBL these include:&lt;br/&gt;1. An
examination of vesicle trafficking in trypanosomes. Part of a larger project
dealing infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;2. The role of Ca/CaM kinase II dynamics
in LTP. Part of a larger project investigating the foundations of memory;
&lt;br/&gt;3. The physiology of single-celled eukaryotic extremophiles. Part of
a larger project to investigate adaptive evolution and protein
expression/modification.&lt;br/&gt;4. Multidrug resistance in pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Architectural dynamics of the mitotic spindle. A continuing
project on live imaging of cellular dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;6. Calcium oscillations
in neurons. A component of several ongoing projects looking at calcium activity
domains in the cell membrane and cytosol.&lt;br/&gt;7. The effects of
environmental pollutants on neuronal development. A key issue being studied by
MBL investigators in the field of toxicology.&lt;br/&gt;8. The mechanisms of
iron trafficking in erythroid cells which forms part of a new mitochondrial
program initiated at the MBL.&lt;br/&gt; Scientists at the MBL have had a long
interest in the study of cellular dynamics, which by necessity requires
observations on living systems. The microscope to be chosen maximizes this
ability. System components were chosen to provide 1) capability for confocal
fluorescent imaging of different fluorophores in the visible spectrum; 2)
multiphoton excitation; 3) emission fingerprinting for simultaneous recording of
multiple fluorophores with closely-spaced emission spectra; 4) a sufficient
range of objective lenses to enable both structural studies and experiments on
the physiology of living cells; 5) precisely localization fluorescent-labeled
structures; 6) temperature control of live cells under study; 7) software to use
fully the data acquisition capabilities of the confocal; and 8) software for
image analysis and display. &lt;br/&gt;The research activities proposed in the
grant reflect the diversity of scientific interest amongst the MBL community as
well as outreach in research and education. The new microscope will be an
invaluable addition the MBL facilities for cutting edge research. Its
availability to residents and visitors alike (over 200 seasonal investigators
visit the MBL for research purposes on an annual basis) will insure a high
impact and use for the grant awarded.&lt;br/&gt;