* 0215631
* Repeated Game Models of Endogenous Ethnic Tensions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* John Conlon, University of Mississippi
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 114,953.00

Many theories of ethnic tensions are "backward looking" in the sense that they
focus on how past experiences shape current attitudes. They therefore depict
ethnic relations as relatively static and unchanging. By contrast, repeated game
models of interpersonal relations are forward looking. In these models, a
person's actions today are influenced by how she expects others will respond to
those actions in the future. This project develops a theoretical model of racial
or ethnic tensions in a forward-looking repeated game framework. If a community
is partially segregated, then relationships will be more frequently repeated
within groups than across groups. People may therefore cooperate more with
members of their own group than with members of other groups. That is, people
may trust members of other groups less than members of their own group. We
interpret this as a form of ethnic tension. In this context, this study shows
that everyone may prefer integration to partial segregation, in spite of these
ethnic tensions. This is because the benefits from increased cooperation across
groups may outweigh the cost of shifting from cooperative own-group interactions
to less cooperative cross-group interactions. In addition, the study shows that
minorities tend to suffer more from ethnic tensions than non-minorities. On the
other hand, the study shows that an individual may not be able to improve her
cross-ethnic relationships unless she is able to commit herself to interact more
frequently with members of other ethnic groups in the future. It follows that
individuals may need to use commitment mechanisms, such as residential
proximity, a common employer, or marriage, to facilitate cooperation with
members of other groups.

Forward looking models of ethnic tensions are important because they suggest
that ethnic relations can be very responsive to changing conditions. This can be
a bad thing since, for example, ethnic demagogues may be able to break down
trust across ethnic lines. Such a breakdown of trust can become self-fulfilling,
as both sides become pessimistic about their future relationships, and so, treat
each other worse today. On the other hand, the forward looking nature of ethnic
relations can be a good thing since, for example, a community that was
previously sharply divided along ethnic lines can quickly become less divided
under favorable social and political conditions. If these favorable conditions
make people more optimistic about their future cross-ethnic relationships, then
they will be more careful to cultivate those relationships today. Models of
ethnic tensions among forward-looking agents are therefore important because
they highlight important risks and opportunities in improving ethnic relations.
These models may also suggest new ways to help overcome these ethnic tensions.