* 0215511
* US-Pakistan Workshop:  27th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs, Islamabad, Pakistan, June 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Talat Rahman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

0215511 &lt;br/&gt;Rahman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports the participation of nine US scientists in the 27th International
Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs, scheduled for June
24-July 5, 2002 in Nathiagali, Pakistan. Dr. Talat S. Rahman, Department of
Physics, Kansas State University, is organizing the US delegation. Dr.
Riazuddin, Director of the National Center for Physics at Quaid-e-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan is the organizer of a one-week session on
condensed matter physics (CMP) at the College. Attendees include scientists,
mostly recent Ph.D.'s, from a number of developing countries in the region,
including Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, China, India, Iran, Nepal, Tajikistan, and
Turkey, as well as Pakistan. They also include graduate students from Pakistan.
There are two sessions of one week each: the first week is dedicated to topics
in CMP and the second week to topics in particle and plasma physics. This award
supports the participation of the US scientists in the first week's session,
whose theme is "Novel Characteristics of Nanostructured Materials." Lectures
will focus on magnetic, semiconductor and metallic nanostructures, and the
processes of nanostructuring materials. Special emphasis will be placed on
providing insight into topics such as spintronics, quantum dots, quantum wells,
nano-wires, nano-tubes, photonics, and microelectronics. Speakers will also lead
informal discussions and tutorial sessions. The proceedings will be
published.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: International Nathiagali Summer Colleges
(INSC) have been organized every year since 1976. Scientists from the United
States and Western Europe present lectures and hold discussions on a variety of
subjects of current interest in physics and their contemporary applications in
developing countries. The INSC is attended by laboratory and industrial
researchers, university professors, college teachers, and graduate students. The
INSC provides the US lecturers the opportunity to establish useful links with
scientists from developing countries and to disseminate scientific knowledge
broadly. At least one junior scientist and one graduate student will be selected
as participants in the US delegation. The broader impact of this activity will
be to create a more scientifically aware society worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;