* 0215547
* CSEDI: Collaborative Research: New Experimental Approaches to He/U-Th Partitioning of the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Timothy Grove, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 165,054.00

Grove EAR-0215547

It is paradoxical that the mantle sources with the highest 3He/4He and
22Ne/21Ne, and argued to be the least-degassed and therefore the most primitive
or primordial, have uniformly depleted (not primitive) Sr, Nd, and Hf isotope
signatures. This is an unexplained and long-standing flaw in the "Standard
Model" for rare gas evolution in the earth. One of the assumptions underlying
the Standard Model is that He is more incompatible than Th and U during upper
mantle melting processes, and that it will be preferentially removed during
melting and subsequent eruptive degassing. Existing data for mineral-melt
partitioning of He ranges over several orders of magnitude, and does not place
any real constraints on this most important assumption of the Standard Model.
This project will address this issue by methodical experimental measurement of
He, Th and U partitioning between olivine, clinopyroxene and silicate melt. The
study will provide new solubility data for true structural-bound He in both
natural and synthetic olivine and clinopyroxene, and in silicate melt, over a
wide range of temperature, pressure, and oxygen fugacity. Helium in single-phase
experimental charges will be analyzed first by crushing in vacuo (to release
helium from cracks, voids and defects) followed by fusion in an utrahigh vacuum
furnace. He in multi-phase charges will be analyzed by in-situ laser-ablation. U
and Th partitioning data will also be determined over the same range of
conditions for olivine/melt and clinopyroxene/melt equilibrium pairs in simple
Fe-free haplobasaltic systems. The experiments will be designed to provide a
direct comparison between Th-U partitioning and He partitioning. Ultimately, the
resulting data will allow an assessment of a key question in terrestrial helium
isotope evolution: is high 3He/4He synonymous with an "undegassed" or
"relatively primordial" mantle source? The answer to this question has broad
significance to the CSEDI community, as helium is one of the only lines of
evidence for relatively undegassed material in the deep earth. --