* 0215486
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* David Donoho, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

This project will provide computing support for&lt;br/&gt;research on
computationally intensive applied&lt;br/&gt;statistical methods: wavelet methods
for finding&lt;br/&gt;filiments in two and three dimensional
data,&lt;br/&gt;microarray data analysis of gene expression
data,&lt;br/&gt;Monte Carlo method of finding
interpretable&lt;br/&gt;approximations to black box functions,&lt;br/&gt;spatial
smoothing of functional MRI images,&lt;br/&gt;and automatic clustering of flow
cytometry data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research frontiers of statistics are
now a&lt;br/&gt;far cry from the t-tests and chi-squared tests
of&lt;br/&gt;introductory courses. Modern scientific equipment&lt;br/&gt;gathers
millions of data measurements in complex&lt;br/&gt;settings. For example,
biologists measure the&lt;br/&gt;expression levels of thousands of genes on a
single&lt;br/&gt;chip, and brain scientists watch maps of
brain&lt;br/&gt;activity as a subject performs a task. Handling&lt;br/&gt;data
from these and related problems requires new&lt;br/&gt;statistical methods to
sort out patterns from&lt;br/&gt;randomness. These methods in turn
require&lt;br/&gt;substantial computating power, in both speed
and&lt;br/&gt;memory. This project will pay for computating&lt;br/&gt;resources
to support five such research areas.