* 0215392
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Qiang Du, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,320.00

NSF proposal DMS-0215392&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Xu, Belmonte, Du, Li and
Zikatanov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Mathematics at the Pennsylvania State&lt;br/&gt;University will purchase a
64-node parallel PC cluster&lt;br/&gt;to be dedicated to the support of research
and teaching&lt;br/&gt;in the mathematical sciences. In particular, the
PC&lt;br/&gt;cluster will be used to support the research projects&lt;br/&gt;of
faculty members in the areas of the numerical&lt;br/&gt;solution of partial
differential equations in fluid&lt;br/&gt;dynamics and material sciences, and
computational&lt;br/&gt;finance and in the studies of general
numerical&lt;br/&gt;techniques such as parallel multigrid algorithms
and&lt;br/&gt;quasi-Monte Carlo methods. In particular, the
projects&lt;br/&gt;include studies of important issues concerning
modeling&lt;br/&gt;and simulations of non-Newtonian flows, liquid
crystals,&lt;br/&gt;quantized vortices, water waves and fuel cells. Much
of&lt;br/&gt;the research efforts rely critically on the&lt;br/&gt;establishment
of the proposed PC cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal involves an
integrated collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between the numerical work to be performed in
the PC&lt;br/&gt;cluster and the experimental work to be performed
in&lt;br/&gt;the W. G. Pritchard Laboratories of the Department
of&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics. The new equipment will make it possible
to&lt;br/&gt;numerically simulate the various complex
physical&lt;br/&gt;phenomena observed in the fluid lab and will
greatly&lt;br/&gt;enhance collaborations among researchers in
computational&lt;br/&gt;and applied mathematics at Penn State. The PC
cluster&lt;br/&gt;will also be the basis for the creation of a
new&lt;br/&gt;computational laboratory, which together with
the&lt;br/&gt;Pritchard fluid lab, will provide a unique
environment&lt;br/&gt;for multidisciplinary research as well as for
(both&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate) student training.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;