* 0216557
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of a Digital Imaging System to Support Research and Research Training in Applications of Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Gregory Buck, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 130,800.00

Acquisition of a Digital Imaging System to Support Research and Research
Training in Applications of Molecular Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has
been awarded to Dr. Kirk Cammarata and colleagues at Texas A&amp;M University-
Corpus Christi (TAMU-CC) to acquire a digital imaging system for sensitive
detection of multicolor fluorescence, radioactivity and chemiluminescence data
generated by a variety of DNA- and protein-based research techniques. The
imaging package includes blue, green and red fluorescence excitation
capabilities, bandpass emission filters, 10 um-resolution optics and microarray
slide holder, storage phosphor cassettes and phosphor image eraser, and data
analysis software. The instrumentation will support molecular biological studies
on the health of the Gulf of Mexico coastal environment. The research will
explore the mechanisms by which aquatic organisms respond to environmental
contaminants such as endocrine disruptors and toxic heavy metals, and how DNA-
and protein-based molecular techniques can be used to monitor environmental
impacts. The Gulf coast hosts a diversity of uses including fisheries, wildlife,
industry and recreation. But it is also a sensitive collection point for
environmental contaminants originating from approximately two-thirds of the
continental United States. Knowledge of how aquatic organisms respond to
pollutants, in conjunction with molecular assay methods to measure these
responses, will result in a cause and effect understanding that may support
risk-based environmental assessment and regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
research facilitated by the imaging system will support the empowerment of
regulatory agencies to make rational, fact-based decisions regarding
environmental impacts of pollution. Moreover, the mission of the College of
Science and Technology at TAMU-CC is, in part, to increase minority
participation in the sciences. The research training and teaching needs of
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) in South Texas will be enhanced because the
instrumentation will enable research projects not previously possible in the
region.