* 0216391
* RUI: Acquisition of Electron Microscopy Instrumentation to Enhance Undergraduate Research at Truman State University
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* George Shinn, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 119,659.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jeffrey M. Osborn at Truman State University to
enhance undergraduate research opportunities at Truman through the acquisition
of electron microscopy instrumentation. Funds from this grant will be used to
purchase the following instruments: 1) a digital image system for an existing
transmission electron microscope (TEM), 2) a digital image system for an
existing scanning electron microscope (SEM), 3) an ultramicrotome, 4) a block
trimmer, and 5) a critical point dryer. &lt;br/&gt; This proposal brings
together five faculty members who utilize electron microscopy in their research
and teaching. 1) Pollen Developmental Evolution in Basal Angiosperms - Jeffrey
Osborn (PI). 2) Functional Morphology of Prey Capture by Arrow Worms - George
Shinn (Co-PI). 3) Structure-Function Relationships in Fleas: Water Uptake -
Laura Fielden (Co-PI). 4-5) Programmed Cell Death in Maize - Diane Janick-
Buckner and Brent Buckner (Co-PIs). &lt;br/&gt;Truman is Missouri's highly
selective, public liberal arts and sciences university, whose mission includes a
significant emphasis on involving undergraduate students in original research.
Student research is achieved through faculty mentoring of individual and group
projects, as well as direct inclusion of original research into the curriculum.
Electron microscopy continues to play a pivotal role in both approaches.