* 0216102
* Acquisition of a Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Ivan Petrov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 01/31/2005
* USD 600,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign with the purchase of a time-of-flight
secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS). The TOF-SIMS system will be capable
of ultra-sensitive surface and in-depth analysis at high mass resolution, high
lateral resolution and high molecular weight detection. The instrument will be
equipped with a UHV sample preparation chamber to perform in-situ experiments of
film growth and surface treatments. The proposed instrument will be equipped
with a cold stage to meet the needs of users in the expanding research area of
biomaterials. The TOF-SIMS will be located in the Center for Microanalysis of
Materials (CMM) which is part of the Frederick Seitz Materials Research
Laboratory (FSMRL) located on the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of
Illinois. The FSMRL is an interdisciplinary research unit that has been very
successful in enabling cross-disciplinary research and collaboration involving
about 130 faculty research groups distributed among seven academic departments.
The TOF-SIMS is critical to many research programs active at the University of
Illinois such as: (1) Nanobiology Assays; (2) Molecular Engineering; (3) Growth
of Individual Neurons in a Living, Cultured Neural Network; (4) Silicon
Nanotransitors; (5) quantum wire structures; (6) Nanoscale Quantum Dot
Heterostructures; (7) Alternative Gate Dielectrics; (8) p-doping of GaN-based
Nitride Semiconductors with Mg; Failure mechanisms in transition-metal (TM)
nitride diffusion barriers and corrosion-resistant layers; (9) Microchemistry of
large area solar cell materials. In addition to the above programs, the new
instrument will see widespread use in many other graduate research and education
programs. It is estimated that annually 50-75 researchers will directly utilize
the TOF-SIMS in their programs.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign with the purchase of a time-of-flight
secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS). The TOF-SIMS system will be capable
of ultra-sensitive surface and in-depth analysis at high mass resolution, high
lateral resolution and high molecular weight detection. The instrument will be
equipped with an ultra high vacuum sample preparation chamber to perform in-situ
experiments of film growth and surface treatments. The instrument will be
equipped with a cold stage to meet the needs of users in the expanding research
area of biomaterials. The TOF-SIMS will be located in the Center for
Microanalysis of Materials (CMM) which is part of the Frederick Seitz Materials
Research Laboratory (FSMRL) located on the Urbana-Champaign campus of the
University of Illinois. The FSMRL is an interdisciplinary research unit that has
been very successful in enabling cross-disciplinary research and collaboration
involving about 130 faculty research groups distributed among seven academic
departments. In addition, the new instrument will see widespread use in many
other graduate research and education programs. It is estimated that annually
50-75 researchers will directly utilize the TOF-SIMS.