* 0216899
* Acquisition of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Molecular Thin Film Research and Education.
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Richard Van Duyne, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 05/31/2004
* USD 107,341.00

The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program in the
Division of Materials Research will allow Northwestern University to acquire a
new Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR) Instrument for research and
education in the Departments of Materials Science and Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, and Chemistry. The proposed FTIR instrument will replace the
current outdated equipment and will be housed in the Polymer Characterization
Facility of the Materials Science department. The instrument will consist of two
modules: a conventional turn-key FTIR spectrometer with an array of attachments
for standard spectroscopic techniques, and a highly customizable module
specifically designed for measurements of molecular structure in ultra-thin
films of organic molecules. The former will make the instrument easily useful to
a broad audience of Northwestern researchers, while the latter will allow
measurements of molecular conformations in more difficult samples, especially in
biomaterials and nanomaterials research. The instrument will facilitate the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in all three departments, by
being utilized in laboratory sections of polymer materials class offered to the
engineering undergraduate students, and a spectroscopy class offered through the
chemistry department. The more advanced capabilities of the spectrometer will
greatly advance the ability of students involved in the interdisciplinary bio-
and nanomaterials research at Northwestern to elucidate and understand the
molecular-level details of structure in their
samples.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research Program in the Division of Materials Research will allow
Northwestern University to acquire a new Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer
(FTIR) Instrument for research and education. The instrument will be housed in
the Polymer Characterization Facility in the Materials Science and Engineering
department, and will be used to characterize new polymeric, biological and
nanomaterials prepared by researchers at Northwestern. In particular, it will
enable measurements of the orientation, shape, and arrangement of molecules in
extremely thin (just a few molecules thick) films deposited on the surfaces of
solids and liquids. Such films are often critical in creating the new materials
for biotechnology and nanoscience applications, governing, for example, the
interactions of biomaterials with biological tissues, or the workings of
nanoscale sensors capable of precisely measuring minute quantities of substances
present in a gas or a liquid. The instrument will be used in instruction for
several classes currently taught to science and engineering students at
Northwestern. Moreover, students of the undergraduate and graduate levels will
use the instrument for their research, improving the quality and scope of their
training as future members of the science and engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;