* 0216552
* Acquisition and Development of Two ICP Instruments: Continuous Ice Core Elemental Analyses and Other Environmental Applications
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 409,548.00

OPP-0216552 McConnell

Faculty, scientists, and students of the Desert Research Institute (DRI)
routinely need to quantify trace elements and isotopes in their research in
atmospheric, hydrologic, earth, ecosystem, and anthropological sciences. DRI's
quadrapole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) is widely used
for such measurements, but the detection limits of this instrument are
inadequate for many projects. Therefore, the Principal Investigators have
requested funding for two new ICP instruments: a Finnigan MAT Element2 high-
resolution, double focusing ICP-MS and a Varian Vista-Pro axially viewed
inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) under the
Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program. Additional funds are requested for
instrument development to incorporate the two ICP instruments into DRI's
recently developed method for continuous trace element and isotope analyses in
ice cores.

Continual improvement of high-resolution capabilities specifically was
identified by the NSF-sponsored U.S. Ice Core Working Group as a priority
requirement for the continuation of U.S. ice core research. Given the high cost
of collecting and storing ice cores and their potential to provide highly
detailed information on past atmospheric chemistry, atmospheric and oceanic
circulation, and anthropogenic pollution across a wide range of temporal and
spatial scales, it is clear that the best possible analytical procedures and
instrumentation for ice core analyses are warranted. DRI faculty has recently
developed a novel, efficient method using ICP-MS to make continuous, high-
resolution and exactly co-registered measurements of trace elements and chemical
species on ice cores. Measurements of 15 chemical species and elements on a ~135
meter (M) core from Summit, Greenland, and pilot data developed using cores from
Siple Dome, Antarctica, demonstrate the potential of this new approach as well
as the limitations of DRI's quadrapole ICP-MS. In ice cores, the concentrations
of some important elements and isotopes are below the detection limits of the
quadrapole ICP-MS. This problem also hinders other environmental science
applications where elemental and isotope data are fundamental to answering
critical questions.

While a major objective of this proposal is to significantly advance the level
and scope of U.S. ice core research, the availability of a state-of-the-art ICP-
MS and ICP-OES will improve and expand research capabilities for DRI and
University and Community College System of Nevada (UCCSN) faculty working in
other fields (e.g., impact of pollution aerosols on precipitation, groundwater
fingerprinting, determination of sources of colloidal material in surface
waters, trace element analysis in archeology). In particular, as the only ICP-MS
in Nevada capable of dedicated, high-resolution elemental and isotopic analyses,
the acquisition of the Element2 ICP-MS will attract new faculty to DRI and the
UCCSN system (with a goal of increasing diversity) as well as improve and expand
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate student training throughout the
state.