* 0216381
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Universal Wireless Communications System Emulator
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Parveen Wahid, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,475.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0216381&lt;br/&gt;Wei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;The phenomenal growth of wireless systems in thc last 15 years represents
a major paradigm change for society. Today, wireless, personal, and mobile
communications are essential for our modern economy and the general well being
of the country. Wireless technologies have not only brought in USA billions of
dollars in technology export, but also significantly increased the productivity
of the whole nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation the PIs are
requesting in this proposal is a wireless communication systems emulator. In
short, it can transmit and receive not only standard wireless signals and
display them in detail, but it also allows them to deviate from these standards.
It contains a universal wireless signal generator/transmitter, a universal
wireless signal receiver, a high resolution network analyzer and a multi-input
network analyzer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless communications has been a major
research focus area in the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
(SEECS), UCF, over the past few years. A major mission of SEECS is to advance
the future of wireless communications through education and research. The PIs
involved in this effort have been conducting research in wireless communications
for a number of years now. Some examples of the state-of-the art that they have
been engaged are included below:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) Invented new decoding
algorithms that are not only best known for block lengths from 100-250 bits, but
also specifically geared towards practical implementation and compatibility with
existing wireless systems. With the proposed emulator, they will be able to test
these algorithms for applications in the real world.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Introduced a
new intelligent packet network architecture, called a cognitive packet network
(CPN), in which the packets have intelligent capabilities for routing and flow
control themselves. The PIs currently have a network test-bed, with fixed wire-
line linkage, and their plan, with the help of the emulator, is to extend it to
incorporate wireless linkages. With the proposed instrument, they can also
increase the intelligence of the packets using the information gained from link-
quality, channel state information, power levels. etc.&lt;br/&gt;(c)
Teleoperated robots have wide application from search-rescue operation to
factory operation. The robotics and controls lab has several robots, real-time
control systems, and other equipments. The proposed instrument will enable the
PIs to extend their capability to mobile robots with advanced wireless
communication capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty members on this
team have published several hundreds of papers in leading technical journals and
conferences. In fact, all PIs and senior personnel have served or are serving as
Editors / Associate Editors for prestigious international journals in the areas
of their expertise. This state-of-the-art instrumentation will help them verify
their research results, extend their capabilities, and justify their future
research directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment will also enhance their
educational capabilities. The PIs currently offer a Wireless Communications
option for their electrical engineering undergraduate students and have several
graduate students working on projects in the field of wireless communications.
This emulator will not only help demonstrate to the students the theory
presented in the classroom, but also provide a hands-on platform for thesis and
dissertation works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;