* 0216492
* Acquisition of a High-Resolution Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 800,000.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Norbert F.
Scherer and colleagues at the University of Chicago will acquire a high-
resolution scanning transmission electron microscope (S/TEM) for
interdisciplinary nanoscience research. The STEM will be used to study systems
in nano-physics, nano-chemistry, and nano-biology. Some of the applications
include characterization of nanocrystals; diblock copolymer used for making
nanoparticle array wires; phase separation and structure studies for
electroactive diblock copolymers; hemoglobin fiber formation and sickle cell
anemia; genome-scale genetic analysis and fabrication of nano-structured
materials with novel properties; biomembranes; high resolution e-beam writing
using photoresists; and new direct methods of pattern formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the research at the forefront of structural and
cell biology and nanoscience requires routine characterization of specimens by a
combination of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission
electron microscopy (S/TEM). High-end TEM is unsurpassed in terms of image
resolution and ease of interpretation. In addition, with new capabilities such
as tomography, electron microscopy is entering a new era in which its
application can visualize molecular structure with (near-) atomic resolution.