* 0216881
* Development of X-ray Diffraction Equipment for Research, Education, Training, and Outreach at a Synchrotron Source
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Hector Abruna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 144,375.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Cornell
University will allow several teams of investigators to develop x-ray
diffraction instrumentation that will provide unique experimental capabilities
and powerful general use equipment for use at the G2 experimental station at the
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). A six-circle diffractometer, two
CCD area detectors, and a temperature- and environment-controlled sample stage
will be built. The diffractometer will allow for a very wide range of
experimental configurations and will be the basic diffractometer for the G2
experimental station. The area detectors will be used at G2 for a variety of
different experiments, but will also be made available to users at other
experimental stations easing a current very high over demand for such detectors
at CHESS and at Cornell. The stage will be able to hold samples at any
temperature between 20 and 900 degrees C in a range of atmospheres during
diffraction experiments and will also be used at different experimental
stations. Together, this equipment will be optimized for high resolution and
time-sensitive x-ray diffraction work. Initial work includes: 1) studies of
mechanical deformation, relaxation, and anelastic recovery, as well as
interactions among microstructure development, phase changes, and solid state
reactions in thin films and nanopattened structures, 2) studies of the evolution
of strain and magnetic and electronic properties as a function of controlled
oxidation in magnetic oxide thin films and nanostructures, 3) studies of
formation and structure of highly ordered arrays by metal initiated self-
assembly of ligand modified den-drimers, and 4) studies of the kinetics of
interface growth of metal mono- and multilayers. This equipment will be made
available to outside users and to students, and will be used in outreach
programs such as the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) and Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs sponsored by NSF through the
Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR).&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award
from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Cornell University
will allow several teams of investigators to develop x-ray diffraction
instrumentation that will provide unique experimental capabilities and powerful
general use equipment for use at the G2 experimental station at the Cornell High
Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). This equipment will be optimized for high
resolution and time-sensitive x-ray diffraction work. It will be used to obtain
rapid high resolution measurements of thermally induced phenomena in
nanostructured materials, including strain, deformation, phase transformations,
magnetic and electronic properties, film formation, and solid state reactions.
This equipment will benefit a large number of research groups at Cornell, and
also external US and international collaborators. It will be made available to
outside users, to students, and will be used in outreach programs such as the
very successful Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) and Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) programs sponsored by NSF through the Cornell Center
for Materials Research (CCMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;