* 0216982
* Workshop on the History of Algebra in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Michael Singer, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Project Abstract SES # 0216982 Workshop on the History of Algebra in the
Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries

Michael Singer, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Cal -Berkeley Karen
Parshall, University of Virginia

This proposal is for a workshop at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
at the University of California at Berkeley in spring 2003. The conference,
which culminates a semester-long focus at the Institute on commutative algebra,
brings together leading historians of mathematics and mathematicians for a five-
day discussion of relevant topics. This workshop represents an important
departure for the institute, which normally focuses on purely mathematical
enterprises. The organizers are Jeremy J. Gray (Centre for the History of the
Mathematical Sciences, The Open University) and co-PI, Karen Hunger Parshall
(Departments of History and Mathematics, University of Virginia).

The workshop should have two components: lectures and moderated discussions.
Some twenty, hour-long lectures are to be delivered over a five-day period by
established researchers, more junior scholars, and advanced graduate students.
Ample time for questions and discussion follows each lecture. Each day closes
with a moderated discussion period for a dialogue between the historians and the
mathematicians visiting MSRI about critical issues in the history of modern
algebra. Among the topics to be analyzed are: o the contribution of David
Hilbert to modern algebra, his re-working of the ideas of Dedekind and
Kronecker, and the role of his new formulation of the subject in guiding
subsequent research; o the origins of Emmy Noether's work and its later
developments; o the spread and development of algebraic thought from Germany to
Britain, France, and the United States; o the importance and the nature of the
connections between commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, and algebraic
number theory; o the philosophy and the teaching of modern algebra; and o the
institutionalization of modern algebra in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries.

This workshop provides a unique forum for the interaction of historians of
mathematics and mathematicians, who represent one of the primary audiences for
research in the history of mathematics. Moreover, the workshop will allow us to
take a major step forward not only in understanding the evolution of modern
algebra in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries but also in defining a common
agenda for on-going research in the history of modern mathematics. Both of these
objectives will be accomplished in the short term through interactions at the
workshop and in the long term through a published, book-length volume with an
explicitly historiographical component.