* 0216732
* U.S.-Russia-Mongolia Joint Collaborative Research: Comparative Framework for North Asian Genetic Diversity
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Tatiana Karafet, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2006
* USD 327,307.00

Hammer&lt;br/&gt;0216732&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use human
genomic variation patterns as a tool for testing hypotheses concerning the early
peopling of North Asia and the Americas and for assessing the relative effects
of sex-specific demographic processes and natural selection in shaping North
Asian genetic diversity. Within genetics, the study of lineages that are
inherited paternally, maternally or biparentally can offer different insights
into the origins and global dispersals of Homo sapiens. The genetic analyses
will be applied to a panel of 16 males from each of 6 Siberian populations.
Comparisons of intra-specific patterns of variation within and among human
populations, and with levels of divergence between humans and great apes at
these loci, will enable tests of the effects of natural selection and potential
differences in male and female effective population sizes. Informative
polymorphisms discovered in this Siberian ascertainment panel will be genotyped
in a larger set of North Asian samples to allow further tests of the
associations between linguistic, geographic, and genetic variation and the
effects of genetic drift, migration, and admixture on North Asian populations.
These results will be used to aid in constructing more realistic colonization
models involving different stages for the early peopling of the
Americas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will enhance our
understanding of the evolutionary history of our species. Reconstructing the
patterns and processes of human evolution in Asia is of interest because the the
earliest dispersal routes of anatomically modern humans out of Africa are not
well understood from the archaeological and paleontological records. Further,
this region is the origin for subsequent migrations to Japan, Siberia, and the
Americas. The 31 native ethnic groups of Siberia, 14 of which are available for
this project, offer significant opportunities to examine the evolutionary forces
that may have acted on early modern human populations. Until very recently many
native Siberian groups retained traditional subsistence economies and lifeways
that may have reflected a pre-Neolithic population structure. North Asian
populations, especially those adapted to boreal climates in the northernmost
regions inhabited by humans, are genetically subdivided, and genetic drift has
played a key role in shaping patterns of variation in Siberia. Furthermore, the
demographic history of Siberian populations has led to an unusually strong
association between language and genetic variation. The proposed research is a
first attempt to develop a comparative genetic framework using data obtained
from the same set of samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
directly address three major challenges that now face anthropological
geneticists. The multiple locus approach to be taken here will help to
understand: (1) which portions of the human genome are variable; (2) how genomic
and evolutionary processes have interacted to generate observed patterns of
diversity; and (3) what the relative roles of each of these forces have been
over different periods of time and in different populations. In addition to
having a fascinating evolutionary history, Native Siberian populations represent
an ideal model system within which to address these timely issues.