* 0216471
* A Stable Isotope and Eddy Covariance System for Monitoring Ecosystem Metabolism
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 01/31/2006
* USD 279,101.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Northern
Arizona University to acquire eddy covariance towers and a stable isotope ratio
mass spectrometer. The eddy covariance equipment will be used to measure carbon,
water, and energy exchange between southwestern ecosystems and the atmosphere.
These fluxes are critical regulators of ecosystem processes, such as
decomposition, &lt;br/&gt;nutrient cycling, consumer activity, and groundwater
recharge to riparian ecosystems. They also influence regional and global climate
and are of increasing interest to policy-makers concerned with management of
greenhouse gases. Previous eddy covariance studies emphasize determining net
fluxes in pristine ecosystems. The two major goals of this project are 1) to use
stable isotope techniques to determine the mechanisms responsible for changing
net fluxes (e.g., for carbon dioxide, determining how overstory trees versus
understory grasses contribute to total ecosystem photosynthesis and
respiration), and 2) using large-scale experiments, to determine how fluxes of
carbon, water, and energy respond to disturbance and land use
practices.&lt;br/&gt;Eddy covariance and stable isotope measurements will be
conducted in two experimental settings. First, tracts of Ponderosa Pine forest
that have been thinned to reduce fire danger will be compared with dense,
control forests, documenting the impacts of so-called 'forest restoration' on
fluxes of carbon, water, and energy. Second, grasslands under varying grazing
management practices will be compared to assess which land management practices,
for example, are more effective at conserving water and storing carbon. In these
experiments, instruments on towers will be used to measure 'eddies' (turbulent
air movements) carrying pockets of air upwards, downwards, and sideways.
Measuring vertical air movements and the amount of carbon dioxide, water vapor,
and heat they contain enables one to calculate the net fluxes of these
constituents between the ecosystem and the atmosphere. The isotope ratio mass
spectrometer will be used to analyze the stable isotope composition of carbon
dioxide and water vapor in samples of air throughout the canopy. Stable isotopes
of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen provide characteristic fingerprints of how
individual components of ecosystems contribute to overall fluxes measured by
eddy covariance, so coupling these two techniques will enable researchers to
determine which &lt;br/&gt;ecosystem components are responsible for altering net
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;This equipment will be used to address research questions
ranging from the effects of climate on ecosystem functioning to the implications
of large-scale forest restoration for regional climate and site water balance.
Once established, this new flux measurement array will attract additional
&lt;br/&gt;researchers working on issues as diverse as design of new range
management programs to regional influences of globally important phenomena such
as El Nino and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate in the proposed
research through an NSF funded UMEB program already in place at NAU. The
&lt;br/&gt;theme of the UMEB program includes specific research activities that
dovetail nicely with the research enabled by this instrumentation grant (e.g.,
Carbon Balance of Colorado Plateau Ecosystems, and Livestock Management,
Productivity, and Diversity of Southwestern Grasslands). Minority students
recruited into the UMEB program will work with mentors &lt;br/&gt;involved with
the flux and isotope studies and will attend special classes in which the
findings of the ecosystem experiments are presented. In sum, the equipment
funded by this grant will increase opportunities for training students of
diverse backgrounds at NAU in state-of the-art techniques and research relevant
to important issues in ecology and environmental biology&lt;br/&gt;