* 0216671
* SBIR Phase II:  A Fast Parallel Grid-Free Method for Simulating Turbulent Incompressible Flow In/Around Time-Varying Geometries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Adrin Gharakhani, Applied Scientific Research
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 08/31/2005
* USD 589,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project builds on
algorithms developed for simulating turbulent incompressible flows in and around
time-varying geometries. The Phase II project proposes to develop and
commercialize a state-of-the-art computational fluid dynamics (CFD) package
utilizing the algorithms developed. The computational engine is based upon an
advanced parallel, adaptive fast multipole (FMM) implementation of a 3-D
Lagrangian vortex-boundary element method. Turbulence is accounted for via Large
Eddy Simulation (LES) using a dynamic Smagorinsky sub-grid scale model. The
method is (1) grid-free in the fluid domain, (2) virtually free of numerical
diffusion, (3) inherently solution-adaptive, and (4) capable of modeling
inhomogeneous unsteady wall-bounded turbulent flow. During Phase II additional
innovative algorithms will be developed for FMM to substantially increase it
computational speed as well as accuracy. Additionally, an LES model for unsteady
inhomogeneous flows will be implemented and tested rigorously using problems of
potential interest to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software is ideal for
simulation and analysis of complex laminar-through-turbulent flow phenomena
involving massive flow separation, unsteady vortex shedding, transient jets in
cross-stream, and wake-body interaction. Examples of interest to industry are
flow over bluff bodies such as ground vehicles or buildings, in data storage
units with rotating and moving parts; in internal combustion engines; and in and
around rotating machinery such as pumps and fans.