* 0216681
* Acquisition of a Low Temperature Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscope/Scanning Probe Microscope (NSOM/SPM) for Spectroscopic Studies of Structures Down to the Nanometer-Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Clive Perry, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 148,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program is for the
acquisition of a low temperature Near-field Scanning Optical Microscope/Scanning
Probe Microscope (NSOM/SPM) for light emission spectroscopic studies of
structures down to the nanometer-scale. Such a powerful combination will allow
the simultaneous recording of topographical and spectroscopic data, with
conventional far-field imaging, confocal microscopy, atomic force microscopy
(AFM), and near-field optics in a single system. Examples include NSOM
imaging/spectroscopy of nanowire arrays, quantum dots, and related III-V and
magnetic semiconductor heterostructures, NSOM fluorescence of disordered
polymers, glasses, super-cooled liquids, and single molecule fluorescence
studies of proteins. Novel experiments are also proposed to explore issues in
quantum chaos at optical wavelengths using suitably fabricated structures. The
Nanonics Imaging Ltd. NSOM/SPM-100 confocal system is able to perform
simultaneous NSOM and AFM imaging. Metal-coated tips will be used for the
development of ballistic electron emission microscopy of semiconductor samples
simultaneously with light emission spectroscopy. The instrument has the
potential of satisfying many diverse users including identifying and building
basic skill sets for undergraduate and graduate students and to train talented
technicians. It will be a complementary tool to the ultra high vacuum Scanning
Tunneling Microscope (STM/AFM) and a micro-Raman systems currently available in
the physics department at Northeastern University that are devoted to the
promotion of research and educational programs in nano- and biomolecular-
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is an instrument award to Northeastern
University for a Near-field Scanning Optical Microscope/Scanning Probe
Microscope (NSOM/SPM) with analytical light emission spectroscopic (LES)
capabilities. The new facility provides a complimentary platform for the
universal integration of several other forms of frontier microscopies, such as
an ultra high vacuum scanning tunneling microscope/atomic force microscope and
micro-Raman systems, that are currently in use in their physics department
today. The instrumentation will enable the user to make direct comparisons
between the topographical and optical/spectroscopic properties of samples down
to the nanometer scale. The instrument is equipped with a variable temperature
capability from room temperature to10K and the proposal calls for future
development of ballistic electron emission spectroscopy (BEES) using metal-
coated tips for complementary BEES/LES studies of semiconductor
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;The facility has two central goals: &lt;br/&gt;1)
Collaborative research using NSOM imaging/spectroscopy to explore issues in
quantum chaos at optical wavelengths; studies of quantum dots, and magnetic
semiconductors for "spintronic" applications; and NSOM fluorescence of
disordered polymers, glasses; and single molecule fluorescence studies of
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;2) Education and hands-on training of undergraduate
students, graduate students, and talented technicians in nanometer-scale
characterization techniques. &lt;br/&gt;The instrument request includes 33%
matching funds provided by Northeastern University and a substantial discount by
the instrument manufactures.&lt;br/&gt;