* 0216816
* Acquisition of Chromatography Equipment for Polymeric Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Jimmy Mays, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 01/31/2004
* USD 90,650.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will allow
the University of Tennessee to purchase instrumentation for chromatographic
separation and molecular characterization of polymers and copolymers that are
synthesized and/or studied at the University of Tennessee (UT). More
specifically, two chromatographs - one capable of operation at elevated
temperatures and the other operating at ambient or near ambient temperatures -
will be purchased. To optimize the utility of these systems for characterizing
complex polymers, such as branched polymers, block and graft copolymers, and
polymers with reactive end-groups, the instrument will include a variety of
detectors including light scattering, differential viscometer, ultraviolet, and
differential refractometer units. To further expand the usefulness of the room
temperature chromatograph, columns will be purchased for operating this unit as
either a size exclusion chromatograph (SEC) or as a temperature gradient
interaction chromatograph (TGIC), as necessary. The acquisition of these
instruments will provide UT polymer scientists and engineers with a state-of-
the-art facility for measurement of polymer molecular weights, polydispersities,
conformational characteristics, and branching. Improved polymer characterization
capabilities will favorably impact the research of more than 60 researchers in
the UT Chemistry, Materials Science, and Chemical Engineering Departments,
including projects such as the correlation of molecular weight distribution to
complex rheology, crystallization studies of polymers and copolymers,
optimization of interfacial adhesion in polymer blends and composites, effect of
biopolymer structure on food chemistry, and new branched polymers as novel
elastomers and for testing polymer dilute solution theory. In addition, these
instruments will allow us to develop new laboratories for Introduction to
Polymer Chemistry, Polymer Physical Chemistry, and Polymeric Materials courses,
thus exposing approximately 100 undergraduate and graduate students annually to
the use of multi-detector SEC and TGIC for polymer characterization.

The acquisition of instrumentation for chromatographic separation and molecular
characterization of polymers and copolymers that are synthesized and/or studied
at the University of Tennessee. This will provide polymer scientists and
engineers with a state-of-the-art facility for measurement of molecular weights,
polydispersities, conformational characteristics, and branching of polymers and
copolymers. Improved polymer characterization capabilities will favorably impact
the research of more than 60 researchers in the UT Chemistry, Materials Science,
and Chemical Engineering Departments. In addition, these instruments will allow
the PI's to develop new laboratories for Introduction to Polymer Chemistry,
Polymer Physical Chemistry, and Polymeric Materials courses, thus exposing
approximately 100 undergraduate and graduate students annually to the use of
multi-detector Size exclusion chromatography and temperature gradient
interaction chromatography for polymer characterization.

