* 0216626
* Leveraged acquisition of a Seattle fault GPS network:  Four dimensional constraint on seismic and aseismic strain accumlation and release  in the urbanized Puget Lowlands
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* M. Meghan Miller, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

0216626 Miller

Continuous observations using Global Positioning System (GPS) geodesy yield
high-precision determination of horizontal and vertical deformation rates and
their variation in time and space. This project builds on the stunning advances
that data from the regional Pacific Northwest Geodetic Array (PANGA) has yielded
over the last year. In partnership with the surveying community in Puget Sound,
PANGA scientists will install a continuous GPS network that is optimally
designed to determine the kinematics and locking of the Seattle fault zone, a
major fault within the North America plate. In addition, this network provides
important new constraints on the periodic recurrence of slow or silent
earthquakes, which have been recently discovered along the transition zone of
the Cascadia plate interface. Both studies have fundamental importance to
characterizing the geodynamics of plate interaction, they also have broader
impacts on quantifying seismic strain energy accumulation on a crustal fault
that lies in the heart of the urbanized Puget Lowlands. This network will add
new constraints to the relative balance between seismic and aseismic strain
release mechanisms on the plate boundary fault that is known to generate great
earthquakes (approximately magnitude 9) at frequencies of about 500 years.
Finally, this project will foster the nascent collaboration between regional
professional and academic communities.

The Puget Sound surveying community has formed a consortium to support
coordination of new GPS technology to the urbanized Puget Lowlands. This
collaboration of cities, counties, state agencies, and engineering firms is
committed to installing a "virtual reference system" GPS network known as the
Puget Reference System Utility (PRSU) that can provide cm-level positioning in
real time. Fortuitously, this network is optimal for the earthquake and
geodynamics studies outlined above, with the caveat that the solid earth
deformation community has the highest standards for monumentation in order that
GPS antennas track real earth motion rather than the effects of soil,
gourndwater or man-made structures. The Puget Lowlands present the greatest
first-order challenges to stable monument design: thick soil horizons, deep
sedimentary basins in the foot wall of the Seattle fault and a mantle of debris
left behind in the last glacial retreat require use of the deeply anchored
drilled braced monument. Such monumentation is thus critical to making
geophysically meaningful observations of great precision required by the
problems posed here. This project funds geodetic quality monuments in order to
leverage the PRSU GPS network for solid earth deformation studies in a highly
leveraged fashion. ***