* 0216661
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Linux Cluster Super Computer for Meteorological Modeling and Computer Science Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Robert Bornstein, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 205,454.00

EIA 02-16661 Rafkin, Scot Chun, Robert San Jose State University

Title: MRI/RUI/MII: Acquisition of a Linux Cluster Super Computer for
Meteorological Modeling and Computer Science Research and Education

Project Proposed:

This proposal from an RUI/MII institution, establishing a Linux-based parallel
computing cluster, aims to simulate meteorological phenomena and study and teach
the use of parallel processors. The infrastructure will be used in support of
ongoing Numerical modeling of the atmosphere of Mars using the Mars Regional
Atmospheric Modeling System (MRAMS) and Computer Science Research in the
parallel and distributed hardware and software. The first component will benefit
the following current research underway: Large eddy simulations (LESs) of the
Martian atmosphere to provide insight into the structure and dynamics of the
highly unstable convective boundary layer (including the dynamics of dusts
devils) Mesoscale simulations of past and proposed Mars landing sites Simulation
of local and regional dust storms, and wind-produced landforms (aids satellite
observations) Simulations of orographic water ice and carbon dioxide clouds. The
second component will investigate and/or explore Software optimization of the
MRAMS code (tune it for maximum performance on hardware platform) and
Alternative hardware architectures for high-performance computing The cluster
will serve as a central research platform to investigate processor-to-processor
communication overhead, memory contention of symmetric multiprocessors, cache
coherence, and distributed processing. Moreover, performance of novel processor,
memory, and network topologies will be evaluated.