* 0216162
* RUI: Acquisition of a 300 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for Undergraduate Chemical Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* John Beck, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 254,066.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Sweet Briar College will acquire a 300 MHz NMR
Spectrometer. This equipment will enable researchers to carry out studies on a)
structure-activity relationship, and the synthesis and testing of analogs of
bioactive compounds; b) structure elucidation and characterization of natural
products; c) the synthesis of novel ligands for palladium and platinum bioactive
compounds; and d) the synthesis and purification of dithiophosphate
oligonucleotides, and the testing of activity in cell culture of antisense DNA.
Faculty at Randolph-Macon Women's College, Hollins University and The University
of the Virgin Islands will also have access to this equipment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most
powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in a number of areas
including biochemistry and drug development.