* 0216563
* Acquisition of Computer Infrastructure for the San Diego State University Computational Science Research Center
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Jose Castillo, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 140,940.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Computational Science Research Center at San Diego State University will acquire
a computer system consisting of an Intel/Linux cluster and 4 workstations. This
equipment will enhance research in the following areas: a) calculation of
structural and dynamical properties of reactive chemical intermediates with low-
barrier mechanisms for chemical transformation; b) development of numerical
integration techniques for application to oceanic flow patterns around static
objects; c) modeling of protein-protein docking as a component in iterative
protein design techniques; d) development and testing of mathematical models of
flame dynamics; e) simulation of collisions between different planets and
between planets and their suns; f) calculation of dynamical properties in
quantum fluids; and g) three-dimensional mapping of mitochondrial structures and
associated statistical analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cluster of fast, modern
computer workstations is vital to serving the computing needs of active research
departments. Such a "computer network" also serves as a development environment
for new theoretical codes and algorithms, provides state-of-the-art graphics and
visualization facilities, and supports research in state-of-the-art applications
of parallel processing. These studies will have a significant impact in a wide
number of areas, including biochemistry, ocean sciences, drug development,
combustion chemistry, astronomy, and materials sciences.