* 0216832
* Genetic Consequences of Pre-Columbian Agave Cultivation in Central Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Kathleen Parker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 299,999.00

Although its ethnobotanical importance in Mesoamerica has long been recognized,
agave cultivation by indigenous peoples north of the present international
boundary separating the U.S. and Mexico was not documented until the 1980s.
Since then, agave cultivation by pre-Columbian cultures in the northern Sonoran
Desert has been studied by several scholars, but many questions remain. This
research project will examine the genetic effects of pre-Columbian cultivation
on three agave species that were grown by several prehistoric cultures in
central Arizona from about 600 to 1350 A.D.. Because two of these species (Agave
murpheyi and A. delamateri) are only found in association with archeological
sites, they have been considered to be cultigens, or crop plants. They were most
likely transported north from Mexico along prehistoric trade routes, although
the identity of their ancestral species remains a mystery. The third species (A.
parryi) exists in both wild and cultivated populations, with some of the latter
constituting an area of purported human-induced range expansion. Thanks to their
longevity and vegetative reproduction, coupled with the absence of agave
cultivation in this area after roughly 1450, these three agave species provide a
unique opportunity to study the pre-Columbian domestication process, as well as
the effects of prehistoric cultivation practices on the genetic variability and
structure of wild plants. The investigators will use molecular techniques (a
combination of allozyme, microsatellite, chloroplast DNA, and ribosomal DNA
analysis) to examine both cultural and evolutionary aspects of agave cultivation
in this region. Specific objectives of the project are (1) to determine levels
of genetic variability within the two cultigens, (2) to clarify the number of
times they were independently introduced into central Arizona from Mexico, (3)
to identify the ancestors of the cultigens, (4) to determine whether human
selection for different traits in A. murpheyi differed with cultural context,
(5) to compare levels and partitioning of genetic diversity within wild and
cultivated populations of A. parryi, and (6) to determine whether cultivated
populations of this species were all derived from the same founder. Leaf samples
for these molecular analyses will be collected from populations of the three
target species and their close relatives in Arizona and
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will break new ground in a virtually
unexplored area of crop evolution. Because most research has focused on modern
crops that are part of either a commercial or traditional agricultural system;
much less is known about prehistoric plant domestication. Molecular markers have
been used successfully to examine the domestication process in other crops, and
to determine taxonomic relationships among genera within the Agavaceae (agave)
family. Their use in this study will clarify poorly understood taxonomic
relationships within the Ditepalae group of that family, and it will assess the
genetic consequences of pre-Columbian cultivation on these two cultigens and A.
parryi. Both A. murpheyi and A. delamateri are very rare plants that range over
a small area of Arizona. Protection has been sought for both species under the
Endangered Species Act, the Antiquities Act, and the Historic Preservation Act,
but many populations have already been destroyed through urban development and
reservoir impoundment. This project will advance fundamental knowledge of these
important prehistoric cultigens and the cultural context within which they were
cultivated, and it will assist efforts to ensure their preservation.&lt;br/&gt;