* 0216927
* Development of a Nondestructive Microprobe for Research and Education on Multiscale Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 468,041.00

This award from the Major Instrumentation Program provides support to scientists
at the University of California, Riverside who are developing a microprobe that
can take pictures revealing the spatial distributions of various atomic-scale
defects that may be present in an object. Nanoscale imperfections in solids can
interact to produce macroscopic effects in response to applied stress, such as
aging, weathering and cracking. Understanding the mechanisms for the
transformation of isolated defects into significant imperfections is crucial to
predicting and ultimately preventing failure in many materials of key importance
to society. An essential element to correlating macroscopic events with their
precursors would be the availability of images that could show the spatial
distribution and organization of atomic defects on many length scales. The
positron microprobe has an unrivaled sensitivity for detecting open volume
defects at the parts-per-million level of concentration in many materials. The
objective is to develop an instrument that includes a scanning positron
microprobe that can capture images of material defects with a high data rate and
resolution such that centimeter size samples can be viewed with micron
resolution. The microprobe will be useful across many scientific disciplines,
leading to advances in diverse fields including environmental science and
geology where the examination of rocks could reveal pathways for the transport
of pollutants and elucidate important evidence for the earliest life forms.
&lt;br/&gt;The microprobe instrument will combine (a) a positron microprobe for
crystalline imperfections and porosity; (b) a picosecond laser probe for
introducing thermal gradients and acoustic shocks and for measuring surface
reflectivity; (c) a scanning electron microprobe for measuring features at 20 nm
resolution on precisely the area of interest without disturbing a sample; and
(d) a sample preparation and surface spectroscopy station. The scanning positron
microprobe will have a two orders of magnitude greater data collection rate than
any existing positron probe and would for the first time allow obtaining images
at 1 micron resolution over macroscopically interesting distances in useful
laboratory timescales, ie., several hours. The combination of this unique
positron probe with two well-established tools, ie., SEM and optical imaging,
would enable structure studies on spatial scales extending from atomic defects
to macroscopic fracture on the mm scale and temporal studies from picoseconds to
days. The object of having all instruments combined in the same sample chamber
is to ensure that the atomic scale defects are not changed by remounting and
handling of the sample and that the stresses on the sample remain the same for
all 3 characterizations. The proposed instrument will thus have all the
advantages of SEM/laser/optics combined with a unique positron contrast image
linked to atomic-scale defects.&lt;br/&gt;Several students will be trained in
the details of the principles, construction and operation of the proposed
instrument. The availability of the microprobe will be the basis for the
formation of an interdepartmental group of researchers focused on understanding
the well known tendency of systems driven by stress or energy gradients to
organize at many length scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new type of microscope
combining positron, electron, and laser microprobes will be developed that will
allow scientists to study how atomic-scale defects affect the physical
properties of solid materials and how neighboring atomic-scale defects are
gradually organized into much larger imperfections such as cracks. The core of
the instrument is a positron microprobe, which has an unrivaled sensitivity for
detecting defects in which a handful of atoms are missing from their usual
location. By combining the positron microprobe with a conventional electron
microscope that can resolve structures on the scale of 100's of atoms and a
pulsed laser microscope that can resolve structure on a micron scale, it will be
possible to directly resolve how individual atomic defects evolve into larger
and larger structures. With the new understanding made possible by such an
instrument, materials scientists may one day be able to predict where cracks
will form in a strained, aging, or weathered object. This will allow to test and
design stronger and more durable materials for semiconductor devices, airplane
turbines, and nuclear waste storage containers. The new microprobe will be
useful in all scientific disciplines where solid material properties are
important. For example, it may lead to advances in environmental science and
geology where the examination of rocks could reveal pathways for pollutants to
move and provide evidence for the earliest forms of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;several students will be trained in the details of the
principles, construction, and operation of the proposed instrument. Once
available, the microprobe will be the basis for the formation of an
interdepartmental group of researchers focused on understanding the general
tendency of all complex systems to respond on many length scales when they are
strained. The ultimate goal would be to find new physical principles which would
allow us to predict the behavior of a wide variety of seemingly unrelated
complex systems ranging from systems of atoms in a solid to systems of
astronomical bodies in a galaxy, molecules in a cell, or organisms in a colony.
&lt;br/&gt;