* 0216240
* SBIR Phase II:   A Programming Environment to Enable Engineers to Program Distributed Measurement and Control Networks
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Thomas Sharp, SHEET DYNAMICS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2006
* USD 479,286.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
high level graphical programming environment for distributed measurement and
control networks used in industry. Using this environment, an industrial control
engineer will be able to describe the desired behavior of his/her system at a
high level of abstraction (e.g. 'control motor speed', 'monitor bearing',
'monitor pump') and then "click a button" for the executable distributed
application to be generated. In addition, the engineer will be able to monitor
the behavior of the executing system at the graphical level to help identify
problems. This system will automatically partition the graphical description
into components targeted at specific processors on the network based upon the
resources required by the algorithm. This functionality will greatly benefit the
industrial control engineer, who will be able to focus on algorithm and
application development rather than details of hardware and networking
realizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the commercial potential of distributed
approaches are becoming more prevalent in industrial applications, the potential
of this software system will grow at a fast rate. For example, 15 network
controllers instead of one now manage a Proctor &amp; Gamble diaper
manufacturing line. Currently the market for distributed measurement and control
is fragmented, with over 60 proprietary process network standards in use. The
advent of the IEEE 1451 smart transducer standard creates a huge market
opportunity by providing a portable application model that enables development
tools, such as those being developed in this project, to be used with the
multitude of existing commercial process busses.