* 0216233
* Scanning Electron Microscope for Collaborative Use at Rutgers-Camden
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* William Saidel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 165,100.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Joseph V. Martin, Georgia A. Arbuckle-Keil,
Daniel H. Shain, J. William Whitlow, Jr. and William M. Saidel at Rutgers
University to obtain a scanning electron microscope for multidisciplinary use.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) provides high resolution imagery of surfaces
ranging from synthetic materials to biological samples. Energy dispersive X-ray
(EDX)-equipped scanning electron microscopes also have the capacity to detect
heavy metals localized in tissue (e.g., brain) and synthetic polymers. In an
effort to foster interdisciplinary research among faculty in the College of Arts
and Sciences at the Rutgers/Camden campus, the IPCBS (Information Processing in
Complex Biological Systems) group at Camden will acquire an SEM equipped with
EDX capabilities. This unit operates under low vacuum, which permits samples to
be examined without traditional time-consuming and costly preparative
methodologies. &lt;br/&gt; Research initiatives that would result from the
purchase of this instrument include the detailed morphological characterization
of polymers with electroactive properties (Dr. G. Arbuckle-Keil), fine
resolution of fungal hyphae for mapping leaf surfaces (Dr. J. Dighton), the
accumulation of lead in brain tissue (Drs. J. Martin, W. Saidel, R. Whitlow),
the distribution of iodine and zinc in the central nervous system as they relate
to thyroid hormone function and circadian rhythms, respectively (Dr. J. Martin,
P. Sarkar), characterizing the morphology of an unusual fish eye (Pantadon
buchholzi) that receives light simultaneously from air and water (Dr. W. Saidel)
and the taxonomic classification of annelid species from the Amazon River (Dr.
D. Shain).&lt;br/&gt; The ease of use of an SEM will allow graduate and
undergraduate researchers to have hands-on experience with a sophisticated
research instrument. Courses that can incorporate an SEM component in their
curricula include comparative morphology of plants, chemical principles,
developmental botany, electron microscopy, general microbiology, instrumental
analysis, invertebrate zoology, microtechnique and its applications, mycology
and others. High school students will also have access to this instrument
through the Science Preparation Alliance of Rutgers and Camden (SPARC). In
summary, the acquisition of an SEM at Rutgers/Camden will greatly facilitate a
broad range of research and teaching initiatives on this campus.&lt;br/&gt;