* 0216153
* RUI/MRI: Acquistion of Equipment to Establish an Aerogel Fabrication, Charaterization and Applications Laboratory
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Hagerman, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2004
* USD 254,457.00

This grant will establish an interdisciplinary collaborative facility, the
Aerogel Fabrication, Characterization, and Applications Lab (AFCAL), for faculty
and student researchers in the Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry Departments
at Union College. An aerogel is a fragile nanostructure consisting of
approximately 90-99% air (volume ratio), contained in an intricate pore
structure with pore sizes primarily in the 2 to 50 nm range. An aerogel is
formed by a highly cross-linked polymerization reaction and drying phase. The
polymerization process forms a solid network surrounded by a liquid (sol-gel).
The drying process removes the liquid and leaves behind a delicate pore
structure. This pore structure gives aerogels the lowest known density, index of
refraction, thermal, electrical, and acoustical conductivities of any solid
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds provided will purchase the equipment
necessary to implement two aerogel fabrication techniques: an automated pressure
and temperature controlled hydraulic press and a critical point drying system;
and equipment to characterize those aerogels: a thermal constants analyzer, a
gas adsorption system, an integrating sphere spectrophotometer, and a
fluorescence spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AFCAL facility will be used
by faculty and students in Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry to: (1) further
develop a new aerogel fabrication technique and perform fundamental studies on
the effects of chemical reagents and process variables on the aerogel
nanostructure, (2) characterize the thermal and optical properties of silica
aerogels, (3) use fluorescence spectroscopy to perform fundamental studies of
aerogel structure &amp; applications of aerogels to chemical sensing, and (4)
develop inorganic-organic scintillator composites and perform fundamental
studies of the inclusion chemistry of aerogels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Union
College Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry Departments have a demonstrated
history of excellence in introducing students to research at a formative stage
of their academic careers, providing students with coursework that provides the
necessary background for success in graduate studies, and placing these students
successfully in graduate programs and industrial positions. As a result, these
departments have had an impact on the scientific infrastructure of this nation.
The four co-PI's will continue to involve undergraduate students in their
research, including students from traditionally underrepresented groups, and to
encourage their students to consider graduate studies in engineering- and
science-related fields and careers in research.&lt;br/&gt;