* 0216977
* ITR/SY: QoS-Aware Execution Environments for Multi-tier Network Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2007
* USD 171,942.00

&lt;br/&gt;Modern, componentized Internet services allow server consolidation
&lt;br/&gt;by sharing common service components. &lt;br/&gt;Such sharing can
potentially reduce the installation cost, &lt;br/&gt;space, and energy
consumption. However, to date, services &lt;br/&gt;are seldom shared across
server applications to avoid&lt;br/&gt;possible interference between them.
Service providers often run&lt;br/&gt;multiple instances of shared services, one
for each frontend&lt;br/&gt;service. The only benefit gained thus far, from the
deployment of&lt;br/&gt;multi-tier services is that new services can be composed
quickly using&lt;br/&gt;existing service components. Since these
service&lt;br/&gt;components may execute on different machines, each optimally
configured&lt;br/&gt;for its services, multi-tiered services tend to be
more&lt;br/&gt;scalable than monolithic counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research aims to address the shortcoming of current&lt;br/&gt;OSs in
executing multi-tiered services. We will focus on OS extensions &lt;br/&gt;that
correlate and trace service activities across the tiers of a &lt;br/&gt;multi-
tiered server farm. We will develop mechanisms for
online&lt;br/&gt;classification of activities (e.g., premium vs.~basic service
classes), &lt;br/&gt;as well as mechanisms that allow system administrators to
insulate &lt;br/&gt;(performance-wise) different service classes even when the
&lt;br/&gt;activities of different service classes may overlap and
&lt;br/&gt;share backend services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The same OS mechanisms
that are used to manage multi-tiered &lt;br/&gt;services can be used to analyze
the interactions between different &lt;br/&gt;tiers and the interferences
between different service classes. &lt;br/&gt;We will show that a combination of
service interaction analysis &lt;br/&gt;and service policing minimizes
performance invasiveness &lt;br/&gt;between services/applications. &lt;br/&gt;We
will also investigate how to improve insulation between &lt;br/&gt;services in
this environment. &lt;br/&gt;We will explore how service implementations may
take &lt;br/&gt;advantage of an improved OS infrastructure for multi-tiered