* 0216594
* Aquisition of Equipment for Research at the Prescott College Kino Bay Center for Cultural and Ecological Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Edward Boyer, Prescott College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 98,556.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr. Edward Boyer at Prescott
College to acquire equipment and instruments necessary to support research in
the areas of marine ecology, marine conservation and management, and community
outreach at the Kino Bay Center for Cultural and Ecological Studies (the
Prescott College field station on the Gulf of California). The primary
instruments to be purchased fall into three categories. First is a GPS base
station, associated hand held units, computers, software, and set up service.
This instrumentation will allow us to time/base correct GPS data and serve as
the Base Station for this region of the Gulf of California which has no such
base station within a 500km radius. The work done will support mapping of
islands, and coasts, desert vegetation, and tracking of marine mammals. The
second set of instruments is to be utilized in our Fin Whale photo
identification project in the Midriff Island region of the Gulf. These
instruments include boat motors, cameras, plankton and physical oceanographic
sampling devices, binoculars, and spotting scopes. The third set of instruments
include microscopes, cabinets, herbarium supplies, and a small inflatable boat
to support ongoing research on commercial crab growth and reproduction in nearby
mangrove estuaries. All of these research projects are in cooperation with
Mexican Federal (Instituto Nacional de Ecologia), and local agencies and
NGO's&lt;br/&gt; Currently, research at the Center has two major foci, 1) Isla
Alcatraz - island inventory, conservation, and community based management plan
development and 2) Fin Whale (Balaenoptera physalus) photo identification. The
island is small (about one half square km.), volcanic island, about 1.4
kilometer from the town of Bahia de Kino. A primary focus of this research is on
nesting cormorants, egrets and herons on the island. A biological inventory and
detailed mapping of the island are also part of the project.&lt;br/&gt; The
majority of the users of our field station are undergraduate students and a
small number of graduate students who overlap with and often assist visiting
researchers thereby gaining invaluable field/ research training. An important
component of our research activities is the dissemination of information via
environmental education projects in the local community, by way of presentations
at conferences, and through our web pages on the Prescott College
website.&lt;br/&gt;