* 0216161
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Institute of Ecosystem Studies' Central Analytical Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Kathleen Weathers, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 154,337.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0216161&lt;br/&gt;Weathers, Kathleen
C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kathleen C. Weathers of
the Institute of Ecosystem Studies (IES) to upgrade IES's central Analytical
Laboratory through the replacement of instruments that are both used heavily and
outdated. Their manufacturers either have, or will soon cease to provide
replacement parts or support for these instruments. The instruments are a
carbon-nitrogen-sulfur analyzer, a continuous flow analyzer, and an inductively
coupled plasma spectrometer. All of these instruments are critical for
generating data for core ecological research programs at IES, and all are used
by students. &lt;br/&gt;Many individual research projects will be supported
through the use of these instruments. For example, the instruments will be used
to generate data: 1) on the baseline chemistry for both of IES's Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) sites (Hubbard Brook and Baltimore), which are
components of the NSF's LTER network. The Baltimore Ecosystem Study is one of
only two "urban" projects in this network of nearly 25 sites; 2) for the Hudson
River research group, who investigate many aspects of the function of the River,
including the effect of an invading bivalve, the zebra mussel, on the Hudson
ecosystem; 3) for a project testing the global hypothesis that earthworm
invasion of north temperate forests will have large consequences for nutrient
retention and uptake in these ecosystems; 4) for research on the loss of
nitrogen (N) from forest ecosystems after insect defoliation and the role of N
availability in controlling that loss; 5) for a project investigating the effect
of beech bark disease invasion on the functioning of the Catskill Mountain
ecosystem (whose streams are the source of drinking water for New York City); 6)
and for the IES Environmental Monitoring Program, which has generated an
extremely valuable record of precipitation chemistry, air quality, meteorology,
wet and dry deposition, forest growth, forest nutrient cycling, and stream
chemistry at a protected 800 ha location in the Hudson Valley.&lt;br/&gt;The IES
Analytical Laboratory is a shared resource: on average 80% of its scientific
staff and a large number of graduate students, postdoctoral associates, REU
students, collaborators and visitors use its facilities for analysis of
ecological samples, ranging from precipitation and throughfall to soils and
saline waters. The IES Analytical Laboratory currently performs between 50,000
and 60,000 analyses a year for major inorganic and organic ions, including
sample analysis for many of the 33 (currently funded) National Science
Foundation (NSF)-sponsored projects. These projects include PIs from IES, as
well as collaborators outside of IES whose affiliations vary widely and include
colleagues from countries throughout the world. In addition, the IES Analytical
Laboratory serves as the primary analytical facility for projects funded by the
National Institutes of Health, the US Department of Agriculture, the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Mary
Flagler Cary Charitable Trust, the Hudson River Foundation, and others.
Extensive postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate (through an NSF Research
Experiences for Undergraduates grant) student research is also done in this
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;