* 0216072
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of a High-Rate Data Analysis System for Nuclear Astrophysics Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Robert Kaye, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 08/31/2004
* USD 104,892.00

Nuclear Astrophysics has developed a very successful model of stellar nova
explosions based on a series of reactions in which protons are captured by
atomic nuclei and high-energy electromagnetic radiation is released in the form
of gamma rays. The probabilities of these reactions determine the time scale for
the stellar explosion events and are unknown in many cases. The measurement of
these probabilities is a prominent research subject at a number of research
facilities around the world. In many of these studies, a high-efficiency gamma-
ray detection system would provide a great increase in sensitivity for these
measurements. The aim of this project is to establish an efficient and versatile
gamma-detector system which will be used for experimental research in nuclear
physics and nuclear astrophysics. The system will be used at several
laboratories (most of which are capable of producing "exotic" ion beams) in the
United States in conjunction with charged-particle detector systems and
spectrometers. The components of the detector system will be maintained and
calibrated with the help of Undergraduate students at Purdue University Calumet.
The students will learn essential skills and techniques of modern Nuclear
Physics experiments, and will assist in the setup of the detector array in
collaboration with researchers at Florida State University, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Michigan State University, and Argonne National Laboratory.

