* 0216129
* MRI:    Development of a Colloidal Force-Distance-Adsorption Apparatus for Particle Science Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2006
* John Walz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 395,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University will develop a new experimental tool
for measuring colloidal forces. An understanding of these forces is important in
materials science, cell biology, soil science, waste disposal and water
purification, ceramic engineering, the development of personal products, and in
quality control in the microelectronics industry. The instrument will combine
capabilities of atomic force microscopy (AFM) and total internal reflection
microscopy (TIRM), while overcoming most of the drawbacks for each technique.
The instrument will provide a new capability: the ability to measure adsorption
isotherms during particle collisions. The atomic force microscope is currently
the most widely used method for measuring colloidal forces. A major problem with
this application is that the separation between the particle and the surface is
not measured; it is derived indirectly. With this apparatus, the separation will
be obtained directly, from the scattering intensity from an evanescent wave
produced by totally reflecting a laser beam at the substrate/fluid interface.
This approach is based on the TIRM technique. The TIRM technique will be
improved through modulation of the scattered evanescent wave. The adsorption of
material to surfaces is the main method by which colloidal forces can be
modulated, so it is useful to determine adsorption during particle interactions.
We will develop a technique for measuring adsorption during collisions using
fluorescent tags on the adsorbates. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in this instrument development project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of
the objects that we encounter in everyday life actually consist of very fine
particles. For example, bricks, paper, clothing, china, soil, most foods,
cosmetics, and even humans are composed of small particles. The physical
properties (e.g. stiffness, flow, and workability) of these objects depends on
the forces between the particles. Part of the process of creating new and
improved products is the manipulation of the forces between particles to obtain
desirable material properties. The first stage of manipulating these forces is
to measure them. With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will develop a new
experimental tool for measuring the forces acting on particles. The new
apparatus will combine existing techniques, the force probe from Atomic Force
Microscopy and the distance probe from Total Internal Reflectance Microscopy,
and incorporate improvements through the use of signal modulation and
fluorescent tagging of molecules. A graduate student and undergraduate students
will participate in this instrument development project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;