* 0216005
* Genetic Map of Sympatric Introgression in Hybridizing Colias Butterflies
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Adam Porter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Scheiner
* 09/30/2007
* USD 315,000.00

The sulfur butterflies, Colias eurytheme and C. philodice, common in fields and
along roadsides across most of North America, are remarkable because they
hybridize extensively. Up to 10% of the butterflies are hybrids, an
interbreeding rate that is sufficient to blend them into a single species. Yet,
they have remained distinct. Many other species pairs show similar patterns of
hybridization, including Darwin's Finches and numerous plant species. These
cases challenge our traditional definition of species, which do not normally
interbreed.

One untested hypothesis, first proposed in 1957, is that hybridizing species do
in fact share part of their genome, and that selection acts to keep the
remaining parts of the genomes distinct. To test this, new methods will be used
to map the chromosomes of these butterflies in great detail. This genetic map
will then be used for a fine-scale analysis of the rates that genes are able to
spread between species.

If superficially distinct, hybridizing species do share major portions of their
genomes in common, then it will cause biologists to restructure their thinking
about what species are. It would suggest that species identities can exist as a
mosaic of genomically complex, stable polymorphisms, maintained in an otherwise
dynamic, fluid genome. If this alternative explanation is not upheld, the study
will provide strong support of the traditional view of species.