* 0216886
* Community, Immigrants and the Construction of Citizenship
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Lynn Staeheli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 170,000.00

This research examines the ways in which immigrants to the United States and
United Kingdom understand citizenship. Much of the theoretical debate over
citizenship highlights two sets of issues: 1) the ways in which citizenship is
understood and experienced as a result of the interplay between legal
institutions and a feeling of belonging and membership in a political community,
and 2) the ways in which ideas about citizenship may be changing in response to
globalization. These debates suggest ideas about and the experiences of being a
citizen are changing as a result of international migration. The research
explores these debates through over 150 qualitative interviews and 36 focus
groups with leaders and members of immigrant organizations in four US cities and
two cities in the United Kingdom. The particular focus is on organizations
serving Arab immigrants. The organizations will cover a range of social,
cultural, and political activities, and respondents will be selected to ensure
variation across gender, socio-economic status, and age. The research will
examine the ways in which immigrants are incorporated into the cities and
countries in which they currently live, how they understand citizenship, the
connections they may continue to feel with the source country, and whether and
how they reconcile feelings of belonging to communities in two countries. The
research specifically asks how ideas related to citizenship affect political
activism and whether conditions within specific places shape their
identification as citizens of either the host or source country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will yield important theoretical and tangible
advances. First, if migration is changing citizenship and the sense of belonging
to a political community, then it is important to understand how they are
changing and how the changes affect the lives of immigrants. In focusing on the
people who negotiate changing ideas about citizenship on a daily basis, the
research provides the basis for theoretical advances that are grounded in real
experiences. This is particularly important in trying to understand the nature
of citizenship and community in the context of globalization. Transnational
migration show no signs of receding, so it is important for receiving societies
to understand the ways in which immigrants understand the roles of community and
citizenship. Recent events have demonstrated the importance of understanding why
some groups feel marginalized or isolated within a society. Attending to the
differing conceptualizations of citizenship and community may create a situation
in which understanding between different groups can be fostered&lt;br/&gt;