* 0216109
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Scanning Probe Microscope Facility to Improve Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Yang Zhao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2005
* USD 220,000.00

A Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) facility for the improvement of research and
student learning at Wayne State University (WSU) will be established through
this grant. The major instrument to be purchased, Dimension 3100 SPM with
Nanoscope IV control station, will be shared among researchers from five
departments spanning two colleges. This investment addresses a critical need for
surface characterization in many projects funded by the National Science
Foundation at WSU and provides an advanced tool for materials study in our
undergraduate and graduate curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale science
and engineering has emerged as a principal research thrust at WSU as evidenced
by well-funded efforts in 1) nanoparticles, nanostructures, and devices for
optical and magnetic applications, 2) protein, tissue, and biomaterial coating
and engineering, and 3) encapsulation using biological or biologically inspired
materials. In each of these domains, the SPM technique is an indispensable tool
for elucidating and comprehending structure at the nanometer scale. The
establishment of a centralized SPM laboratory with an additional SPM instrument
with new, state-of-the-art features should allow us to build on our current
strengths in interfacial and nanostructured materials research, increase
individual research productivities, and foster collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A laboratory dedicated to SPM research will be
established in the WSU College of Engineering to house the Dimension 3100 SPM
and the current Nanoscope IIIa SPM. This laboratory will be made accessible to
all principal investigators and other users. The computers will be networked so
that the SPM image files can be easily accessed. This updated SPM facility will
complement other existing material characterization instrumentation such as NMR,
mass spectrometry, X-ray crystallography, optical microscopy and spectroscopy,
and scanning electron microscopy. A microscopist at the postdoctoral level will
be hired in order to oversee the installation, maintenance, and training of
researchers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The estimated number of researchers and
students impacted by this proposal annually consists of 11 senior users, 5
postdoctoral associates, 20 graduate students, and over 100 undergraduate
students. The impacted external research funding amounts to approximately
$1,000,000 annually.&lt;br/&gt;