* 0216839
* ITR: Internet Disintermediation of Food Delivery - Spanning the Last Mile
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Tomas Hult, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2005
* USD 249,999.00

Proposal 0216839&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Internet Disintermediation of Food Delivery -
Spanning the Last Mile&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth K. Boyer, Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt;Tomas Hult, Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the eBusiness frenzy of 1998-2000,
numerous new, pure-play Internet grocers promised consumers they could buy
groceries at prices equal to or lower than from bricks-and-mortar stores, while
enjoying unparalleled convenience without having to leave the house. The most
prominent of these companies was Webvan, which reached a stock market value of
$7.9 billion at the end of its IPO. Webvan, Home Grocer, PeaPod and several
other grocers made huge bets that selling groceries online was both a growth
market and a new way of doing business. Unfortunately, the widely publicized
collapses of these high profile Internet grocers have illustrated the
substantial gap between theory and practical application bridging the last mile
to grocery consumers' homes represents a substantial challenge. At the outset,
many difficulties experienced by online grocers can be fundamentally attributed
to a lack of alignment between marketing and operations strategies. In contrast,
several examples also exist of grocery and other food delivery companies that
appear to be making effective use of the Internet as a link to customers. In
particular, both Tesco (a British grocer) and Albertson's (a U.S. grocer)
currently have Internet channels for selling groceries that are profitable.
Whereas many of the failed Internet grocers seemed to be hoping for a large
market share, Tesco and Albertson's view Internet ordering of groceries more as
a value-added complementary marketing channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research
project examines four cutting edge companies via case studies of their marketing
and operations strategies, and via cross-sectional surveys of their Internet
customers. Approximately 1,000 Internet customers of each of the four
organizations are to be surveyed to assess their experiences with online-based
grocery home delivery. Field studies of each organization will also be conducted
via structured interviews and analysis of on-site data to assess operational
components of food delivery. As an outcome of the study, the project scope is to
document best-practice marketing and operations strategies and activities in
applying Internet ordering to food delivery. As such, the data generated will
provide important guidance to other companies regarding the best ways to match
proactive and responsive marketing and operations strategies. The benchmark data
should be generalizable to a wide range of companies with characteristics
similar to the grocery industry.