* 0216522
* Collaborative Research:  Acquisition of a drilling rig to recover geological records from the Antarctic margin for the ANDRILL Consortium
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 482,361.00

Geological drilling to recover core for scientific investigations was
successfully conducted in the&lt;br/&gt;McMurdo Sound Region during 10 austral
summers over a 28-year period since 1973. The sea-ice has been used successfully
as a drilling platform for seven drill-holes in this area. Experience gained
during these projects forms the basis for developing new drilling technology to
advance this approach. The ANDRILL (ANtarctic DRILLing) Project considers future
drilling from sea-ice, ice shelf and land platforms within its McMurdo Sound
Portfolio. This Portfolio proposes more than ten individual drilling targets
that will require varied drilling equipment and strategies. Most of these
targets have several common requirements, including drilling through hundreds of
meters of water (up to 1000 m), and to recover continuous core starting from the
sea-floor to depths of as much as 1000 m. Most of the targets call for a drill
rig with a greater capacity than that used for the highly successful
international Cape Roberts Project (CRP from 1997-1999), to which ANDRILL is the
successor. Although the CRP rig, as well as various other commercial drilling
rigs and equipment are available to ANDRILL, the unique requirements (drilling
in deep-water and through an ice shelf more than 300 meters thick) require
acquisition and development of a new, more powerful drilling system adapted to
the Antarctic environment. The desired rig will handle the required length of
drill rod and recover rock at an appropriate speed within the short windows of
time allowed for Antarctic drilling. Development of this new system will enhance
the drilling capability by providing faster core recovery and the ability to
sample from previously inaccessible areas, thus expanding the scope of
geological sampling into deeper water and through thick shelf ice. The study of
sediment drillcores represents a key means to decipher Cenozoic climate and
glacial history of Antarctica, a region where most rocks of this age are hidden
beneath the ice sheet cover. ANDRILL is an international consortium with
objectives to recover stratigraphic core records for use in interpreting
Antarctica's past climatic, glacial and geological history over the past 50
million years and at varying scales of age resolution (0.1 to 100 thousand
years). Understanding the past history of ice volume variation in Antarctica and
associated physical changes in this region is critical to proper assessment of
the global climate system and interaction of ice sheets with the ocean,
atmosphere and biosphere. ANDRILL will proceed in three phases: geophysical and
site surveys (2001-2004), drilling and core recovery (2003-2007), and climate
and glacial modeling and integration of recovered data into global records of
climate change (2005-2009). For the past 40 million years the Antarctic Ice
Sheet has played a critical role in regulating global climate and sea level.
Climatic warming is expected to be most pronounced in polar regions; Antarctic
temperatures may rise by the end of the century to levels that have not been
achieved for several million years. It is therefore vital that we understand the
past response of the Antarctic ice sheet to climatic change in order to provide
constraints on models that predict the future. ANDRILL currently plans 4 seasons
of drilling under the McMurdo Sound Portfolio, in the regions of New Harbour,
Windless Bight, Mackay Sea Valley and on the Southern McMurdo Ice Shelf. Through
subsequent Portfolios, the life of ANDRILL and this new drilling system will
likely continue towards the year 2020. Support for programs of this scale must
come from contributions of several nations. To date, the ANDRILL International
Consortium includes as member nations the USA, United Kingdom, New Zealand,
Italy and Germany, and it invites membership from any interested nation. Similar
to the CRP, close interaction of a diverse team of research scientists,
postdoctoral scientists, graduate and undergraduate students will provide
excellent opportunities for education and on-site training. REU appointments
will target underrepresented groups in the geosciences. ANDRILL plans to expand
the&lt;br/&gt;educational and outreach component beyond that of CRP by direct
on-site and remote learning&lt;br/&gt;opportunities through member-nation
initiatives and ANDRILL sponsored outreach and education. An "on-ice" team of
scientists would prepare the core and provide initial description and
characterization. Samples would be shipped to "off-ice" scientists to study and
present results at the first of two science workshops to be hosted at member-
nations home academic institutions on a rotating basis. Publication of initial
results would be followed by presentation of results in major scientific
journals and at professional meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;