* 0216785
* Acquisition of a Femtosecond Laser System for Semiconductor Research and Photonics Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Hong Koo Kim, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 203,500.00

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program the
University of Pittsburgh will be able to acquire a laser system which would be a
very flexible system for photonics research. This system will have wavelength
tunability from the near-infrared to ultraviolet, variable repetition rate, and
pulse width variable from 100 femtoseconds to picoseconds, plus a narrow
linewidth constant-wave option for some wavelengths. This laser will be replace
most of the functions of an existing dye-laser system which has become obsolete
and will provide new optical functions which will allow a greater range of
experiments. These experiments are part of the ongoing research at the
University of Pittsburgh in the area of semiconductor photonics. This system
would have immediate impact on undergraduate research at the University of
Pittsburgh, because with the availability of the new system, the Nd:YAG-pumped
dye laser system presently in use would be made available for a new
undergraduate training facility for high-power lasers. This facility will be
part of the existing Certificate in Photonics undergraduate education program at
the University of Pittsburgh, created through a past NSF program and with
continuing support from NSF. The new laser system would also have immediate
impact in graduate education, because the primary users of the new system will
be graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program the University of Pittsburgh will
be able to acquire a laser system which would be a very flexible system for
photonics research. This laser will be replace most of the functions of an
existing dye-laser system which has become obsolete and will provide new optical
functions which will allow a greater range of experiments. The experiments are
part of the ongoing research at the University of Pittsburgh in the area of
semiconductor photonics. This system would have immediate impact on
undergraduate research at the University of Pittsburgh, because with the
availability of the new system, the Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser system presently in
use would be made available for a new undergraduate training facility for high-
power lasers. This facility will be part of the existing Certificate in
Photonics undergraduate education program at the University of Pittsburgh,
created through a past NSF program and with continuing support from NSF. The new
laser system would also have immediate impact in graduate education, because the
primary users of the new system will be graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;