* 0216124
* Development of a Cryogenic Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Dimitri Basov, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 418,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports instrument
development of a spectroscopic ellipsometer capable of precision measurements of
the optical constants of complex materials in a broad range of frequencies
(400-45,000 cm-1) both at cryogenic and elevated temperatures (5-700 K). New
spectroscopic capabilities provided by the ellipsometer are essential to carry
out difficult experiments pertinent to physics of strong electronic correlations
in oxides, to ferromagnetism in semiconductors and many other problems. The
principal advantage of ellipsometry is that this technique eliminates or
minimizes experimental ambiguities connected with the determination of the
optical constants using more conventional spectroscopic methods such as
transmission or reflectance measurements. However, practical realization of
theses advantages in the infrared IR part of the spectrum requires development
of an original set-up since instruments with the needed specifications are not
commercially available. Broad spectral coverage of the proposed instrument will
be achieved through a cost-efficient merger of an infrared home-build
ellipsometer based on a Fourier-Transform interferometer with a standard
rotating analyzer apparatus for visible-near-UV operation. The project
integrates research and education thus aiding towards preparation of highly
skilled personnel with expertise that is in high demand both in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systematic studies of the optical properties
of new materials can provide unique insights into the electronic structure, both
carrier and lattice dynamics that is difficult or impossible to obtain through
alternative experimental approaches. This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program supports the development of a spectroscopic ellipsometer
capable of precision measurements of the optical constants of complex materials
in a broad range of frequencies both at cryogenic and elevated temperatures.
Novel experimental capabilities provided by this instrument will facilitate
resolution of some of the long-standing issues in contemporary condensed matter
physics and materials science. The development program naturally integrates
research and education thus aiding towards preparation of highly skilled
personnel with expertise that is in high demand both in academia and industry.
Research infrastructure developed in the course of this project will benefit a
large group of investigators at several institutions.&lt;br/&gt;