* 0216265
* MRI - Acquisition of Test Equipment for Wireless Microsystems at RF/Microwave Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Karl Hirschman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

The instrumentation being requested would support five currently funded research
projects and would establish test capabilities to support the upcoming
Microsystems Ph.D. program in the College of Engineering at RIT. The previously
stated scope will not change significantly. Additional funding will be obtained
through RIT, the College of Engineering and industrial support. Following is the
scope and justification for the revised equipment list.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Microwave and Antenna Lab, within the EE Department, does have excellent RF
measurement capabilities. However the lab is short of some key instrumentation
for higher frequency characterization and the testing of micro-scale structures.
The probe measurement system for interfacing the circuitry in the chip and on
the package to the network analyzer is not available. The deficiency of this
very crucial accessory is currently being addressed by making measurements at
Georgia Tech. This short-term solution is tedious and slow, and prevents
graduate students from optimizing designs on their own. There is a critical need
for a probe measurement system. The number of probes and accessories previously
requested has been reduced, to match with the available funding. Also, software
that was previously requested for theoretical modeling of RF circuitry has been
removed and will be obtained through research funding and in conjunction with
support from the Electrical Engineering Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network
analyzers at frequencies up to 6 GHz are available in the Microwave lab, for
measuring the reflection and transmission characteristics of RF components, for
characterizing CMOS and SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT's) and for
optimizing input characteristics of antenna arrays. However, for higher
frequency microwave circuit characterization a network analyzer with
capabilities extending to 40 GHz is required. Because of the reduced budget,
some of the options requested previously have been removed. The most important
ones, such as the time domain option, the TRL calibration and the frequency-
offset mode have been retained. Accessories such as cables, the GPIB kit, repair
and service will be provided, as needed, by the EE
Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HP89441A vector signal analyzer required
for optimizing the smart antenna system has been removed from the equipment
list. At present, this instrument has been loaned by HP to the Electrical
Engineering Department for classroom and research purposes. It is the intention
to negotiate with HP, for acquiring this equipment as a
donation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chip and package fabrication would be done in
the Semiconductor and Microsystems Fabrication Laboratory (SMFL) of RLT, which
has a complete IC and MEMS fabrication capability. However, there is currently
no Microwave and RF instrumentation in the facility for device characterization.
It is critical that the test capability of the SMFL be strengthened in order to
support the increased activity in RF-MEMS, and to support Ph.D. level research
in Microsystems. Because of the reduced budget, some of the items that were
originally requested were removed. Although an RF signal generator and a digital
oscilloscope are needed for mixed-signal testing, other systems that are
available from neighboring departments in the college (Electrical and Computer
Engineering) should be adequate as a short-term solution. These systems may
eventually be acquired through additional college funding. The semi-automated
probe station, originally proposed, has been requested from Motorola. An
equivalent model, the KLA 1201 probe station, has been recently committed by
Motorola as a donation. The requested software packages for instrument control,
data collection and parameter extraction will be obtained through research
grants and industrial support.&lt;br/&gt;