* 0216308
* MRI:    Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Multi-disciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Hariharan Srikanth, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 414,244.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to purchase a fully
analytical JEM-2010 transmission electron microscope (TEM). The JEM-2010 is a
multipurpose high-resolution analytical microscope with wide range of
capabilities, such as high-resolution image observation, microarea X-ray
analysis, versatile analysis by convergent-beam electron diffraction, and
analysis of the atomic structure and/or bonding state of atoms. The primary TEM
system will comprise: (i) a TEM with a high resolution pole piece for high
resolution electron microscopy imaging (HREM) and convergent beam electron
diffraction (CBED), (ii) a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
accessory, (iii) an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS), (iv) an electron
energy loss spectrometer (EELS) with an energy filter, and (v) a multichannel
analyzer and support computers for data acquisition, storage, and processing.
This instrument is capable of high spatial resolution imaging of crystalline and
amorphous structures, small-beam electron diffraction, and compositional and
spectroscopic analyses of micro-and nano-scale features, all necessary tools for
characterizing materials structure. Numerous new scientific investigations will
be enabled with the new equipment. This instrument will support research in a
variety of materials systems including nanomaterials, semiconductors, ceramics,
metals, polymers, biomaterials and mesoporous materials. The proposed research
projects cover a broad area of research related to synthesis and
characterization of high-performance materials for manufacturing applications
and TEM will provide an opportunity to conduct high-quality research to
understand the microstructural properties of the
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed TEM instrument will not only
stimulate the productivity of the existing research projects related to the
characterization of materials but also will be used for educational purposes.
The instrument will be used in undergraduate and graduate courses, and in
outreach program for minority students from local schools. It will thus allow
for research training of future scientists and engineers from diverse
backgrounds in current techniques of electron microscopy and state-of-the-art
instrumentation. A laboratory course will be introduced and the main purpose is
to provide students hands-on experience starting from sample preparations to
operations of TEM. Support for a TEM instrument will also allow the development
and enhancement of creative partnership with the numerous local industries,
including microelectronics manufacturing, optical coating manufacturing,
biomedical company, and computer hardware company. Results of the project will
be disseminated by paper presentation in regional and national conferences, and
published in journals.