* 0216572
* Development of an Instrument for Multispectral Measurement of Aerosol Light Absorption
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Hans Moosmuller, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 10/31/2005
* USD 835,490.00

This is a Major Research Instrumentation award to support the development of an
instrument for measuring the absorption of aerosol particles at different
wavelengths in the solar spectrum. Aerosols absorb and scatter solar radiation
and thus influence regional and global climate. Though accurate data on aerosol
absorption spectra are lacking, the available evidence indicates that aerosols
from different sources have markedly different spectra. For example, Saharan
dust appears to absorb strongly in the ultraviolet but weakly in the visible
part of the spectrum. Diesel soot, on the other hand, absorbs more uniformly
over the spectrum. To now, no instrument has been available to measure the in-
situ absorption of aerosols at more than two wavelengths, though what is needed
for radiative transfer calculations is a detailed representation of the
absorption spectrum. Accordingly, a multi-wavelength unit will be built, based
on the resonant photoacoustic principle, to measure the absorption at six
wavelengths spanning the spectrum from the ultraviolet to the infrared.
Calibration is established by measuring the (known) absorption of the 760-nm
oxygen A-band. The instrument will be employed for measurements of the spectral
absorption of different kinds of natural and anthropogenic aerosols. This
information is essential for understanding the consequences of the human use of
combustion on climate.