* 0216219
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Nano- to Microscale Imaging and Chemical Analysis in the College of Engineering, University of Delaware
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Tsu-Wei Chou, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 07/31/2003
* USD 344,500.00

A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) is sought for the
University of Delaware College of Engineering (COE) electron microscopy center
to fill an immediate, widespread need for nanometer resolution scanning electron
microscopy. FESEM has become an indispensable instrument in conducting micro- to
nanomorphological material imaging and chemical imaging/analysis. Importantly,
true nanoscale data is obtainable from of an immense array of materials,
spanning "hard" inorganics, both electrically conductive and insulative, to
"soft" polymeric and biologicals. In comparison to traditional thermionic SEM
(currenlty, the only functioning SEM in the college of engineering (COE) EM
facility), the FESEM provides far superior resolution (nanostructures as small
as 1 nm in diameter while our traditional SEM resolution is in the range of ~100
of nm) and can be operated at voltages as low as 0.5kV (the traditional thermal
source in-house SEM must operate at ~30kV to reach its ultimate resolution of
~0.1 mm). It is important to stress that this low accelerating voltage allows
direct nanoscopic imaging and elemental analysis of all materials currently
being studied in COE and across the university. On the current COE SEM
instrument, a JEOL JXA-840, imaging and chemical analysis is limited to
conductive inorganics and only feasible at relatively low resolution (&gt;0.1 mm
for secondary electron imaging and ~1.0 mm for x-ray analysis). Polymeric and
other insulating materials must be coated by a thick (~10's of nm) layer of
conductive metal for feasible imaging which, consequently, completely masks true
surface structure and chemistry. Biological materials with some level of
hydration are simply not possible at ambient conditions in the traditional SEM
due to high vacuum conditions. The sought FESEM system is equipped with state-
of-the-art energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy and a cryogenic transfer and
cold stage for imaging of in situ, hydrated (vitrified) biological materials.
With the large emphasis on nanotechnology in the current research paradigm, and
certainly here at UD, this new FESEM will fill a large materials
characterization gap in the college of engineering's research capabilities.
Consequently, it is estimated that over 18 faculty members and 30 to 40 graduate
students will immediately benefit in their research from the acquisition of the
FESEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational training opportunities for graduate
students and advanced undergraduates represent a clear benefit to the university
as a whole. At present, our electron microscopy facility serves about 30
students and post doctors for predominantly TEM research purposes. In addition,
over 25 students from engineering and other natural science majors on campus use
the facility for their course work (the new TEM course MSEG/CHEG 832 and the TEM
lab module in MSEG602, Structure of Materials lab offered through Materials
Science and Engineering). Specifically, a new MSEG602 lab module will be
developed by the PI for specific FESEM introduction and instruction to incoming
college of engineering graduate students. The addition of an FESEM will provide
a unique opportunity for students at various levels and from various backgrounds
to work in an interdisciplinary, advanced laboratory setting that is the College
of Engineering electron microscopy center. Since the summer of 2001, we have
utilized our JEOL FasTEM system, contained in the FEG2010 TEM microscope, to
enhance our undergraduate and graduate classroom teaching and training. The
FasTEM is a system integrated with our field emission transmission electron
microscope (FE-TEM) that is capable of telecommunication and remote operation
through computer networks. In addition to remote demonstrations, elementary and
middle school students frequently visit the lab for in-house demonstrations of
electron microscopy. It is obvious that these in-house and outside
demonstrations generate significant student curiosity and interest in science
and technology. To better achieve our educational outreach goals (and attract
top quality undergraduates to the university) it is our desire that we also can
demonstrate the nanostructures of modern engineered materials with an FESEM.
Experience tells us that the 3-dimentional morphological images of the FESEM
appeal more to K-12 students than 2-dimensional TEM data which is more difficult
to interpret. Furthermore, the UD college of engineering electron microscopy
facility has been highlighted in the popular media through a visit by the
Discovery Channel in the fall of 2001. Microscopic details of fracture surfaces
from metal cables of the Hindenberg were observed indicating the nature of
catastrophic tensile failure. This type of popular media outreach will also be
further pursued in the future during which we can highlight the new experimental
capabilities of the college of engineering electron microscopy
facility.&lt;br/&gt;