* 0216480
* Acquisition of a Cryostage and Transfer System to Characterize Biological Systems and Frozen Materials with Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Galen Stucky, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 06/30/2005
* USD 109,088.00

Acquisition of a Cryostage and Transfer System to Characterize Biological
Systems and Frozen Materials with Environmental Scanning Electron
Microscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Patricia A.
Holden and colleagues at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) for
purchasing equipment to look at the fine structure of frozen materials. The
equipment, a Cryostage and Transfer System, will be mounted on an environmental
scanning electron microscope that UCSB acquired through a previous NSF award.
The combined system supports every aspect of modern environmental, biomolecular,
bioengineering and materials sciences. With an environmental scanning electron
microscope, researchers can observe complicated biological, geological and
manmade materials without having to damage the samples by coating or drying
beforehand. The addition of the cryostage and transfer system allows scientists
to look at snow or ice, or to freeze biological tissues and look at them while
frozen. UCSB scientists and engineers will now be able to work with frozen
samples of all types and thereby learn about the real, unaltered structure of
important, delicate materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long term, many projects
will use the CST-ESEM. Initial projects
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovering how much water is held by bacterial
colonies in soil aggregates by freezing, fracturing and observing internal
water. We will study temperate and tundra soils to learn about how bacteria live
in each type of soil.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Observing bonding of ice crystals,
called sintering. Sintering, or lack of sintering, controls avalanche hazard in
alpine regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the impurities in snow. Snow
contains atmospheric pollutants that are released with initial
melting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freezing bacteria that have been tagged with
special identifying molecules. We can learn where and how the tags attach and
thereby study how pollutants interact with
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning how new "tunable" biological materials
change over time by freezing and imaging them at different times in their
development. Such materials have promise for new artificial tissues, adhesives,
and improved drug-delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad significance of
acquiring the cryostage for our microscope is multifold. First, researchers from
UCSB and beyond will use this instrument to study socially relevant themes such
as pollutant biodegradation by soil bacteria, avalanche formation, release of
concentrated pollutants in snowmelt, speculations about extraterrestrial life,
likely changes that global warming will cause, and the next generation of
biomedical materials and devices. Second, we will teach many students how to
acquire state-of-the-art data so they can develop into the next generation of
well-trained environmental and medical problem-solvers. Third, we will advance
the research infrastructure nationally because ours will be one of the first
environmental scanning electron microscopes with a cryostage in the USA.
Finally, we will attract and help researchers from UCSB, the local region, and
around the world, thus enlarging the influence of our research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;