* 0216055
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Cathodoluminescence System for Research in III-Nitride Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Alfons Schulte, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 101,723.00

0216055&lt;br/&gt;Chernyak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose the acquisition
of a state-of-the-art cathodoluminescence instrument which will enable nano-
scale resolution optical measurements in-situ in a Scanning Electron Microscope
(SEM). The Gatan MonoCL3 system for high-resolution cathodoluminescence (CL)
imaging and spectroscopy will be integrated into a Philips XL3O TMP SEM
operating in the PI's laboratory. The SEM by itself has been extensively
employed in Electron Beam Induced Current (EBIC) and in-situ electrical
measurements of III-Nitride nanostructures. The cathodoluminescence setup is
critical, since it provides nanoscale information on optical properties,
composition, and defect distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CL instrument is
equipped with a high efficiency collector, which is optimized for the SEM, and
transfers light to an integrated spectrometer. Therefore, CL signals at the
single photon level can be detected and low electron beam currents be used. The
spatial resolution in CL measurements is determined by the range (penetration
depth) of electrons from the SEM beam in the material, which depends on the
accelerating voltage. Thus, a sampling range of 10 nm is achieved in III-
Nitrides with a voltage of ~ 1 keV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cathodoluminescence
spectroscopy system will significantly enhance cross-departmental research
projects focused on III-Nitride semiconductors and novel materials. These
include studies of the fundamental effects, induced by electron injection in GaN
and related compounds, as well as device applications. For instance, the
efficiency of GaN photodetectors is determined by minority carrier transport,
which will be investigated by combining in-situ electrical and
cathodoluminescence measurements in the SEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the new equipment will be the deeper understanding of electron
interaction with semiconductors and nanostructrures as well as the integration
of research and education in the graduate and undergraduate learning
environment. Acquisition of the CL system will foster several research programs
in advanced materials, which are currently funded or under consideration for
funding, as well as partnership with industry. Drs. Chernyak and Schulte have
established major activity [I -9] related to the "UV-Florida" program, which
unites efforts of Uniroyal Optoelectronics and several Florida Universities,
including the University of Central Florida, in the development of efficient
A1GaN-based multiple quantum well light emitting diodes. Since Uniroyal has
specifically expressed an interest in the proposed cathodoluminescence setup,
there are clear benefits for this academia-industry
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrumentation enables outstanding
research and education opportunities for students in nanoscale experimental
techniques. The "UV-Florida" program currently supports 5 graduate students
whose rotations have been coordinated by the PI. It is anticipated that at least
15 more faculty and students (including undergraduates) will use the equipment.
Knowledge of the state-of-the-art cathodoluminescence applications will broaden
the students' career options with the high-tech companies in the Central Florida
14-corridor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;