* 0216571
* MRI/RUI:  High Sensitivity Profiling of Hydrogen and Nitrogen Using Nuclear Reaction Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Daniel Marble, Tarleton State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 131,279.00

This Major Research Instrumentation RUI award is for the development and
construction of an improved Nuclear Reaction Analysis (NRA) detection system
based upon the Alabama A&amp;M coincidence scheme, but with one to two orders of
magnitude improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio. Previous results indicate
that by modifying the detector geometry and materials, a larger, more efficient
detector is possible without increasing the background signal. By using sample
cooling and beam rastering, this larger detector will be able to routinely
profile hydrogen in semiconductors with a sensitivity of one part-per-million
and a surface depth resolution of five nanometers while remaining compatible
with existing IBA facility requirements. The development of this detector would
likely increase the use of NRA in the materials characterization community since
it could be easily added to any existing IBA facility with minimal cost. This
would allow companies and universities to perform hydrogen profiling by NRA and
to use NRA for calibrating other IBA techniques including SIMS. Finally, the
detector's ability to dramatically reduce all background sources including
competing nuclear reactions without the reduction in efficiency of a germanium
detector should open up new opportunities for profiling other light elements
including nitrogen, boron, and carbon with greatly improved
sensitivities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light trace elements are known to have
dramatic effects on the electrical, chemical and mechanical properties of many
types of materials in even minute quantities. NRA is a powerful ion beam
technique for quantitatively profiling light impurities in materials with
excellent depth resolution. NRA has previously been used to profile a wide range
of trace elements including H, B, C, N, and F in problems ranging from hydrogen
embrittlement of metals to the dating of arrowheads. Potentially important
applications of NRA include passivation studies of SiO2/SiC and SiO2/Si
interfaces using hydrogen or nitrogen and the profiling of carbon and boron in
metals to test predictions of computer simulations. Presently, few electronic
companies or universities have NRA capability due to the technical difficulties
inherent in obtaining high sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;