* 0216252
* Acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering Facility at the University of Tennessee
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Paul Phillips, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 01/31/2005
* USD 244,700.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) Facility at the University
of Tennessee. The instrument will be used to characterize the structure of
materials on a length scale of 1-100 nm. Current and future research that will
benefit from the SAXS facility ranges from studies of the structure of 'soft
materials' such as polymers to the more traditional 'hard materials.' The
studies of soft materials include investigation of the morphology of (a) polymer
blends and copolymers, (b) polymer crystallization, (c) polymer electrolytes,
(d) polymer composites and (e) processed polymers (fibers, films, moldings,
etc.). Studies of 'hard materials' include investigations of (a) the
nanostructure of new metal oxide based materials, (b) the nanometer-size
dispersions of metals and compounds in sapphire, (d) development of
nanoparticles through pulsed laser ablation techniques, and (e) void formation
in carbon fibers. An interesting overlap involves the use of microphase
separated diblock and triblock copolymers as templates to synthesize new
nanostructures, well ordered carbon nanotubes, and nanoscale magnetic wires. In
addition, studies of X-ray scattering of materials will provide background for
neutron scattering studies at Oak Ridge National Laboratory with the HFIR
reactor upgrade and, in the longer term, the completion of the Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS). This acquisition will (1) foster the development of new
areas of research in nanoscience and new collaborations among UT faculty in
science and engineering, especially in the soft materials area, (2) develop new
collaborations among UTK faculty and students with scientists and engineers at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and with and other internationally prominent
researchers, (3) provide opportunities for SAXS measurements to investigators
from neighboring institutions, especially those that have traditionally served
underrepresented minorities.

*** This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) Facility at the University
of Tennessee. The instrument will be used to characterize the structure of
materials on a length scale of 1-100 nm. The SAXS system will serve faculty,
postdoctoral research fellows, and students in a wide range of sub-disciplines
of Materials Science, including polymer science and engineering, ceramics,
metallurgy, and solid state physics. Examples of areas of study include
investigation of the structure of (a) polymer blends and copolymers, (b) polymer
crystallization, (c) polymer electrolytes, (d) polymer composites (e) processed
polymers (fibers, films, moldings, etc.), (f) new metal oxide based materials,
(g) the nanometer-size dispersions of metals and compounds in sapphire, (h)
development of nanoparticles through pulsed laser ablation techniques, and (i)
void formation in carbon fibers. This acquisition will (1) foster the
development of new areas of research in nanoscience and new collaborations among
UT faculty in science and engineering, especially in the soft materials area,
(2) develop new collaborations among UTK faculty and students with scientists
and engineers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and with and other
internationally prominent researchers, (3) provide opportunities for SAXS
measurements to investigators from neighboring institutions, especially those
that have traditionally served underrepresented minorities.