* 0216947
* C-RUI Shifts in Wolf Spider Reproductive Behavior under Predation Risk
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Ann Rypstra, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 374,669.00

Shifts In Wolf Spider Reproductive Behavior Under Predation Risk&lt;br/&gt;Ann
L. Rypstra, Miami University, Hamilton Campus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; At every
moment, animals must weigh trade-offs and make decisions about how to allocate
time and energy into foraging and reproduction while trying to minimize exposure
to risks such as predation. The wolf spider, Pardosa milvina, displays effective
anti-predator behavior in the presence of information about one of its major
predators: the co-occurring wolf spider, Hogna helluo. The anti-predator
behavior is mediated through cues (putatively silk draglines and feces) that the
predator deposits as it occupies an area. Using these cues as a surrogate for
predation risk, the specific costs (predation or reduced reproductive success)
can be experimentally decoupled from the benefits (survival and increased
reproductive success). Through manipulation of the presence or absence of H.
helluo cues (perceived predation risk) with or without a living H. helluo
(actual predation risk), the behavioral trade-offs and relative risk of
predation can be quantified for every stage in the reproductive process. In each
stage one can quantify: (1) the susceptibility of the animals to predation, (2)
the behavioral changes made in response to a perceived threat of predation, (3)
the degree to which those behavioral changes provide some protection from
predation, and (4) the impact of altering reproductive behaviors in response to
predation risk on reproductive success and fitness (survival, egg production,
and phenology). Experiments will be conducted in the laboratory and in the field
at Miami University's Ecology Research Center. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this study lies in the fact that it will advance the understanding of
predator-prey interactions. In addition, it will lead to a clearer understanding
of how natural selection through predation interacts with sexual selection in
shaping mating strategies at each stage of the mating process. This study will
also provide a deeper understanding of the factors that allow the coexistence of
two important predatory arthropods inhabiting agroecosystems. This information
will lead to an understanding of the mechanisms that maintain biological
diversity and will have important implications for biological control in
agricultural systems. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
research lie in the development of a collaborative research community including
PhDs and undergraduates from two very different institutions: a two-year open
admission campus of a large state assisted university (Miami - Hamilton) and a
small private liberal arts college (Susquehanna). Recruiting efforts will target
non-traditional students, students from local Appalachian populations, as well
as traditional minority groups. This program will unite undergraduate
researchers from the two institutions behind a common research goal and, in so
doing, expose them both to the culture of a different educational environment.
The research program consists of a number of technically straightforward
experiments that can easily be undertaken by individuals or teams of
undergraduates as independent projects. The beauty of such a research program is
that undergraduates can take ownership of significant portions of the project
and execute them to publication. When these various projects are considered
together, a comprehensive understanding of the reproduction behavior of an
economically important predator will be revealed. This research program will
help build the research program of a new Assistant Professor (Persons),
rejuvenate the research program of a senior faculty member (Rypstra) and help a
recent Ph.D. (Postdoctoral Associate) learn how to develop a research program at
an undergraduate institution. Undergraduates will explore the literature, write
research proposals and papers, and present their findings to their peers and to
professionals at regional and national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;