* 0216548
* BE/CNH: Settlement Systems Within a Dynamic Environment and Economy: Contrasting Northern and Southern Mesopotamian City Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* John Christiansen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,197,340.00

The early urban settlements in the Near East provide an ideal laboratory for the
study of long-term human-environment interactions because they offer an enormous
array of archaeological and textual data that can be incorporated into an
overall social, economic, and environmental analytical framework stretching over
several millennia. This research project will model and attempt to explain
trajectories of development and demise of Bronze Age settlement systems for both
the rain-fed and the irrigated zones of modern-day Syria and Iraq. The project
goals are to develop a holistic, dynamic, object-based model that can help
determine the conditions under which societies became more or less urban or even
collapsed. The investigators will examine why third and fourth millennium B.C.
cities in the irrigated zone of southern Mesopotamia grew to a greater size and
complexity than those in the rain-fed north. Traditional models often view
cities as being founded by an over-arching authority. Although the model will
test such a top-down perspective, the project will emphasize settlement system
development from the ground up. Concepts of complex adaptive systems will be
used to test the hypothesis that systems of early cities and their regions co-
evolved in an intimate relationship with their environment, primarily by means
of aggregation through time of smaller fundamental units (households). Agent-
based modeling will allow a wide range of choices and trajectories to contribute
to the outcome of the modeling exercise. Simulation will employ advanced object-
based frameworks (DIAS and FACET) designed by the Decision and Information
Sciences Division of Argonne National Laboratory. The DIAS framework allows a
range of simulation models and other applications to work together to address a
complex modeling problem. It will incorporate climate (GCM), weather (MM5),
hydrological and agricultural (EPIC / SWAT), and demographic models plus agent-
based models of social behavior built using the FACET framework. Input data will
be derived from the large corpus of landscape data, epigraphic data, and
regional-scale environmental studies housed within the Oriental Institute of the
University of Chicago and elsewhere. The simulated settlement system will be
validated against the archaeological landscape as it has been recorded by field
surveys and satellite remote sensing. By the end of the project, investigators
expect to have developed a general modeling framework with an associated user
interface that will enable interactions between humans and the environment to be
rigorously tested over periods as long as several
millennia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected result of this work, improved
understanding how humans interact with dynamic ecological and climatic
mechanisms, is fundamental to ecological management and is applicable very
broadly. In addition, studies of the interplay of coupled human and natural
systems as a cause of collapse of past societies are also of fundamental
importance. Cities and their hinterlands are among the most complex coupled
natural and human systems, and urban systems will continue to play an
increasingly important role in shaping the future of the planet. This project
will provide new insights into the complex interactions between people and their
environment, and it will contribute to the study of urbanization past and
present. The proposed modeling framework also has potential utility as an
educational tool, because it will enable both academic and general users to
interact with complex environmental, cultural, and socio-economic databases in
order to simulate the growth of settlements and cities and to analyze long term
concepts of sustainability. This project is supported by an award resulting from
the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on
the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;