* 0216375
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Computational Modeling Facilities for Research and Education in Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Patrick Tebbe, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 86,917.00

EIA-0216375&lt;br/&gt;Patrick A. Tebbe&lt;br/&gt;Lisa Grega&lt;br/&gt;The
College of New Jersey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Computational
Modeling Facilities for Research and Education in
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from an REU institution,
advancing the computational infrastructure of the institution (TCNJ) in
Engineering, aims at improving the areas of computer aided design and numerical
modeling (structural and thermal fluids) in both research and education. Three
high performance workstations with 3-D graphics and visualization capabilities
and expanded dynamic memory are requested along with licenses and training for
two industry finite element modeling packages. The proposal addresses two
strategic areas of national importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; High Performance
Computing and&lt;br/&gt; Advanced Materials and
Processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The former will be addressed through the
infrastructure and training aspects; while the latter will be addressed through
the research of the following topics:&lt;br/&gt; Numerical Study of Transient
and Interfacial Effects in Physical Vapor Transport and&lt;br/&gt; Process
Modeling of the Warm Forming of Aluminum.&lt;br/&gt;Modeling will be done using
commercial code such as ANSYS and FLUENT. Education and training activities are
also planned. The project also addresses educational outreach and curriculum
integration opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested include the
equipment listed below and associated expenses.&lt;br/&gt; Sun Blade 1000
workstations&lt;br/&gt; ANSYS RFD upgrade license&lt;br/&gt; FIDAP and Exceed
software&lt;br/&gt; Training for maintaining the
packages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will support educational outreach
programs and will be integrated with the curriculum to involve high school
student, undergraduates and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;