* 0216779
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Electron Gun for a Scanning Auger Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 06/30/2004
* USD 122,325.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
acquisition of a field emission gun for a scanning Auger Microscope at PA St U
University Park. Scanning Auger Microscope is an important tool for the study of
surfaces, interfaces and thin films. The purchase of an electron gun will allow
this technique to be performed in existing equipment at Penn State. Materials
researchers will use scanning Auger microscopy to address important questions in
the development of &lt;br/&gt;both conventional and nanoscale semiconductor
devices, superconductors, and carbon nanostructures. Users in the Center for
Innovative Sintered Products, Center for Thin Film Devices, and National
Nanofabrication Users Network at Penn State will also &lt;br/&gt;benefit from
availability of the technique. The equipment will be integrated into an existing
undergraduate laboratory course in materials science and engineering, and a new
one credit graduate course will be offered to teach students about the
principles and operation of the scanning Auger microscope. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will use the equipment for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program supports the acquisition of a field emission gun for a scanning
Auger Microscope at PA St U University Park. Scanning Auger Microscope is an
important tool for the study of surfaces, interfaces and thin films. The
purchase of an electron gun will allow this technique to be performed in
existing equipment at Penn State. Materials researchers will use scanning Auger
microscopy to address important questions in the development of &lt;br/&gt;both
conventional and nanoscale semiconductor devices, superconductors, and carbon
nanostructures. Users in the Center for Innovative Sintered Products, Center for
Thin Film Devices, and National Nanofabrication Users Network at Penn State will
also &lt;br/&gt;benefit from availability of the technique. The equipment will
be integrated into an existing undergraduate laboratory course in materials
science and engineering, and a new one credit graduate course will be offered to
teach students about the principles and operation of the scanning Auger
microscope. Both graduate and undergraduate students will use the equipment for
research.&lt;br/&gt;