* 0216297
* MRI:  Development of a Focused Ion Beam System with Multi-Ion and Direct-Write/Implantation Capability for Fabrication of Mesoscale Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Bill Appleton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Harvard
University and UC Berkeley with the development of a focused ion beam system
with multi-ion and direct-write/implantation capability for fabrication of
mesoscale structures. Harvard University and UC Berkeley-LBNL will develop a new
Focused Ion Beam (FIB) system that is capable of producing a variety of ion
species for direct implantation, maskless patterning, and ion beam sculpting,
with nanometer resolution. Key Harvard and UC Berkeley faculty and staff will
establish design specifications based on research needs. Postdoctoral
appointments and senior technical staff will follow the project through
completion and into operation. Ion sculpting research by the Golovchenko group
at Harvard will be applied to fabricate critical ion source extraction apertures
for the system. The primary ion source, ion beam manipulation, ion optics, and
fabrication capabilities will be provided by Professor Ka-Ngo Leung's group at
UC Berkeley. Selected specialized components will be fabricated under sub-
contract at LBNL, where Professor Leung holds a joint appointment. The system
will consist of an integrated, multiple-beam facility housed in a high vacuum
processing and analysis chamber. A compact Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
will be configured for in situ imaging. A high resolution Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
system will be designed that can be used for nanofabrication and direct
write/implantation. Ion sources will be easily interchangeable with the FIB
column for maximum flexibility, including the use of negative ions. Systems with
controllable, multiple apertures (multiple beams) will be explored to increase
processing speed and versatility. In situ diagnostics will be designed into the
chamber to facilitate future fabrication and research applications. The
completed system will be installed, operated and maintained by technical staff
of Harvard's Center for Imaging and Mesoscale Structures (CIMS) as a new shared
equipment facility available to all faculty and collaborators for research and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research to understand the
science associated with mesoscale structures has shown the need for new
approaches to the fabrication of future small-scale structures. For example,
conventional Focused Ion Beam (FIB) systems utilize Gallium liquid metal ion
sources and Gallium is an undesirable contaminant that severely limits many
applications and fundamental studies. A second example of current limitations is
the need to selectively dope/modify small regions in nanoscale device
structures. At present this requires complex masking, implantation, evaporation,
diffusion, annealing, and lift-off steps that become increasingly difficult as
device dimensions shrink. A third limitation is the lack of integrated
diagnostics in conventional systems which limit research applications. Harvard
University and the University of California (UC) Berkeley/LBNL will collaborate
to develop a new Focused Ion Beam (FIB) system capable of utilizing a variety of
ion beams/species for direct implantation, maskless patterning, and ion beam
sculpting, all with nanometer resolution. This system will not only provide
unique capabilities for research, but improvements made in the course of the
development will also be of interest in the U.S. processing and equipment
industries. By operating the new system as a shared equipment facility within
Harvard's Center for Imaging and Mesoscale Structures (CIMS), existing Harvard
programs such as the NSF Materials Research and Engineering Center (MRSEC), the
NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center (NSEC), and other faculty and
students can make immediate use of the new system for research, training, and
education. Close ties will be maintained with UC Berkeley and interested
industries to ensure optimum future development and applications of the
system.&lt;br/&gt;