* 0216752
* Acquisition of a Physical Properties Measurement Facility for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Karl Unruh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 89,250.00

An IMR award is made to the University of Delaware to purchase a physical
properties measurement system (PPMS) to support a number of complementary and
multidisciplinary research programs in the areas of novel magnetic materials and
superconductivity. The PPMS is an automated variable temperature-magnetic field
system that will provide a suite of new electro-transport and magnetometry
measurement capabilities that include resistivity, Hall effect, current-voltage
characteristics, noise, DC&lt;br/&gt;magnetization, AC susceptibility and
anisotropy. The system will serve the diverse needs of several faculty members
who require routine characterization and detailed studies of materials in
magnetic fields ranging from 50 mOe to 90 kOe and at temperatures ranging from
1.9 K to 400K that are currently not attainable. Active research programs that
benefit from access to such a system include studies of: "spin-electronics", in
particular spin-polarized transport in ferromagnetic tunnel junctions, permanent
magnets and small magnetic particles, soft magnetic nanocomposites, magnetism of
transition metal organometallics, linear magnetoresistance of silver
chalcogenides, and electromagnetic properties of recently discovered
superconductors. These research programs address fundamental phenomena
materials, as well as technological aspects related to materials synthesis,
processing, and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IMR award is to establish
a state-of-the-art physical properties measurement (PPMS) facility at the
University of Delaware. The facility will be used by a diverse set of faculty in
the Departments of Physics and Astronomy, Materials Science and Engineering, and
Chemistry and Biochemistry who require studies of the electrical and magnetic
properties of materials under extreme temperatures and magnetic fields. The
research programs address fundamental phenomena in novel magnetic materials and
superconductivity, as well as technological aspects related to materials
synthesis, processing, and performance. Some areas of research that will benefit
from this new facility are related to magnetic field sensing and data storage,
such as the unusually large and linear magnetic response found in silver
telluride compounds and in the emerging field of "spintronics". The latter is a
revolutionary approach to electronics that is based on the spin of the charge
carrier in addition to its charge. Spin-electronic devices
have&lt;br/&gt;already found commercial application in the computer hard-drive
industry and hold great promise for low power, non-volatile memory applications.
The PPMS facility will significantly expand the scope of materials
characterization efforts at the institution. In addition to its impact on the
scientific goals of the IMR program, the PPMS facility will be integrated into
the educational activities of the Department of Physics and Astronomy. These
activities include curriculum development for graduate and senior undergraduate
level courses (such as laboratory exercises for a course on Magnetic Materials),
research opportunities for undergraduates, and established outreach activities
that promote the benefits excitement of research to local high school students
and parents.&lt;br/&gt;