* 0216242
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for High Resolution Light Microscopy and Image Processing at Mount Holyoke College
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Sarah Bacon, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 82,095.00

Proposal 6113720&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sue Ellen F. Gruber&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of
Instrumentation for High Resolution Light Microscopy and Image Processing at
Mount Holyoke College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant
has been awarded to Dr. Sue Ellen F. Gruber and five other biologists at Mount
Holyoke College to acquire instrumentation for high resolution light microscopy
and image processing. Light microscopy is core to the analysis of diverse
biological questions under investigation by these faculty and their
undergraduates in the Biology Department. The instruments to be obtained,
including a research-quality fluorescence microscope coupled to a high
resolution cooled CCD camera and computer hardware and software appropriate for
image processing, will augment the research needs of these researchers, and in
each case will permit experimentation and analysis not possible with existing
equipment. This grant will, at the same time, enhance the research training of
students in the Biology Department, as well as in the two allied programs of
Biochemistry, and Neuroscience and Behavior. The new instrumentation, to become
part of an integrated microscopy facility, will complement the existing electron
microscopes with up-to-date sophistication in the several modes of light
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects under investigation by the six
participating biology faculty members are wide-ranging. One examines the
immunological interactions between a mother and fetus that influence the success
of pregnancy. A second explores the action of antimalarial drugs in
microorganisms. A third, unique in North America, aims to document the
biodiversity of neglected invertebrate groups. The remaining projects dissect
the events giving rise to programmed cell death in plants, sort out the identity
of cell surface features that may be responsible for AIDS-related
immunodeficiency in mice, and examine the role of steroid hormones in the
development of fruitflies. In all instances, the enhanced ability to obtain and
process high quality microscope images will open up new avenues of
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mount Holyoke College is an institution
dedicated to preparing women to be leaders in every part of productive society
and has an especially outstanding record in training women scientists. Its
mission is to train students to think and act as practicing scientists, by
working with accomplished faculty who emphasize hands-on research with modern
equipment. Thus, the benefits of the new instrumentation will extend beyond the
particular faculty research accomplishments, as they nurture the research
training of a generation of future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;