* 0216310
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Research in the Chemical Senses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Alan Gelperin, Monell Chemical Senses Center
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 278,028.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Nancy E. Rawson at the Monell Chemical Senses
Center to purchase a confocal microscope with associated hardware and software.
The Monell Center is a nonprofit research institute focused on acquiring a
fuller understanding of the chemical senses. Recent studies have revealed that
cell-cell interactions play an important role in modulating the output of a
variety of sensory receptor cells. The confocal microscope permits us to
directly observe intracellular processes and interactions between different cell
types in preparations that more closely reflect those of the intact organism. In
addition, chemosensory cells undergo regeneration throughout the life of the
animal. In order to better understand this capability, studies of growing cells
are carried out using methods to identify the different stages in the cells'
lifespan and evaluate the effect of drugs or other treatments on the growth
process. &lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscope will be used in projects aimed at
addressing a variety of questions ranging from understanding how individual
receptor cells detect and respond to chemical stimuli; how experience influences
the ways that organisms respond to chemosensory stimuli; how odor qualities are
encoded in neural activity patterns in the brain; how stem cells divide and
differentiate into mature sensory receptor cells; and how these sensory systems
recover from damage. These projects utilize standard histology, lectin and
immuno-histochemistry, in situ hybridization of fixed tissue specimens, and
biophysical methods to study live tissue. These techniques provide a variety of
kinds of data, ranging from protein and mRNA localization in peripheral and
central components of the taste, olfactory and trigeminal systems to dynamic
extra- and intracellular signalling in tissue slices, cultures and cell
ensembles. The system will also be included as one educational component in our
Minority Student Research Apprenticeship Training Program, which has provided
summer research experiences for over 300 high school and college undergraduates
since its inception.&lt;br/&gt;The ability to examine cells in ensembles, such
as whole taste buds, or thick tissue sections will dramatically improve our
ability to understand how the sensory systems of taste, smell and chemical
irritation function in the intact organism. The confocal microscope will also
enhance our ability to provide state-of-the-art training experiences for
students participating in our high school, college, graduate and post-doctoral
training programs. &lt;br/&gt;