* 0216614
* Social, Ecological and Genetic Variables in a Model Vocal Learning System
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Michael Beecher, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 580,165.00

Social, Ecological and Genetic Variables in a Model Learning
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael D. Beecher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of
elaborate acoustic vocalizations for communication is common in a wide variety
of animal groups. In the oscine passerines (songbirds), such vocalizations are
called song and have an additional, intriguing aspect: they are learned, with
much of that learning occurring very early in life. Song learning in songbirds
has been extensively analyzed in the laboratory and has become a major model
system for studying the neurobiology of learning. Its value as a model system is
enhanced by its many parallels with human language learning. These parallels
include an early sensitive period, a perceptual filtering mechanism tuned to
species communication signals, a crucial role for auditory feedback in normal
development, a separation between sensory and motor learning, and an early
subsong or babbling stage. Work on the neural basis of song perception and
production in songbirds has revealed additional parallels between the neural
centers for song in birds and those for language in humans. In this context,
understanding the normal course of song development in songbirds becomes crucial
if this model system is going to provide general insights into the development
of vocal communication systems in general and human language in particular.
Unfortunately, our understanding of normal song development is surprisingly
incomplete, because most studies of song learning to date have been laboratory
experiments in which essentially all social features have been removed. Four
series of studies will be carried out to examine social, ecological and genetic
variables in the song learning process for one particular species, the song
sparrow. In the first series of experiments, singing interactions between tutor
and tutee, and between tutors, will be manipulated and analyzed as a potential
variable in song learning; this will be the first time this has been attempted
in the laboratory. The setup will simulate four live song tutors, and both
tutor-tutor and tutor-tutee singing interactions will be systematically varied;
the general prediction is that birds will copy more songs from more interactive
tutors. A second study will examine the role of genetic factors by comparing
song learning by eastern and western song sparrows. On the basis of field
studies, it has been hypothesized that birds in the two populations follow very
different, genetically-based song-learning programs. This hypothesis will be
tested by collecting birds from both populations and raising them in a common
song-tutoring regime; according to the genetic hypothesis, the differences
observed in the field should persist despite the common tutoring regime. In a
third study, song learning will be directly examined in the field by radio-
tracking young song sparrows through their first year and correlating the extent
and timing of their interactions with potential song tutors and the degree to
which the young birds copy their songs. In the fourth study, playback
experiments in which the experimenter simulates a birds neighbor by playing
recordings of the neighbor to the bird in a realistic simulation -- will be
carried out to analyze how birds in both populations use their songs in
territorial interactions with their neighbors. Field studies have suggested that
the rules of communication in these two populations may be quite different,
paralleling the presumed difference in their song learning programs. It is hoped
that results from these different lines of research will combine to elucidate
the social factors that shape the development of this model vocal learning
system. In turn, such insights may shed light on human disorders such as autism
that are characterized by a co-occurrence of language and social deficiencies.
&lt;br/&gt;