* 0216532
* SBIR Phase II:   Latent-Reactive Surface Modification Reagents for Biofilm Control
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Patrick Guire, SurModics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 10/31/2004
* USD 496,893.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project continues the
development of new thermally activable reagents for bonding microbicidal
polymers to inner surfaces of a variety of opaque tubing materials, initiated in
Phase I under the Advanced Materials and Manufacturing (AM) topic, Surface
Engineering subtopic (F). Materials have been developed with bulk physical
properties needed for transport of aqueous mixtures; however, the development of
biofilm on the wet surfaces is a continuing serious problem in the dental,
pharmaceutical, food processing, and marine transport industries. Surface
modification of waterlines could decrease the formation of biofilm while
retaining the desired bulk properties of the tubing. Photochemistry has been
proven commercially successful in enhancing the surface properties of medical
devices with radical-based surface modification initiated by RF plasma or
ultraviolet light. However, these energy sources are not effective for modifying
the inner surfaces of opaque tubes such as waterlines used with dental units and
plumbing in pharmaceutical plants. This project is designed to develop latent-
reactive radical generators activatible with thermal energy which penetrates
these opaque devices. This innovative approach to scheduled activation of
radical generators will provide a method to modify inert surfaces which cannot
be activated with external light or plasma sources. Microbial colonization and
biofilm formation remain a major cost and threat to human health and product
quality for dental and pharmaceutical industries, health care and public
lodging, and marine vessel utilization. Successful development of microbicidal
and antifouling coating technology for the luminal surface of opaque transport
and storage vessels for aqueous liquid ingestible products, constitute an
incremental market size of tens of millions of dollars, not subject to current
commercial coating technology.