* 0216467
* MRI:  Acquisition of CITI Terascale Cluster (CTC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Willy Zwaenepoel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,150,000.00

0216467&lt;br/&gt;Moshe Y. Vardi&lt;br/&gt;Don H. Johnson; Ken W. Kennedy; John
M. Mellor-Crummey; Willy Zwaenepoel&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of CITI Terascale
Cluster \(CTC\)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, requiring access to the
kinds of experimental computational resources needed for scalability
experiments, aims to support scalability to thousands of processors. Achieving
this goal requires experimentation of computational facilities of sufficient
size to establish that solutions will scale to large systems. A high-performance
computational cluster with a peak performance of approximately one teraflop,
supporting both compute- and data-intensive science and engineering, will enable
researchers to make fundamental advances in diverse areas such as biochemistry,
biology, chemistry, computational mathematics, computer science and engineering,
earth science, economics, physics, political science, and psychology.
Experiments planned include:&lt;br/&gt;a. Scalability of compiler techniques for
systems with hundreds of processors and deep memory and communication
hierarchies;&lt;br/&gt;b. Development, simulation, and testing of scalable Web
services on hundreds of processors;&lt;br/&gt;c. Simulations of ad hoc multihop
wireless networks scaling to thousands of nodes;&lt;br/&gt;d. Scalable
algorithms for Monte-Carlo studies of the physics of heavy ion
collisions;&lt;br/&gt;e. Design and evaluation of scalable optimization
algorithms based on component frameworks;&lt;br/&gt;f. Extraction and analysis
of data on hundreds of millions of international events, to better predict and
understand international conflicts (extend the Kansas Data System);
and&lt;br/&gt;g. Scalability tests and practical application of new algorithms
for modeling and simulation of biomolecular interactions using several thousand
flexibility parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating the equipment in the
existing curriculum the educational impact is expected to be large, going beyond
a course in parallel programming. Several programs are already in place
addressing diversity.&lt;br/&gt;