* 0216703
* Acquisition of a Multi-User, Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Judy Schneider, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 288,190.00

This grant supports a multi-user Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope
(FE-SEM) to be installed in an Internet-connected facility. It will allow users
to view SEM images from anywhere on Mississippi State campus and throughout the
K-12 educational system. While the new SEM will reside at MSU, faculty at the
other major research universities in Mississippi will also make use of this
facility. The fully analytical FE-SEM will serve the multi-disciplinary research
needs of a number of faculty members from various Colleges and Departments
throughout MSU. The primary users will explore surface phenomena in catalysts;
microfluidic MEMs devices; organic/inorganic relations in soils and rocks;
aspects of cell-biomaterial surface interactions and biocompatibility; and
contributions of phase evolution and microstructure to deformation and fracture
processes. This instrument will greatly expand the efficacy of current research,
broaden the scope of future projects, and have a significant impact on materials
education at MSU, sister research institutions in Mississippi, and the K-12
educational system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SEM will help foster the
integration of research and education by providing modern materials analysis
instrumentation with general availability across disciplines. Installation of
the FE-SEM in an interactive setting will promote materials research as a career
choice to students in K-12. Currently offered summer Outreach Programs for
Teachers will be used to advertise this resource. The co-investigators will have
special broadcast demonstrations to assist students in exploring the
microstructural world of materials and how microstructure affects their
behavior. After initial exposure to microscopy through demonstrations in the
classroom at MSMS, the students will have the opportunity to actively
participate in research at the MSU campus. The modules and demonstrations
developed at MSMS will serve as a model for use in other high schools throughout
the state of Mississippi. MSU plays a leading role in attracting high tech
industry to the state of Mississippi, and enhanced analytical capabilities will
help provide the research support needed to enhance economic development in the
South. &lt;br/&gt;