* 0216932
* Measuring Black-White Wage Inequality Among Women
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Derek Neal, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 240,945.00

A substantial literature explores various ways to estimate black-white wage gaps
among men. Social scientists realize that it is difficult to measure black-white
differences in labor market opportunities among men because large numbers of
less-skilled black men do not work and therefore do not report wages. Thus, the
sample of wages among black men is a highly select sample, and the resulting
estimate of the average wage among black men is overstated because of this
selection bias.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; While much progress has been made on
statistical methods for addressing this important measurement problem, it is
striking that the literature deals almost exclusively with the data on men. Many
economists and demographers believe that selection bias is not a problem when
measuring the black-white wage gap among women because black and white women
have similar labor force participation rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
research will explore how racial differences patterns of labor force
participation among women may affect measured black-white wage gaps among women
even though overall levels of participation are the same among black and white
women. Preliminary results indicate that the relationship between labor force
participation and family structure differs notably by race. Married women who
are raising children account for a disproportionate share of white women who do
not work in the market. Among black women, single mothers are over-represented
in the sample of women who did not report any market work, and a significant
fraction of black, single mothers who do not work in the market receive means
tested government assistance in some form over long time periods. My initial
results come from the 1979 cohorts of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY79). By using data on wages over the 1988-92 period, I construct a wage
observation for at least ninety percent of black women and over 90 percent of
white women in the NLSY79 sample. In addition, based on other data in the NLSY79
that describe family structures and income sources, I develop imputation rules
that allow me to construct estimates of black-white gaps in both mean and median
wages based on samples that include wage data for at least 95 percent of both
the black and white samples. Thus far, my work with the NLSY79 data suggests
that the measured black-white gap in wages among working women seriously
understates the absolute magnitude of the black-white gap in potential wages
among women. My findings are preliminary and apply only to one census year,
1990, for women born in the years 1957-64. Thus, much work
remains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research will address the following
questions: (1) How robust are initial findings concerning selection bias and the
measurement of black-white wage gaps among young adult women in 1990? (2) How
have changes over time in racial differences in selection patterns affected the
measurement of trends in the black-white wage gap among women? (3) How do racial
differences in patterns of selection affect racial differences in wage growth
over the life-cycle among women. (4) Has labor market discrimination against
black women relative to white women increased, decreased, or remained constant
during the past three decades? My research plan seeks to combine several of the
NLS panel data sets as well as data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics.
These panels provide histories of work experience as well as histories of labor
and non-labor income. By combining the information in various panels, I will be
able to replicate the work I have done with the NLSY79 using a broad range of
age groups over the census years 1970, 1980, 1990, and
2000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Early results suggest that black women may not have
made as much progress during the 1970s as previous studies suggest. Further,
black women may not have experienced losses in relative labormarket status
during the 1980s and 90s even though many studies argue that they have.
&lt;br/&gt;