* 0216112
* Establishing A Computer Laboratory for Student/Faculty Economics Research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* John Handy, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 96,843.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
award, the economics faculty at Morehouse College will develop a research
computer laboratory to improve the quality and scope of research activities in
economics and other related disciplines. The research computer lab will enhance
the economics department's capacity to model and investigate substantive
economic and social issues using national and international data sets employing
well-designed econometric models. The department also will rely on this
broadened instrumentation to augment student research within specific courses.
Faculty and student researchers will carry out econometrics projects in urban
economics, international economics, macroeconomics, public finance, economic
development, environmental and health economics, labor economics and other
socioeconomic research. The effort to significantly improve the number of
computer applications for both student and faculty research is central to the
department's strategic plan to strengthen economics and business education at
Morehouse College, and to increase the number of Morehouse graduates pursuing
graduate training in economics, public policy, and international affairs. Thus,
in addition to strengthening the economics curriculum, this effort will
significantly expand the amount of computer-based student research vital to
increasing the pool of undergraduates applying to graduate programs.

The lab also will be available to students and faculty in the political science
department's Brisbane Institute, which will utilize the facility to conduct
voting and political behavior research. In addition, the computer research lab
will help the Division of Economics and Business address important social issues
across the entire economics and business curriculum. Within the division, the
marketing research course will utilize the econometrics research lab, as will
the management faculty and students who do behavioral and social research. This
lab, therefore, will be an important tool for the growth and development of the
economic research program, related divisional business research, and political
behavior research efforts.

The MRI funding will underwrite a new effort aimed at addressing the needs and
interests of students, the economics faculty, and other related faculty to
expand the college's policy research capacity. The department is proposing an
ambitious and forward looking program to begin an expansion of their
infrastructure over three years to take advantage of data downloads from the
University of Michigan Inter-University Consortium of Political and Social
Research, to expand the climate of serious faculty/student research, and to
improve the traditional lecture learning approach with something more
interesting, important and useful for cognitive development.

The project is important for many reasons. It will increase the opportunities
for Morehouse College faculty and students to engage in policy research,
presentations, and programs. It will increase the depth and relevance of
economics and business-related courses in their coverage of national and
international issues through improved computer-based student projects and
papers. Over time, it is expected that these activities will increase the number
of students applying to Ph.D. programs in economics and public policy, thereby
helping to expand the pool of highly trained African American economists and
policy analysts.



