* 0216437
* Acquisition of Computational Systems for Systems Biology Research in the MIT BioMicro Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Peter Sorger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract: A grant has been awarded to the BioMicro Center at MIT to acquire
high-performance computers for research in biology and biological engineering.
The systems will be among the most powerful at MIT and will be dedicated to
advancing the research programs of an active group of young faculty. These
Assistant and Associate Professors lead research teams working on a wide range
of problems in computational biology. The teams are united in their interest in
the application of numerical models, computational simulations and large-scale
computation to biological problems. The completion of the human genome sequence
has emphasized the remarkable complexity of biological processes. While
traditional molecular biology and molecular medicine will continue to play an
important role in unraveling how these processes work, it seems almost certain
that fundamental advances will come from the application of quantitative and
rigorous analytic methods. The research includes Professor Amy Keating's work on
protein design. Dr. Keating's goal is to discern the rules governing protein-
protein interactions through calculation and simulation and to then apply the
rules to actual experiments. Professor Mike Yaffe will use computation to mine
the human genome for proteins that play crucial roles in the transmission of
signals within cells. Dr. Yaffe hopes to determine how circuits are constructed
in cells, and to compare these circuits to electronic and mechanical circuits.
Professor Tidor will use large-scale calculations to try to determine how
proteins interact with each other and with small molecules (such as drugs). This
is a long-standing problem in structural biology, but Dr. Tidor has recently
shown that approximations drawn from engineering can be successfully applied to
the problems that have proven to be impossible to calculate using conventional
methods. The new facility will not only enhance novel research but also graduate
and undergraduate education. A new set of courses have the unusual distinction
of being in the curriculum of three different departments: biology, biological
engineering, and computer science. The group's intention is to expose students
to the very latest computational methods and computer systems. Thus, high-
performance computing will not only have a direct impact on world-class science,
but also on education and training. With the help of Prof. Amy Keating, the
group is working hard to attract additional women to computational biology. In
the physical sciences women are significantly under-represented. Computational
biology holds great promise as a discipline in which the historically
inequitable under-representation of women in physical sciences can be overcome
by association with biology.

