* 0216866
* Model Bending: Towards Dealing with Model Inadequacies in Data Assimilation and Forecasting Using a Single Model Structure
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Edward Lorenz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2006
* USD 668,950.00

There are two major sources of errors that account for inaccurate weather
predictions from numerical models: the initial-condition errors and model
inadequacies. In this project, the PIs will tackle the model inadequacies
problem through data assimilation and adjustment of physical parameters during
forecast period. They will use the model output statistics (MOS) produced from
forecasts as pseudo-data of the system's future states in a four dimensional
variational data assimilation (4d-Var) to find the initial conditions that
minimize the mismatch between the MOS forecasts and the model forecasts. A
second, independent, application of MOS is then applied to the resulting
forecast 4d-Var states. This procedure is termed as a "forecast 4d-Var" as it
takes into account the model errors through 4d-Var during forecast. The second
part of the research is to dynamically alter model parameters, instead of the
initial conditions, using 4d-Var to "bend" the model toward the true state of
the atmosphere. Self-correcting models will be developed to allow selected
parameters to be slowly varying functions of time and space based on physical
constraints. During this period, MOS for these parameters are obtained and then
used to "predict" optimized parameters in forward runs. This procedure is termed
as "model bending". Models of varying levels of complexity will be used to gain
a better understanding of model inadequacies overall.

The research will bring more attention into model errors in numerical
predictions. It has the potential of improving operational forecasts and
directing future model development. If successful, it would lead to a major
breakthrough in numerical modeling. The project provides good opportunities for
training graduate students in the highly needed areas of data assimilation and
predictability.