* 0216525
* Development of a Digital Video/Data Recorder for Monitoring Behavior and Multi-Dimensional Movements of Marine Mammals at Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Randall Davis, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2004
* USD 219,662.00

Research on the behavioral and energetic adaptations of Weddell seals
(Leptonychotes weddellii ) to the cold dark Antarctic fast-ice environment have
been facilitated by recent developments in animal-borne video systems. The PI
has developed a small, analog video/data recorder that can be attached to free-
ranging marine mammals to observe their underwater behavior, track their three-
dimensional movements, and simultaneously record data on their environment. The
current effort will build on this success and advance the technology to the next
level. The video/data recorders will be redesigned include the following new
features: digital video recording for up to 30 h, a Global Positioning System
(GPS) for geolocation at the surface, extended data recording for up to 14 days,
and a 50% reduction in size. Development includes specifications for an advanced
digital video/data recorder and operating software. The new video/data recorder
will be jointly designed and fabricated by Texas A&amp;M University at Galveston
and Pisces Design (San Diego, CA). The system will consist of two parts. The
first will be a small aluminum housing for the microcontroller and sensors for
pressure, swim speed, compass bearing, ambient temperature, ambient dissolved
oxygen, ambient light level, tilt, pitch and roll. The use of a 31 gigabyte or
larger mini-hard drive for storing compressed, digital video and audio will
allow a considerable size reduction from previous designs while retaining full
programmability and increasing the recording duration to ca. 30 h. The
microcontroller will have at least 8 analog-to-digital converters at 12-bit
resolution or greater. This housing will also contain lithium ion batteries that
will power the micro-controller, compass, sensors and GPS. The second housing
will contain the miniature video camera with near-infrared light emitting diodes
(LED) as a light source. The camera will be a low light sensitive, black and
white camera. This high-resolution camera is sensitive to visible and near-
infrared wavelengths of light. The near-infrared LED light source is designed
for imaging in total darkness without disturbing the animal's behavior (near-
infrared light is invisible to marine mammals and fishes). This new generation
of video/data recorder will be used initially as part of current studies of the
foraging behavior of free-ranging Weddell seals in Antarctica and will yield new
insights into the activities of animals at sea. This includes the study of
general foraging strategies, searching behavior, searching mechanics, modes of
swimming, and foraging efficiency for different environmental conditions and
prey type. The new instruments will advance the ability to conduct these
investigations byproviding high quality digital video recordings, enhancing our
ability to track the movements of animals at the surface (with GPS) and while
submerged (with three- dimensional tracking), and reducing the size to decrease
hydrodynamic drag. In addition to the study of marine mammals, the video/data
recorder has broad applicability to a variety of submersible platforms and human
divers. The video/data recorder will contribute to the development of new
undersea technology and instrumentation that can be used to better understand
and protect marine organisms and their habitats.