* 0216541
* MRI/MII:  Acquisition of Collaborative High Performance Computing and Visualization Cluster
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Stephen Zahorian, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/2006
* USD 306,000.00

EIA-0216541&lt;br/&gt;Stephen A. Zahorian&lt;br/&gt;R. Bowen
Loftin&lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI/MII:
Acquisition of Collaborative High Performance Computing and Visualization
Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from an MII institution, establishing
a Beowulf cluster for High Performance Computing (HPC) and visualization, aims
at enabling, supporting, and enhancing research and education in modeling and
simulation. The main applications addressed use a variety of numerically
intensive algorithms, which require many "runs" of a base computational
algorithm in order to view the big picture. Technical areas which will benefit
from the infrastructure include enterprise modeling and simulation and
visualization, high performance computing in areas such as PDE solvers and
bioinformatics, control systems modeling, automatic speech recognition, and
physical electronics simulations. Current specific research activities at ODU
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Modeling and Simulation Research,&lt;br/&gt;2. A JSC
Augmented Reality Trainer for International Space Station Space Lab Window
Assembly,&lt;br/&gt;3. Virtual Environments for Training,&lt;br/&gt;4. VMASC
Battle Lab (war gaming, human computer interfaces, visualization and distributed
simulation)&lt;br/&gt;5. Center for Computational Science,&lt;br/&gt;6.
Terascale Optimal PDE Simulations,&lt;br/&gt;7. Bioinformatics,&lt;br/&gt;8.
Speech Communications Research,&lt;br/&gt;9. Physical electronics simulations
(Bio-electrics, Nanoelectronics, Lattice Boltzmann Simulations,
and&lt;br/&gt;10. Systems Research on Life Critical Control
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational cluster will have approximately
50 nodes on the main campus and a number of similar notes at the modeling and
simulation center in Suffolk. Coupled via gigabit network and loosely coupled
between the two subclusters, the machines within each local cluster will use
public domain (e.g., Linux based) operating systems and scheduling such that
computationally intensive investigations can be initiated from various
locations. The equipment will support faculty and student training providing
hands-on experience in advanced computing research.&lt;br/&gt;