* 0216918
* The Interpretation of Contemporary Gauge Theories
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Richard Healey, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,770.00

SES 0216918 -- The Interpretation of Contemporary Gauge
Theories&lt;br/&gt;Richard Healey, University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to analyze the conceptual
foundations and implications of gauge theories in physics with a view to
answering the central interpretative question: What is the world like if a gauge
theory is true of it? Gauge theories are of fundamental importance to
contemporary physics. Three of the four basic physical interactions acknowledged
today are currently best described by quantized gauge theories, and the concept
of gauge has also been fruitfully applied to the fourth, gravity. But the
conceptual foundations and implications of gauge theories remain unclear. It is
up to the philosopher of science to analyze these and make them clear to
scientists, philosophers and interested laymen who seek a deeper understanding
of the content and significance of contemporary physics. Besides contributing to
the philosophy of science, it is hoped that conceptual clarifications resulting
from the proposed research will broaden the education and facilitate the
thinking of theoretical physicists in their attempts to go beyond the Standard
Model of elementary particles, and to arrive at a successful quantum theory of
gravity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research by the proposed PI has yielded
an interpretation of a class of classical gauge theories, including
electromagnetism. The conclusion was that these theories are best understood as
ascribing properties not simply at each point of space at each instant, but
rather directly on closed paths in space-time. Arguments for this conclusion
rest on an analysis of the behavior of quantum-mechanically described particles
interacting with a classical gauge field. Do similar conclusions emerge from a
fully quantum mechanical analysis which treats both "particles" and interactions
by means of quantized fields? Recent&lt;br/&gt;loop-space quantizations of Yang-
Mills fields suggest this may be so. A major goal of the project is to pursue
this suggestion, and to explore the implications of this kind of non-locality
for natural philosophy. The project then investigates the possibility of an
interpretation of loop-space quantum gravity as a gauge theory that attributes
properties non-locally on closed paths in space-time. Smolin (2001) takes the
loops themselves as basic, with space-time emerging from appropriate structures
of loops in some classical limit. This suggests a more radical form of non-
locality in which properties are ascribed to objects more fundamental than
space-time (though space-time itself emerges as an approximate construction out
of such&lt;br/&gt;objects). The project will evaluate the coherence,
credibility, and implications of this suggestion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is to be conducted over the course of two summers as well as the
academic year 2002-2003. The proposed PI intends to accept an invitation to
spend several months during 2003 in London, England as a Visiting Fellow of the
Centre for the Philosophy of the Natural and Social Sciences at the London
School of Economics. This should facilitate consultations with both philosophers
and physicists interested in the topic of the proposed research.