* 0216784
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope at Yale Geology and Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 344,338.00

0216784&lt;br/&gt;Karato&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will permit the
purchase of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a range of capabilities
for high-resolution analyses of structures and compositions of Earth materials,
including biological samples. The SEM we will purchase is a Philips XL30 ESEM-
FEG, which operates with both low- and high-vacuum modes with a field emission
gun (FEG) and a software/hardware package for an electron backscattered
diffraction (EBSD) pattern analysis. This new facility is critical to the
diverse research activities at Yale Geology and Geophysics including studies of:
(1) deformation microstructures of experimentally and naturally deformed samples
(Karato, Brandon), (2) fluid-rock interaction (Ague, Rye), (3) microbial
geochemistry and geomicrobiology (Blake). Complete orientation measurements with
high-spatial resolution, as provided by the EBSD package attached to this type
of state-of-the-art SEM, are critical to microstructural studies on deformed
rocks by Karato and Brandon. Geologic application of this technique is
widespread in Europe, but has been limited to only a handful of labs in the
United States. The spatial resolution of orientation measurements is close to
0.25 mm when the FEG electron source is used with an EBSD package. Such a high
spatial resolution is critical, particularly for the experimental studies in
Karato's group where microstructural developments under high-pressure conditions
are studied using specimens with very fine grain size. Similarly, the ESEM mode
of operation of this SEM has major advantages in several research areas at Yale
Geology and Geophysics. This includes the study of fluid-rock interaction
through the charge-contrast imaging technique (which works selectively at ESEM
mode), and the study of microbial geochemistry and geomicrobiology, which
requires high-resolution images of the morphology of mineral surfaces and
associated microorganisms. Addition of this facility to the existing analytical
and other experimental facilities will significantly enhance the research
programs of experimental Earth science at the department of Geology and
Geophysics at Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;