* 0216473
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Genetic Analyzers for University of South Dakota Evolutionary Genetics Research Group
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* John Swallow, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 124,953.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of South Dakota Department of
Biology, under the supervision of Drs. Nepokroeff, Britten, Helenurm &amp;
Swallow, to acquire automated genetic analysis instrumentation. The equipment
will be used for automated DNA sequencing, genetic fragment and genotyping
analysis (e.g. microsatellite detection, DNA finger-printing using AFLPs). The
equipment will be housed in the Biology Department, and will be used by an
additional 17 faculty from USD's Departments of Biology and Basic Biomedical
Sciences. The acquisition of this equipment at USD is especially significant
because there is currently no such facility on campus, and no high-throughput
facility in the state of South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in Biology at USD
will address a number of important questions in evolutionary genetics,
conservation biology and systematics using the genetic analyzer. Specific
projects to be addressed by Dr. Nepokroeff include the systematics of the
carnation family, Caryophyllaceae, using molecular phylogenetic analysis of
several different DNA sequences and phylogenetic approaches to study
biogeography, (colonization and dispersal) in Pacific island species of the
tropical shrub genus Psychotria (one of the most species-rich genera of
flowering plants). Additionally, she will study conservation and population
genetics of several Hawaiian plant lineages using AFLP and microsatellite
markers. Dr. Britten plans to address population genetic structure and genetic
variability of several Federally endangered species. He will be investigating
the effects of population fragmentation through habitat loss and historical
sylvatic plague infections in Black-tailed prairie dogs using AFLP and
microsatellite analysis. Additionally, he plans to examine genetic variation in
trumpeter swans and sandhill cranes. Dr. Helenurm will address population
genetics and evolution of insular endemic plants. He will use DNA finger-
printing methods, e.g., microsatellite and AFLP markers to examine levels of
genetic variability in several species of flowering plants endemic to
California's Channel Islands, many of which are endangered. He will also use
AFLPs and DNA sequences to examine within-species (or "phylogeographic")
relationships for plant species in the Channel Islands, a system which is poorly
known. Dr. Swallow will address questions concerning correlated evolution of
morphological, behavioral and physiological traits in stalk-eyed flies (family
Diopsidae), wild relatives of the fruit fly. He will use DNA sequences for
reconstructing phylogenetic relationships among species and populations of
stalk-eyed flies. Secondly, he will use DNA markers (AFLPs) in a QTL study to
determine the number of genes involved in traits related to species recognition
and mate choice.&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will be used in original research by
faculty, postdoctoral researchers, graduates and undergraduate students at USD,
will be integrated into three courses in the USD curriculum. The equipment will
also be incorporated in several existing summer programs, geared to give
research experiences to area minority high school students and their teachers.
The new equipment and proposed programs are anticipated to serve at least four
area colleges with research expertise and experiences, in addition to the USD
community. Acquiring an on-site facility will enhance the PI's competitiveness
for federal research funds and attract new faculty and graduate students to
USD's growing research programs. Thus, a genetic analyzer facility will have an
enormous impact on the quality of research and educational programs at USD, will
allow the PIs to integrate teaching and research at a high level, and will
enrich the USD community in a diversity of ways.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;