* 0216715
* Acquisition of Electron Microscope Upgrade to Implement Environmental Capability for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* James Mayer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2004
* USD 90,300.00

A state-of-the art (scanning)transmission electron microscope (TEM)will be
upgraded to an environmental TEM allowing near-atomic resolution imaging at
pressures up to 8 Torr and temperatures up to 900 degree C. These capabilities
are vital for proposed nanoscience, biotechnology and environmental science
research. Near-atom-scale patterns will be defined by electron-beam
decomposition of molecules adsorbed on surfaces. In situ investigation of vapor-
liquid-solid grown Si nanopillars will facilitate rapid process optimization
allowing growth on technologically relevant Si(100) surfaces. Characterization
of artificial bone synthesized using genetically engineered osteoblasts will be
facilitated by the capability for imaging hydrated specimens. Imaging at
elevated pressure and temperature will be employed to discover novel materials
useful for mineral sequestration of greenhouse gases. These advanced
characterization capabilities will be fully integrated into the classroom
learning experience and will significantly enhance industrial outreach
facilitating academic/industrial knowledge transfer.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;A
state-of-the art (scanning)transmission electron microscope (TEM)will be
upgraded to an environmental TEM allowing near-atomic resolution imaging of
diverse samples at pressures of up to 8 Torr and temperatures of up to 900
degree C. These capabilities are vital for cutting edge research proposed in
strategic thrust areas at ASU including nanoscience and technology,
biotechnology and environmental science. Specifically, electron beam stimulated
surface chemistry will be employed for writing near atomic scale patterns, real-
time imaging will be used to optimize process conditions for Si nanopillar
formation, characterization of tissue engineered artificial bone and in situ
investigation of mineral sequestration of greenhouse gases. The advanced
characterization capabilities of this instrument will be fully integrated into
classroom learning at ASU through its internet connection to the Goldwater
Materials Visualization Facility. Further, these capabilities will enhance
academic/industrial knowledge transfer facilitated by our highly successful
Industrial Associates program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;