* 0216389
* Acquisition of Multiple Instruments for Genomics-related Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Linda Strausbaugh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 11/30/2005
* USD 415,553.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Connecticut under the direction
of Dr. Linda Strausbaugh to acquire multiple instruments for genomics-related
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have witnessed milestones in
genetics research as the scientific community has developed advanced methods for
the sequencing and analysis of the genomes of humans and other model organisms.
These collective accomplishments herald a new era in genomics-related research
and training, providing unparalleled opportunities for new avenues of
investigation. It is the goal of this project to transport genome project
paradigms to the study of a wide range of important research topics and
organisms, and to train students at all levels in the theory and practice of
genomics research. The instruments acquired in this project will provide the
framework necessary to accomplish these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Specific
research problems to be addressed fall into three current areas of
interdisciplinary research strengths and one newly emerging area that builds
upon these three foundations. Scientists from Genetics and Animal Sciences will
address problems in Chromosomes and Mechanisms of Expression that focus upon how
structural features of the genome influence expression in the context of
development, aging, and genome changes. Scientists from Microbiology,
Engineering and Plant Science will conduct research in Environmental
Biotechnology by using genomic information and genetic engineering to study the
complex interactions between microorganisms and their environments. Researchers
in Evolutionary Biology, Molecular Biology, Civil Engineering and Computer
Science will conduct research projects in Molecular Evolution and Comparative
Genomics to better understand the molecular changes that accompany adaptation
and evolutionary histories of organisms. In an emerging, highly
interdisciplinary area, scientists from these three areas of research will join
forces with Forensic Scientists to advance DNA typing research by innovative
applications of genomics and new technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
genomics-related accomplishments in research and training made possible by this
project have significance on many levels. At the most basic level, knowledge of
the structure, function and expression of relatively poorly understood
components of the genetic blue prints of many plants, animals, and
microorganisms will be gained. This knowledge will be applied to several
pressing problems facing contemporary society, such as: the need to understand
the responses of living systems to environmental or genomic stress and aging;
the requirements for remediation of contaminated sites; and the necessity of
expanding the spectrum of environmental conditions under which plant growth may
be sustained. Equally important to its role in research, this project is also a
key part of a research-intensive learning environment for undergraduates,
students in two new and innovative professional master's programs in genomics
and microbiology, and doctoral candidates. Ties to more practical applications
should attract students from diverse populations. The advanced, state-of-the-art
training possible under this project will help meet the demands for a highly
skilled workforce required in a multitude of genomics-related applications from
pharmaceuticals to agriculture to forensics. &lt;br/&gt;