* 0216183
* Acquisition of Affymetrix GeneChip Microarray Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Roger Wise, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Iowa State University to acquire instrumentation for
the analysis of DNA oligonucleotide microarrays that allow the parallel
evaluation of up to 22,500 genes in a single experiment. This system will enable
researchers at ISU to employ state-of-the-art genomics technology to a variety
of plant, animal, and human research topics including; the molecular
characterization of genes coincident with disease, response to biotic or abiotic
stresses, or cellular development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oligonucleotide-based
microarrays can already be purchased which have been designed for genome
analysis of a number of different species. Research programs at Iowa State
University that will be most advantaged by this system are those investigating
questions in development, metabolic networking, biotic and abiotic stresses, and
that involve Arabidopsis, Triticeae (barley/wheat), yeast, Drosophila, C.
elegans, mouse, rat, cattle, or human microarrays. A typical experiment could
involve an organism infected with a pathogen compared to a control sample that
was not infected. Messenger RNA would be extracted from both samples and then
used to probe the oligonucleotide microarrays. This RNA contains the genetic
code for the specific genes that are active during pathogen infection. The new
instrumentation facilitates highly quantitative assessment of the expression
levels of each of the 22,500 genes in the two samples, thus, comparison of the
two sets of data would point out genes that are correlated with disease
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of this technology will make it possible
to systematically study how genes contribute to complex phenotypes ranging from
disease, response to external stimuli, and normal growth and development. The
rapid discovery of new genes associated with such complex traits is expected to
lead to novel discoveries in medicine and agriculture. Another mission of ISU is
to train graduate students and undergraduate students in contemporary biology,
and it is essential that they become proficient in the theory and use of modern
genomics tools. This instrument will be made available to graduate students
conducting research in the departments of Agronomy, Animal Science,
Biochemistry, Botany, Plant Pathology, and Zoology &amp; Genetics as well as in
the interdepartmental graduate programs in Genetics, Plant Physiology, Ecology
&amp; Evolutionary Biology, and Molecular, Cellular, &amp; Developmental
Biology. In addition, several students from a NSF-funded REU (Research
Experience for Undergraduates, Undergraduate Research Experience in Molecular
Biotechnology and Genomics) program will have access to this advanced technology
each summer. The REU program focuses on students from traditional minority
universities and students from small Midwestern liberal arts colleges. Half of
the students are members of under-represented groups and half are women. Thus,
the instrumentation system will be integrated into both the graduate and
undergraduate education programs at ISU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;