* 0216248
* MRI:  Acquisition of Advanced Electron Beam Lithography System for Nanotechnology
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Lynn Rathbun, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,684,980.00

0216248 Tiwari

Research in nanotechnology is strongly dependent on the PIs' ability to pattern
structures at the nano-scale. Electron-beam lithography is the leading tool that
makes such patterning possible for a vast variety of projects. Access and
availability of this capability is critical to the success of the National
Nanotechnology Initiative. This MRI proposal seeks funding for the acquisition
of an advanced thermal-field-emission electron-beam lithography system to
upgrade the nanolithography capabilities of Cornell Nanofabrication Facility
(CNF). This will allow CNF to continue to provide state-of-the-art
nanolithography capabilities to the nation's large and rapidly growing community
of nanoscience researchers, with improved speed, resolution and placement
compared to the existing capabilities in the National Nanofabrication Users
Network (NNUN). In 2001, this network served about 1800 users, with ~600 coming
to Cornell. This proposal comes at a critical time because one of the two fully-
utilized e-beam lithography systems currently in the CNF, a 15-year old
Cambridge Instruments EBMF system, has ceased to be supported by the
manufacturer and does not meet the requirements of new nanoscience projects.

A new E-Beam lithography instrument is a major investment that can only be
justified by a large user demand coupled with the infrastructure necessary to
fulfill that demand quickly, efficiently and reliably. CNF serves a large and
growing group of users with innovative projects from across the nation. It has
the necessary staff, software, and hardware infrastructure to routinely achieve
state-of-the-art nanolithography, and to transform the patterned structures into
devices and systems of interest using integrated processing. CNF has a proven
track record over the last 25 years of providing strong user support, a critical
mass of expertise, and an effectively maintained resource to the national
community. Over 130 researchers used the PIs' e-beam tools last year. The
manufacturer-unsupported EBMF system is now beyond its lifetime. A critical
failure and loss of the machine is conservatively expected to increase the delay
for new users from a period of six weeks to six months. At the same time, the
National Nanotechnology Initiative is increasing the nation's demand for e-beam
lithography in the 10-100 nm range beyond the capabilities of the EBMF system.
CNF is one of the very few institutions throughout the nation that both provides
open access and has a record of providing successful nanofabrication solutions.

The machine to be purchased will be a choice between Leica GB6 and JEOL 9300,
with the final decision to be determined by the capabilities of the machines at
the time of the selection. The selection will be based on funds available,
reliability of the system, speed of the system, the usability of the software
for research projects, the resolution and field-size afforded, and the ability
of the manufacturer to service the machine rapidly and reliably, to meet the
specifications and to minimize the costs.

Researchers at CNF get very strong hands-on training as users of the facility.
This allows the staff to work on multiple projects simultaneously and to lend
special support to new and inexperienced users. This practical emphasis at CNF
is reflected in the large number of electron-beam lithography experts throughout
the nation (in industry and in academia) who obtained their major experience
through Cornell. In addition to this graduate research emphasis, the PIs have
similarly been successful in educational and outreach efforts at the
undergraduate level and towards under-represented groups by integrating their
research and educational efforts. To address the national resource need of
under-represented nanotechnology experts, they will complement their other
effort with a program that will identify and support the research of five
graduate researchers per year from Howard University through the training and
use of the proposed electron-beam lithography system.