* 0216000
* MRI: Acquisition of a Thermal Analysis System for Multidisciplinary Research and Educational Projects
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Ku-Yen Li, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 07/31/2005
* USD 85,975.00

This grant will fund a multifunctional thermal analysis (TA) system that can
support the interdisciplinary engineering, materials research and educational
activities at Lamar University and its collaborative outreach program to
industry and other universities in the region. The system is designed to provide
the following capabilities: differential scanning caloremetry, DSC, thermal
gravimetric analysis, TGA over a temperature range from 120 to 1600C and
connectivity to FTIR and MS gas analysis systems. It will allow the
determination of specific heats, melting temperatures, transition enthalpies,
phase transformations, phase diagrams, crystallization temperatures, degrees of
crystallinity, glass transition temperatures, decomposition effects, reaction
kinetics, purity determinations, mass changes, dehydroxylation,
corrosion/oxidation, thermal stability, reduction/oxidation studies, and
composition changes. Lamar University is establishing a central engineering
materials research facility for the University to be located in the College of
Engineering with active participation of the departments of civil, chemical,
mechanical, industrial, and electrical engineering.

The major objectives of the Materials Science and Engineering Laboratory is to
provide a productive environment for interdisciplinary engineering and materials
research and an interactive learning experience for undergraduate and graduate
students at Lamar and to encourage collaboration with off-campus engineering and
materials research centers and individuals. In addition, the Departments of
Chemistry, Physics and Geology will participate in the laboratory and have
extensive use for the thermal analysis system in both teaching and research.

The research and education projects will be in the following areas:
environmental science and engineering, polymers, nano-structured materials,
structured thin films, high technology alloys, super conducting and magnetic
materials, and geological and paleontological materials. The instrument will
support the work of 20 senior personnel, 70 graduate students and over 220
undergraduates and will initially have five industrial research collaborators.
It will be used in graduate research education, undergraduate research education
and in general thermodynamic and materials education in engineering, chemistry,
geology and materials science. The senior personnel come from Lamar University,
Prairie View A&M (a traditionally African-American university), Texas A&M
University and the Technological Institute of Saltillo, Mexico, as well as
catalyst, petroleum, steel and mining industries. The acquisition of the
versatile thermal analysis system is justified by the difficulty numerous
research and educational projects have in accessing a high quality broad
temperature range thermal analysis system.