* 0216156
* MRI/RUI:    Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education in Chemistry and Biochemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Nathan Winter, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 12/31/2006
* USD 157,750.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at St. Cloud State University will acquire a Matrix-
assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) Mass
Spectrometer. This instrument will be used in a wide variety of studies,
including a) the identification of molecular determinants of cellular
sensitivity to cytostatic/cytotoxic agents that may be unique to tumor cells; b)
the identification of genetic polymorphisms in human aldehyde dehydrogenases
that will render differential cellular sensititivy to cytotoxic agents; c)
characterization of electroactive polymers; and d) the study of precursor
molecules used as dopant sources for fluorescent sol-gel glasses. In addition,
MALDI MS will be a major component in a new laboratory curriculum for
biophysical chemistry.

Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) time-of-flight (TOF) mass
spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining accurate molecular weights
on molecules up to and over 300,000 daltons, with extremely high sensitivity.
Use of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore become a standard technique
in most DNA/protein core facilities. The ability to obtain very accurate
molecular weights of biological molecules is fundamental to all biological and
biomedical research and essential in a modern research and training environment.
These studies will have an impact in the areas of biophysical and materials
chemistry.