* 0216151
* Acquisition of Moored Water Sampling Equipment to Assess the Regulation of Phytoplankton Productivity in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Walker Smith, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2004
* USD 266,654.00

During the past few decades of oceanographic research, oceanographers have
observed significant interannual variations in physical, biological, chemical
and geological processes. The best-known example is the ENSO phenomenon in the
equatorial Pacific. Interannual variations in the Southern Ocean are also known
to occur in ice extent and concentration, in the composition of herbivore
communities, and in bird and marine mammal distributions and reproductive
success. Yet little is known about the interannual variations in production of
phytoplankton or the role that these variations play in the food web.
Furthermore, nothing is known concerning the potential interannual variations in
the controls of phytoplankton production. This proposal seeks funds to augment a
presently funded project which examines interannual variability in the Ross Sea
and to collect time-series data on variables influencing the seasonal production
of phytoplankton in the southern Ross Sea, Antarctica. This project will involve
adding three instruments each to two independent oceanographic moorings in order
to develop a mooring system capable of providing data to address the issue of
interannual variability in the Ross Sea ecosystem. These new instruments include
a fast repetition rate fluorometer, a whole water sampler, and an in situ
silicic acid analyzer. These instruments will allow for the determination of the
timing and extent of iron limitation (using an assessment of photochemical
efficiency, which is a sensitive index of iron limitation), the measurement of
dissolved silicate uptake rates to assess the role of diatoms in the southern
Ross Sea, and the microscopic determination of the composition of the
phytoplankton assemblage. Thus, insights will be obtained into the biological
changes that occur continuously in such a rapidly changing, non-equilibrium
environment. Furthermore, it will assess the interannual variations of the
production of the two major functional groups of the system, diatoms and
Phaeocystis antarctica, a colonial haptophyte. The new instruments will be added
to two existing taut-line moorings with in situ nitrate analyzers moored in the
surface mixed layer. These will collect for the first time in the Antarctic a
time-series of euphotic zone nutrient concentrations over the late spring-summer
period. By integrating the new instruments into the mooring systems, information
on the period of transition between irradiance limitation and iron limitation
will be obtained. Additional data from the new instruments will allow for a
detailed temporal record of the role of diatoms in this region. Diatoms are
critical, as they are considered to be the major talon contributing to the
effect transfer of energy and organic matter through the Antarctic food web as
well as significantly contributing to the vertical flux of biogenic matter to
the sediments. Interannual variations of production are potentially significant
the growth and survival of higher trophic levels of the Ross Sea. They are also
important in order to understand the natural variability in biogeochemical
processes of the region. Because polar regions such as the Ross Sea are
predicted to be impacted by future climate change, biological changes are also
anticipated. Placing these changes in the context of natural variability is an
essential element of understanding and predicting such alterations.