* 0216287
* Acquisition of Test Equipment for Non-Contact Measurement of Thermal and Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Joseph Blandino, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 01/31/2007
* USD 415,109.00

The Program of Integrated Science and Technology (ISAT) at James Madison
University (JMU) features a multi-disciplinary curriculum that places a strong
emphasis on hands-on, project-based learning. The Infrared Development and
Testing Laboratory (IDTTL) was established at ISAT in 1997 to provide
opportunities for effective hands-on, project-oriented, student-centered
learning that reinforces concepts and skills introduced within the ISAT program.
The IDTTL provides access to research in advanced topics and emerging
measurement technologies, fosters development of teaming and communication
skills in an interdisciplinary environment, and avails undergraduates of
professional activities including writing papers, presentation at conferences,
and participation in summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;A suite of projects ongoing
in the IDTTL is presently supported by NASA including (i) non-contact
measurement of the thermal-structural response of an aluminized thin-film
polymer membrane, with application to sunshields, solar sails, and membrane
optics and (ii) development of an imaging gas-filter correlation radiometer
(GFCR) for measurement of tropospheric carbon monoxide. The laboratory also
develops non-contact techniques for manufacturing process control, boiler
analyses, and predictive maintenance. The common thread connecting these
projects is the measurement of critical parameters where contact with the target
object is either impossible or will alter the desired parameters.&lt;br/&gt;The
equipment requested includes an infrared imager with multiple lenses,
hemispherical directional reflectometer, laser vibrometer, shaker, and vacuum
chamber with cold plate. These instruments will elevate the capability of the
laboratory and allow undergraduates and faculty mentors the opportunity to
advance existing studies, and to prepare proposals for future studies that are
more competitive than would otherwise be possible. The equipment will also be
incorporated into new course laboratory activities through which all ISAT majors
will benefit, and undergraduates and faculty from other departments at JMU,
including physics, chemistry, biology, and geology, will be invited to utilize
these instruments. The IDTTL will improve its stature as a model for other
colleges and universities that wish to develop an interdisciplinary research
laboratory capable of conducting valuable research and development and providing
undergraduates an extraordinary learning experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;