* 0216056
* Development of a 2D Vibrational Spectrometer for Materials Characterization Based on NMR Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Mark Berg, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2006
* USD 500,694.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, Prof. Mark A. Berg of
the University of South Carolina will develop a state-of-the-art 2D vibrational
spectrometer for materials characterization based on NMR analogs. Two-
dimensional vibrational spectroscopy can be used to directly probe the inter-
and intramolecular vibrational coupling patterns in complex molecular systems.
The 2D vibrational spectrometer combining infrared and Raman lasers can be used
to study time-resolved structural evolutions of various systems including
protein-ligand, organic-inorganic materials and other systems. Thus it promises
to be one of the major experimental tools in characterizing the molecular nature
of functional materials such as conjugated polyenes, in determining ultrafast
dynamics of protein and protein-ligand binding processes, and in studying
microscopic solvation dynamics by directly probing the real-time dynamics of
solvent molecules close to solute molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies
will have important consequences in each of the above areas, and accelerate the
national development of two dimensional vibrational spectroscopy, an important
emerging area. In addition, student participants will be exposed to a wide range
of techniques.