* 0216408
* RUI: MRI: Acquisition of Fluorescence Microscopy Instrumentation for Research and Education in Biology, Geology, and Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Amy Leventer, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 98,086.00

Items requested in NSF email of 5/2/02:&lt;br/&gt;Neither this proposal nor a
similar one is under review at NSF or any other agency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-MRI Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A grant
has been awarded to Dr. Ken Belanger at Colgate University for the development
of a fluorescence light microscopy facility to be used for research and
undergraduate education. This award will allow the acquisition of four
fluorescence light microscopes and accompanying high-resolution digital cameras,
as well as a variable temperature, stage-mounted incubation chamber. This
instrumentation will be used for faculty and student research projects as well
as investigative teaching laboratory exercises in the Biology, Geology, and
Neuroscience Departments at both Colgate University and Hamilton
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fluorescence microscopy facility funded by
this proposal will initially support six research projects and seven
undergraduate laboratory courses, and will be available for use by faculty
members and laboratory courses not included in the original proposal. The
research projects outlined in this proposal address a broad range of questions
across a variety of disciplines, including examination of intracellular protein
targeting (Belanger, project 1), Antarctic paleogeology (Leventer, project 2),
dopamine-induced neuromodulation (Tierney, project 3), gene expression at
temperature extremes (Hoopes, project 4), steroid hormone regulation of
neurotransmission (Lehman, project 5), and intracellular signal transmission
(Festin, project 6). In addition, the microscopy facility will be used for
educational purposes for seven different laboratory courses (project 7),
including Cell Biology, Environmental Studies, Genetics, Molecular Analysis,
Neurophysiology, and Developmental Biology. Based on current research activities
and course enrollments, approximately 30 independent research students and 180 -
200 lab course participants will utilize this microscopy facility annually.
Thus, this facility will not only serve to enhance the quality of research
performed within this consortium, but will also enhance the educational
experience, technological preparedness, and enthusiasm for continued scientific
research for a significant number of undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;