* 0216518
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Raith 150 Electron Beam Lithography System for a Nanofabrication Education, Research Training and Exploration Consortium
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Alan Feinerman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 12/31/2005
* USD 502,768.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0216518&lt;br/&gt;Feinerman&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will allow UIC to purchase a high resolution e-beam
lithography equipment (Raith 150) with a minimum of 50nm patterning capability
guaranteed and sub-10nm patterning has been demonstrated. UIC will set it up in
a class 100 clean room bay devoted exclusively to lithography. The reasons for
the selection of this particular machine will be elaborated on in section 3c
"Description of Research Instrumentation and Needs," and are the patterning
performance, metrology capability, ease of use by a diverse population, purchase
price, and annual maintenance cost. This machine will benefit 6 other members of
the UIC consortium (Notre Dame, NWU, Purdue, UC, IIT, and NIU) as well as a
large corporate base around UIC and a national laboratory. Basic science and
engineering research are entering a new era where fundamental knowledge of
nanoscale materials including magnetic, semiconductors, superconductors,
electronic devices, bio-materials, fluids, and related interface phenomena will
be essential for the design of advanced devices and engineered systems. A great
deal of basic research and innovation will be needed as devices shrink below the
natural length scales like the size of the minimum ferromagnetic domain
(100-1000 nm), the superconducting coherence length (~ 1-100 nm), or the
characteristic size of bio molecules. The equipment will enable these programs
and many more that can not be described here due to space
limitations:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UIC, Nanomagentism studies, and
nanopatterning&lt;br/&gt;Note Dame, Nanoelectronics and high-speed circuits and
devices&lt;br/&gt;lIT, Nanoelectronics&lt;br/&gt;NIU,
Nanoelectronics&lt;br/&gt;Purdue, NEMS for the Direct DNA Characterization and
Sequencing at the Molecular Level&lt;br/&gt;NWU, Two dimensional Photonoic band
gap materials for biomolecular&lt;br/&gt; detection &lt;br/&gt;UC,
Electronically controlled substrates for mechanistic studies of cell adhesion
and migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The additional applications mentioned are
the 23 letters of support received to support e--beam lithography development at
UIC that are in the supplementary documents section. These are letters of
interest and intent from 10 companies, and from 9 non-profit institutions. The
nano-lithography system will be a part of University of Illinois at Chicago's
Micro/Nanofabrication Applications Laboratory (MAL). The MAL has become a
regional user facility for the Chicago area and in the last 3.5 years it has
increased its user base 7 fold with over 50% of the users coming from outside of
UIC. This rapid growth is due to the MAL offering open and inexpensive access,
training, and guidance on a versatile set of fabrication and characterization
equipment. The addition of e-beam lithography to the PIs facilities will allow
them to greatly increase the participation of UIC and the surrounding community
in the national nano
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;