* 0216288
* SBIR Phase II:  Laser Direct-Writing Technique to Produce Integrated Optical Amplifier/Splitter
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Douglas Taylor, TPL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 518,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project will continue the
successful work from the Phase I project and develop integrated
amplifier/splitters through laser direct writing of wet-chemically derived,
erbium-doped coatings. Precursor solutions will be mixed on the molecular level
to produce pure and homogeneous materials. Waveguide structures will be written
into the erbium-doped fluoride coatings with a laser, which raises its index of
refraction to confine light. The erbium-doped channel waveguides will be pumped
with a 980 nm source to amplify 1550 nm signals. Markets in which integrated
optical devices, such as amplified splitters, can be used total several $100
million. This device will expedite bringing fiber the last mile because it will
replace the current serial arrangement of discrete splitters and amplifiers,
which is bulky and expensive due to the number of components and interconnects.
The proposed integration techniques will also enable optical integrated circuits
and next-generation computing. Prototypes will be fabricated during Phase II.
TPL has extensive experience in wet-chemical processing and demonstrated ability
to commercialize its technologies. The PI is a pioneering researcher of laser-
fired, sol-gel derived films. LightPath Technologies will assist TPL with device
and marketing development.