* 0216726
* Development of Instrumentation for Teaching and Research on Thin Magnetic Film Microstructure Switching Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* James Erskine, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 175,000.00

This project develops new tools and methodology to study properties of magnetic
microstructures. A broad range of technology-enabling magnetic phenomena is
emerging from research on thin films and thin-film based structures. The novel
magnetic effects associated with engineered materials now provide the basis for
a broad range of new magnetic devices including magnetic sensors that improve
hard-disk performance in computers (giant-magnetoresistance read heads) and
permit magnetic-materials-based random access memory (MRAM) to be developed. In
order to optimize the performance of the new magnetic materials and explore new
device architecture that exploits the new magnetic phenomena, precise
understanding and control of the magnetic effects are required. The new
instrumentation to be developed from this NSF award and the research to be
carried out using it will advance our understanding of magnetic phenomena that
enables new technological applications. The research will study factors that
govern critical magnetic properties such as magnetic switching thresholds, the
speed at which information can be stored and retrieved, and factors that govern
how magnetic materials growth and microstructure fabrication affect the
properties. The research is likely to result in discovery of new magnetic
effects as well as deeper understanding of novel magnetic phenomena that have
already been discovered. The research will provide rigorous training for
graduate students in the important fields of condensed matter physics and
materials technology that is essential for the United States to maintain a
leading position in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops new tools and methodology to study properties of magnetic
microstructures. A broad range of technology-enabling magnetic phenomena is
emerging from research on thin films and thin-film based structures. The novel
magnetic effects associated with engineered materials now provide the basis for
a broad range of new magnetic devices including magnetic sensors that improve
hard-disk performance in computers (giant-magnetoresistance read heads) and
permit magnetic-materials-based random access memory (MRAM) to be developed. In
order to optimize the performance of the new magnetic materials and explore new
device architecture that exploits the new magnetic phenomena, precise
understanding and control of the magnetic effects are required. The new
instrumentation to be developed from this NSF award and the research to be
carried out using it will advance our understanding of magnetic phenomena that
enables new technological applications. The research will study factors that
govern critical magnetic properties such as magnetic switching thresholds, the
speed at which information can be stored and retrieved, and factors that govern
how magnetic materials growth and microstructure fabrication affect the
properties. The research is likely to result in discovery of new magnetic
effects as well as deeper understanding of novel magnetic phenomena that have
already been discovered. The research will provide rigorous training for
graduate students in the important fields of condensed matter physics and
materials technology that is essential for the United States to maintain a
leading position in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;