* 0216553
* Acquisition of Analytical Equipment for Nutrient Analysis and Particle Size Determination in Ecological Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Michael Auerbach, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 165,625.00

Abstract

0216553 Auerbach, Michael

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Michael Auerbach, Paul Verburg, John Arnone,
Eric McDonald, and Christian Fritsen at the University of Nevada Desert Research
Institute (DRI), for the acquisition of three pieces of analytical equipment to
be employed in current and future studies of nutrient cycling in terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems. The equipment includes a flow injection ion analysis system,
a dissolved organic nitrogen analyzer, and a laser diffraction particle size
analyzer. Specific goals that will be accomplished through the proposed
equipment acquisition include the following: (1) enhanced analytical
capabilities to benefit ongoing research; (2) pursuit of new research avenues in
the field of physical and chemical characterization of dissolved organic and
particulate nutrients in aquatic ecosystems; (3) integration of terrestrial,
hydrologic, and air research within the university system of Nevada to address
environmental research questions; and (4) establishment of a training facility
for undergraduate and graduate students.

Faculty from DRI are engaged in a wide array of studies focused on nutrient
cycling in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Currently funded research
includes assessment of nutrient loadings in rivers and streams, effects of
management on nutrient cycling in terrestrial ecosystems, nutrient cycling in
extreme environments, and interactions between climate and terrestrial
ecosystems. These studies are carried out in a variety of ecosystems including
high elevation semi-arid watersheds, deserts of the southwestern U.S., tallgrass
prairie, and the Antarctic. These diverse studies share a common need to assess
nutrient composition and particle size distribution of soils, particulate, and
suspended nutrients in lakes and streams. Currently available equipment at DRI
does not allow for routine analyses of inorganic and organic nutrients that are
needed to satisfy the increasing demand for these data. In addition, the methods
in use for particle size analysis do not provide the detailed information needed
for many ongoing and new studies.

Graduate student research training is an important part of the research
enterprise at DRI. Graduate students will be trained in operating the equipment
as part of their curriculum. A laboratory technician will be assigned to operate
and maintain the equipment and will be responsible for training graduate
students in conjunction with the principal investigators. The new equipment will
greatly enhance DRI's analytical capabilities in soils and water research by
creating an infrastructure that will support a series of fundamental studies.
The requested equipment also has applicability to other areas of inquiry
currently ongoing at DRI including research on dust emissions in deserts and
transport of radionuclides in soils. Further, this new equipment will allow DRI
to contribute to solving critical state and national environmental problems
(e.g., increasing demands for drinking water, protection of endangered fish
species).