* 0216974
* C-RUI: Cellular, Physiological and Life-history Responses of a Stream Fish, Blacknose Dace (Rhinichthys atromaculatus), to Urbanization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jay Nelson, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 295,982.00

Scientists are in general agreement with the idea that urbanization and its
accompanying habitat loss and fragmentation will result in a reduced communities
of organisms-often referred to as opportunistic, generalist or weedy species-
that are able to cope with the novel selection pressures and stressors of the
urban environment through rapid evolution or plasticity, or both. Evidence for
this point of view comes from the disproportionate persistence of broadly
distributed species in urban environments, the rapid evolution of resistance to
toxins by fungi, bacteria, plants, insects, and even mammals, and the rapid
evolution among some invertebrate groups of preference for introduced plant
hosts. While it is clear that specific selection pressure in the urban
environment can result in rapid evolution of specific traits, it remains unclear
how and by what mechanisms the overall physiology and life history
characteristics of populations will change with urbanization. Specifically, will
populations in urban environments become more "opportunistic," and if so what
roles will phenotypic plasticity and evolution play? To address these questions
this project will investigate the response of a common stream fish, blacknose
dace, to watershed urbanization. Past comparative studies have documented
increased growth rates, younger age and size at maturity, increased swimming
performance, and reduced predator avoidance behavior in populations occupying
streams draining heavily urbanized watersheds (&gt;90 % urban land use). The
general goals of this project are to continue comparative studies in greater
detail, including extending them to the cellular level, and to investigate the
relative roles of phenotypic plasticity and evolution in producing the
differences observed in urban populations. Field studies will involve comparison
of cellular and tissue structure, protein expression, metabolism, lipid storage,
diet, and survival across a series of streams draining watersheds with 20 to
&gt; 90 % urban land use. A common garden experiment will be conducted to
investigate the potential genetic basis of any of the differences observed in
past studies, or discovered during this study. By conducting programs to enhance
undergraduate retention in the project over multiple years the investigators
hope to increase undergraduate understanding of, and desire to pursue
multidisciplinary studies in graduate school.