* 0216637
* BE/CNH: Linking Human Socioeconomic and Marine Ecosystem Dynamics Along the Pacific Coast of Baja California, Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Christopher Costello, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Small-scale fisheries are dominant actors in coastal marine ecosystems, engaging
more than 90 percent of the fishers in the world and producing more than half of
the world's annual marine catch. The dynamics of their operations and decision
making are poorly understood, however. Scarcity of data, the multi-species and
multi-fleet nature of most small-scale fisheries, and complex feedbacks among
human institutions at the local, regional, and global scale render existing
fisheries models inapplicable to most small-scale fisheries. Small-scale
fisheries typically exploit multiple stocks, have limited mobility, and vary
widely in the types of economic drivers, cultural values, and management systems
regulating extraction. Most small-scale fishing is concentrated in coastal areas
characterized by high productivity and diversity, such as coral reefs, coastal
lagoons, and estuaries. In turn, these locales are maintained by complex
interactions between oceanographic processes in the nearshore marine environment
and exchanges occurring at the land-sea interface. Only the simultaneous
consideration of these different facets of complexity will allow examination of
higher-level, emergent behaviors that are likely to characterize these complex
and variable systems. Examples of crucial questions that can be addressed only
through simultaneous consideration of different biological and socioeconomic
sources of variability are: (1) How robust are different management systems in
the face of environmental variability and variable amounts and type of data? (2)
What are the social, cultural, and economic correlates of management enforcement
and users compliance? (3) What are the effects of local and regional dynamics of
small-scale fisheries on the persistence of ecosystem function and structure?
This research project will begin the process of developing an integrated
theoretical framework regarding the coupled dynamics among small-scale fishers,
coastal resources, and their biophysical setting in marine ecosystems of the
Pacific coast of Baja California, Mexico. A multidisciplinary group of
researchers will develop models through the conduct of workshops and preliminary
data-gathering activities. At the first workshop, researchers will initiate
development of a series of stochastic, bioeconomic models that fuse ecological
dynamics of benthic organisms with spatially and temporally explicit social and
economic behavior of fishers. Researchers will assemble and synthesize existing
physical, biological, economic, and anthropological data needed for
parameterizing models and testing the model assumptions following the first
workshop. The development of a framework for integrating models incorporating
subsets of the complex interactions and feedbacks linking small-scale fisheries
and their biological resources will be the focus of two additional
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this project are expected to
be threefold. First, it will provide a holistic scientific understanding of the
interactions between small-scale fisheries and their resources. Second, it will
provide a better understanding of the drivers and consequences of human impacts
in the coastal marine environment. Third, Baja California is a region of
extraordinary productivity and biological diversity, currently considered one of
the highest priorities for international conservation efforts. The study will
provide a modeling framework for predicting the outcomes of new and future use
of coastal resources in Baja California, including anticipated increases in
population densities and coastal development in the region, and will start
building a theoretical framework more broadly applicable to small-scale
fisheries worldwide. In addition to enhancing fundamental scientific
understandings, the project also offers prospects for practical implementation
regarding the management of abalone and fisheries in the study region. This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition
in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;