* 0216716
* C-RUI: Development and Applications of a Novel Biosensor
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Andrienne Friedli, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 782,917.00

The goal of this multidisciplinary collaborative project, to be carried at an
undergraduate institution, is to develop optical sensors for the detection of
chemical and biological samples. Applications include detection of
organisms/toxins in wastewater or environmental samples, airborne hazards, as
well as, unique genetic sequences. These devices are expected to be inexpensive
and robust with sensitivities exceeding that of conventional surface plasmon
resonance sensors. The sensor design relies on a new surface wave technique that
utilizes surface wave resonance in photonic band gap materials (PBG). The scope
and limitations of the PBG surface wave technique will be tested using standard
benchmark experiments. The progress will be made in the physics and engineering,
chemical and analytical, and biological aspects of the sensor development
simultaneously. Thus, development of instrumentation, PBG property prediction, a
versatile interfacial layer and selection of appropriate genetic sequences will
be the initial foci of effort. Then, a variety of specific biological binding
pairs will be coupled to the surface via organosiloxanes that are capable of
photopatterning and chemical differentiation, culminating in a multianalyte
sensor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in nanotechnology have made complex
biosensing devices possible, however, there is an increasing need for improved
detector sensitivity and specificity. The approach of this project is to involve
students to address the fundamental science of biosensors, develop proof of
principle sensors for specific applications, and capitalize upon collaboration
among disciplines. Students participating in the research project will be
trained for the increasingly multidisciplinary science and technology sector as
they develop discipline-specific laboratory skills.&lt;br/&gt;