* 0216076
* SBIR Phase II:     Wireless Firefighter Lifeline
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* James Halsey, INFORMATION SYSTEMS LABORATORIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2005
* USD 749,977.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
a capability for locating imperiled firefighters in buildings using wireless
technology based on long wavelength signals that penetrate buildings with lower
perturbation than observed at higher frequencies. The system is being developed
for firefighters (estimated 5 year market of over $150 million) but is useful
for any application requiring geolocation in buildings where GPS cannot work.
Such applications include tracking personnel and equipment in crisis situations,
military combat, inventory management and police and military training. This
concept has significant advantages over competing technologies; ultra-wideband
solutions pose frequency licensing problems, and man-portable inertial units are
bulky, costly and have significant time-dependent errors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wireless Firefighter Lifeline (WFL) system is
completely mobile and supports multiple firefighters. It complies with Part 15
rules and will not require FCC licenses. Phase II will demonstrate the
underlying technology over a wide range of conditions and will produce a
prototype system that will serve as the baseline for future system development.
It provides extensive commercial and societal benefit, offers performance
superior to that of other potential technologies, and is well positioned to
attract further funding.