* 0216815
* Safe Science: Governing Green Laboratories
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Susan Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Isaac Unah
* 09/30/2006
* USD 389,307.00

This project studies the development and implementation of a new environmental,
health and safety system (EHS) that resulted from a consent decree between the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and a major research university. This
agreement is an example of a relatively new form of regulation seeking to
promote better management of private firms in ways that meet legislated public
goals. Although most regulation attempts to manage some activities of private
firms, this strategy supplants more familiar policies that mandate either the
use of specific technologies or specific levels of performance. Instead, the
consent decree uses a management-based strategy that locates the design,
standard setting, and implementation of regulation within the regulated
organization itself, creating a form of private management in the public
interest, or regulation at a distance. While much research tries to determine if
regulation works and whether it is cost effective, too few studies have looked
at the ground level - inside the organizations, at the shop floor level - to
trace the behavioral and cognitive threads between the routines of daily work
and government regulation. By observing the invention of the new EHS
organization, its implementation, and dissemination across very different
organizational units, the research will unpack the black box of regulatory
culture by mapping the ways in which local cultures influence health and safety
practices and create the possibility of sustainable improvement in environmental
conditions. How, and in what ways, do local organizational cultures instantiate
or challenge legal norms and regulations? What forms of surveillance and control
operate, and with what effects, in professional/collegial versus
bureaucratic/hierarchical organizations? The research will also expand the
already significant roster of ethnographies of laboratory practices while
focusing on the creation and work of organizations that mediate the worlds of
science, law, and politics. Participant observation, interviewing and
ethnographic analysis will trace variations in the interpretations and responses
to regulation, following the work of the committees and administrators designing
the new system, a reorganization of the environmental health and safety office,
as well as interviewing the lawyers from the University and the EPA who
negotiated the consent degree. The major fieldwork will be a year and a half of
daily observations in eight laboratories and four facilities that vary by
authority structure, degree of risk, and past compliance with EP A and OSHA
regulations.