* 0216567
* National High School Space Weather Network
* GEO,GEO
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Mark Moldwin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 05/31/2003
* USD 20,730.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HEMISPHERE:
Developing a National High School Magnetometer Array.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
offer schools across the country the opportunity to measure and
experiment&lt;br/&gt;with Earth's natural environment, to contribute data to the
nation's space weather&lt;br/&gt;program, and to have effective teaching tools
to educate young scientists about the space&lt;br/&gt;environment. We have
developed a relatively inexpensive, robust, sensitive magnetometer
in&lt;br/&gt;kit form that can be purchased and distributed to schools,
assembled by students, then set&lt;br/&gt;up and used to take research-quality
data. Teachers will be trained in their operation and&lt;br/&gt;how to use them
in classroom activities that demonstrate "space-weather." The data will
be&lt;br/&gt;transmitted through a Web-based database, so that students can
compare their local&lt;br/&gt;readings with those of students at other sites
around the continent and can be used by&lt;br/&gt;university and other
researchers to study geomagnetic Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves.&lt;br/&gt;Low-
to mid- latitude magnetic pulsations provide important information about the
solar&lt;br/&gt;wind-magnetosphere interaction and the dynamic coupling of the
magnetosphere and&lt;br/&gt;ionosphere. The magnetic variations observable at
low to mid latitudes include: Pc 3-4&lt;br/&gt;pulsations (periods of 10-45 s),
which are thought to have their source in the upstream&lt;br/&gt;bow shock and
or magnetosheath; and Pi 2 bursts (damped pulsations with 40-150-s
periods)&lt;br/&gt;which are associated with substorm expansion onsets. This
proposal seeks funding to train&lt;br/&gt;Master High School science teachers in
the use of induction coil magnetometers, provide&lt;br/&gt;the basic space
science content needed for the understanding of magnetic pulsation data
in&lt;br/&gt;space physics research, and develop mentoring relationships between
space physicists and&lt;br/&gt;local high school science teachers and their
students. These relationships will allow the&lt;br/&gt;magnetometer data to be
fully utilized both scientifically as well as
educationally.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically we plan to develop the documentation for
the magnetometer, training material&lt;br/&gt;for testing the instrument, and
educational material for using the instrument in the&lt;br/&gt;classroom. This
material will be the basis for a one-week teacher workshop at
UCLA&lt;br/&gt;bringing together six geographically diverse science teachers
that have already gone&lt;br/&gt;through a space weather workshop at NOAA Space
Environment Center in order to train them&lt;br/&gt;as Master Teachers in the
use and implementation of the magnetometer. This project&lt;br/&gt;directly
impacts pre-college education by providing High Schools with real-life
space&lt;br/&gt;physics instrumentation and ULF data for analysis.&lt;br/&gt;