* 0216722
* BE/CNH: Biocomplexity: Integrating Models of Natural and Human Dynamics in Forest Landscapes Across Scales and Cultures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* R. Daniel Mauldin, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2008
* USD 685,236.00

Few ecosystems are now free of extensive human influence, but the ways that
human activity affects ecosystems such systems and their reciprocal effects on
human behavior are poorly understood. The major objective of this research
project is to develop integrated models that couple forest ecosystem dynamics to
human decision making. The project focuses on two major components and their
interaction: (1) the structure and functions of forest ecosystems; and (2) the
human behaviors that affect forest ecosystem structure and functions. The models
of forest structure will be hierarchically arrayed, beginning with the dynamics
of tree growth and distribution and work up to the stand and landscape scales.
Changes in forest cover affect ecological processes and functions, leading to
predictable changes in water quantity and quality. Human behaviors will be
simulated using multi-agent models, and they will be coupled to the forest
models through linkages that describe different forms of disturbance of human
activities on forest and hydrologic system functions and by receiving feedbacks
about the effects of such actions from the forest and hydrological models.
Information about the values driving human decision making will be obtained
through empirical social-science research, including survey questionnaires. The
dynamics of the coupled natural and human systems will be analyzed
mathematically to identify complex behavior (such as oscillations and "chaos")
resulting from the interaction of the human and natural systems. The project
will examine natural-human system interactions in four study areas: the Trinity
River Greenbelt corridor and the Big Thicket in Texas and the Caparo Forest and
Imataca Reserve in Venezuela. Considerable data already has been gathered for
the first of these sites, permitting it to serve as a test bed for the project.
This two-year pilot study will test the feasibility of modeling forest dynamics
as they are reciprocally influenced by human decision making, and it will begin
the extension of the research to the larger study areas. Application of the
models to the sites in Venezuela, which are very different culturally and
ecologically, will demonstrate the generality of this approach to understanding
coupled human and natural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research
will provide a better quantitative understanding of the interplay between human
actions and forest dynamics. This enhanced understanding will give landowners,
other stakeholders, and policy makers reliable information about the impact of
their decisions on the future composition, structure, and functionality of local
ecosystems. It will thereby facilitate a more informed analysis of the long-term
consequences of private choices and public policies on the natural systems in
which human systems are embedded and with which they interact. This project is
supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in
Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;