* 0216464
* MRI:   A Focused Ion Beam System for Nanoscale Science and Engineering Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Michael Klein, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 622,000.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation program, the University of
Pennsylvania (Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter), the
Nanotechnology Institute and the Rohm and Haas Corporation, a FEI Strata DB235
Focused Ion Beam will be installed within the Penn Regional Materials
Characterization Facility at the Penn MRSEC. This multi-functional instrument
will enable research in nanoscale structure-property relationships via in-situ
experiments on individual molecules and molecular assemblies, as well as carbon
nanotubes. Using enhanced etching modules, the DB235 provides key capability for
the production of minute specimens for the study of mechanical properties at the
nanoscale in polymer and intermetallic materials. Research groups will also use
the instrument to conduct device-editing operations to efficiently explore new
circuit designs for particle detectors and detector arrays that mimic human
function. The flexibility and automated operation of the DB235 allows
integration into educational programs, where it will contribute to NSF education
programs for undergraduates and high school teachers, and to the Penn-Drexel-
Community College NSF Partnership for Innovation for nano-biotechnology
education.

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation program, the University of
Pennsylvania (Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter), the
Nanotechnology Institute (NTI) and the Rohm and Haas Corporation, a FEI Strata
DB235 Focused Ion Beam will be installed at the Penn MRSEC. With capabilities
for sectioning and etching materials at the nanoscale, and for the deposition of
nanometer-scale conducting features, the DB235 will have a broad impact on
nanoscience and nanotechnology research. The flexibility and automated operation
of the DB235 will be used in NSF-funded education programs for undergraduates
and high school teachers, and in the Penn-Drexel NSF Partnership for Innovation
for nano-biotechnology education. Housed in the Penn Regional Materials
Characterization Facility, the instrument will be available to a large regional
community of users, including corporations and academic institutions. Through
the NTI, the DB235 will be used by research teams comprised of researchers from
Penn, Drexel, Penn State, Temple, Widener and Villanova Universities, Thomas
Jefferson, Penn and Windber Medical Schools/Institutes, Children's Hospital and
Haverford College.