* 0216091
* Hormone-related Differences and Similarities in Song Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 453,792.00

LAY SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Males and females typically resemble one
another in some ways and differ in others. Differences may arise because one sex
is subject to greater reproductive competition than the other (sexual selection)
or because the sexes differ in their ecology (natural selection). Because males
and females share a common genome, they are also subject to correlated
selection, which occurs when genetic variants directly favored by selection in
one sex ('like father, like son') are carried along in the other sex ('like
father, like daughter'). Correlated selection can hasten evolution if attributes
directly favored in one sex also benefit the other, or it may serve as a
constraint when the attributes are disadvantageous to the second
sex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proximate mechanisms underlying sex differences and
resemblances include developmental programs, steroid hormones, and steroid-
independent differences in gene expression that lead to sexually differentiated
tissues. Gonadal steroids can act early in development to organize tissues so
that they are or are (or are not) responsive to activation by a steroid later in
life. Gonadal steroids can also affect the sexes as adults, and, when their
effects are similar, there is potential for correlated selection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is the steroid hormone,
testosterone, and its integrating effect on sex differences and resemblances in
adult males and females of a songbird species, the dark-eyed junco. The research
has four objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) to assess the role of
testosterone in sexual integration by comparing natural profiles of male and
female hormone levels, hormonal response of females to stimuli known to increase
T in males, and hormone levels in females that do and do not produce young by
extra-pair fertilizations (EPFs). Resemblance between the sexes will reveal the
potential for correlated selection.&lt;br/&gt;(2) to alter the level of
circulating testosterone experimentally and compare effects of altered
testosterone in females to previous results from males. Individual experiments
will address whether elevated testosterone in females alters attractiveness to
males (sexual selection) and whether it affects parental behavior, social
status, or immune function (natural selection). They will also address
interactions between testosterone, corticosterone, corticosteroid binding
globulins.&lt;br/&gt;(3) to determine whether female responses to altered
testosterone are beneficial, neutral, or detrimental in the field. If the sexes
constrain one another, alterations that are beneficial in one sex should be
detrimental in the other. If the sexes reinforce one another, alterations may be
beneficial in both sexes. If the sexes are independent, then alterations already
known to be beneficial or detrimental in males may have no fitness consequences
for females. &lt;br/&gt;(4) to compare how degree of relatedness affects a
sexually selected trait and two hormone-related traits. Juncos of known genetic
relatedness will be assessed for family resemblance in measures of body size and
a plumage trait that affects attractiveness. Additional juncos will be reared
and compared for three hormonally mediated traits. The presence of a genetic
correlation would predict correlated selection; the absence of one would predict
sexual independence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research described in this proposal
will provide opportunities for training future scientists of diverse backgrounds
in the conduct of laboratory and field experiments that address the integration
of proximate and ultimate explanations for biological differences. It will also
enrich graduate and undergraduate courses taught at Indiana University.
Potential societal implications of the findings to be expected include (1)
importance of hormonally active agents in the environment, (2) improved methods
for breeding captive songbirds for conservation, and (3) a greater understanding
of the relationship between sex and gender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;