* 0216251
* Functional Proteomics - Acquisition of a Biacore 3000 System for Surface Plasmon Resonance Measurements
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Stephen Kent, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Chicago to acquire a Surfac
Plasmon resonance (SPR) analyzer. Underlying all biological processes are highly
specific interactions between large molecules such as proteins, DNA and RNA. In
order to determine the mechanisms that promote life it is important not only to
detect interactions between macromolecules, but to measure their strength using
quantitative methods. The members of our group of research laboratories share an
interest in understanding how molecules recognize their specific partners among
the huge number of macromolecules in and on cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument measures the change in light refraction near a surface that occurs
when macromolecules interact on that surface. This phenomenon is called surface
plasmon resonance (SPR). SPR allows very rapid and quantitative measurements of
interactions between macromolecules. The instrument has robotic functions that
allow automatic processing of many different samples making it possible to test
many different interactions under a wide range of conditions with relative ease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed funding would contribute significantly to the
ability of investigators at the University of Chicago to contribute to the
understanding of a number of biological processes. These processes include how
pollen recognizes plants of its own species, how hormones recognize specific
target cells, how viruses convert inactive virus precursor proteins into active
ones, how cells repair their DNA, how cells turn on specific genes so that they
are expressed as RNA, and how RNA is modified by large protein-RNA machines. In
addition to advancing our knowledge of the living world, the proposed work will
eventually lead to improvements in medicine, agriculture, and industrial
manufacturing. Moreover, the availability of an SPR system will enhance the
education of undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Chicago by
providing them the opportunity to gain hands on experience with a state-of-the-
art method for characterizing the interactions of biomolecules. The SPR
instrument will be part of a series of instruments housed in the Biophysics Core
facility. This facility contains several high-end instruments which contribute
valuable learning tools for biology students. The Biophysics facility is one of
a number of facilities at the University of Chicago that make the University
attractive to a wide variety of students including women and people from
underrepresented groups. The University engages in a range of programs designed
to specifically attract and retain students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;