* 0216635
* Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography System for a Nanotechnology Research and Education Facility at UC Irvine
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Wilson Ho, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 357,810.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
acquisition an ultra-high resolution electron beam nanolithography system for
research and education programs led by a multi-disciplinary team of
investigators from physics, chemistry, electrical engineering, materials
science, and biomedical engineering at the University of California, Irvine
(UCI). The instrumentation will further enhance current research activities at
UCI's Integrated Nanosystems Research Facility (INRF), currently serving over
100 academic users in collaboration with over 50 companies (25 of whom are
users) in order to support research in the nascent fields of nano-electronics,
nano-fluidics, molecular electronics, nano-mechanics, and nano-biotechnology.
The system will offer a unique capability to university, industry, and community
researchers to (among other things) design and process novel materials and
devices at the nanoscale such as molecular wires and devices, carbon nanotubes,
and single-electron transistors, to investigate single-molecule chemistry, to
investigate the use of nano-electronic devices with the preparation of nano-
biological polymer materials, and to accomplish nano-bio tasks such as cell
membrane signal transduction characterization and protein and DNA analysis and
sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI grant will support the acquisition an
ultra-high resolution electron beam nanolithography system for research and
education programs led by a multi-disciplinary team of investigators from
physics, chemistry, electrical engineering, materials science, and biomedical
engineering at the University of California, Irvine (UCI). The instrumentation
will further enhance current research activities at UCI's Integrated Nanosystems
Research Facility (INRF), currently serving over 100 academic users in
collaboration with over 50 companies (25 of whom are users) in order to support
research in the nascent fields of nano-electronics, nano-fluidics, molecular
electronics, nano-mechanics, and nano-biotechnology. The system will offer a
unique capability to the university, industry, and community researchers to
(among other things) design and process novel materials and devices at the
nanoscale such as molecular wires and devices, carbon nanotubes, and single-
electron transistors, to investigate single-molecule chemistry, to investigate
the use of nano-electronic devices with the preparation of nano-biological
polymer materials, and to accomplish nano-bio tasks such as cell membrane signal
transduction characterization and protein and DNA analysis and sequencing.
&lt;br/&gt;