* 0216577
* MRI:  Acquisition of SEM and EDX Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Vernon Griffiths,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2005
* USD 220,977.00

Montana Tech will acquire a new scanning electron microscope (SEM) and an
attached energy-dispersive x-ray microanalysis (EDX) system. The system consists
of a variable pressure SEM (LEO 1430 VP) and a digital x-ray detector with a
PGT-SPIRIT EDX system. Both units operate from PCs running Windows 2000. The SEM
is essentially automatic, facilitating usage by inexperienced operators. The EDX
system also will be far easier to use. The SEM will have excellent imaging
performance at low accelerating voltage and at chamber pressures that permit
observation of wet specimens. Hence the biosciences faculty, graduate and
undergraduate students will have a system that will meet almost any need for SEM
viewing of specimens.&lt;br/&gt;In consequence a significant female faculty and
student body will have SEM/EDX access not presently possible. Besides the
metallurgy/materials department other departments such as geology, environmental
engineering, chemistry and health, safety and industrial hygiene will similarly
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a new SEM/EDX facility will open doors
for undergraduate training, the major role of the system will be to facilitate
the ongoing research of faculty and graduate students. Much faculty and graduate
student research is environmentally oriented since Butte is the location of the
country's largest Superfund site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In other departments
faculty researchers and their graduate students have similarly found it
necessary to use the MSU SEM/EDX facility. Undergraduate students in many
departments are required to propose and carry out a senior thesis research
project and a new SEM/EDX facility will attract interested undergraduates from
all over campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new SEM/EDX system will be connected
to the campus computer network permitting remote diagnostic troubleshooting when
needed. Network connection will also allow for remote on-campus access to the
SEM/EDX. When this is successfully established it will permit undergraduate
classes to experience relatively directly the applications of SEM/EDX to their
field. It will then be extended to the Distance Learning program, which deals
with 36 tribal colleges thereby allowing access to Native
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the future the SEM/EDX facility would become
part of the infrastructure needed for the college to play an active role in the
Montana NSF-EPSCOR program, two target areas of which are nanotechnology and
self-replicating biological structures.&lt;br/&gt;