* 0216837
* GOALI:  Semi-Batch High-Temperature Polymerization: Mathematical Modeling and Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Masoud Soroush, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2003
* USD 45,195.00

Polymers with low average molecular weight and a low polydispersity index have
many applications in the paint and coating industry. Production of such polymers
requires tight control of the molecular-weight distribution of the polymers.
Control is achieved by adjusting the temperature, diluting the reaction mixture,
and adding chain transfer agents, mercaptans, and cobalt glyxins. Liquid-phase,
high-temperature, free-radical polymerization is used to produce low average-
molecular-weight polymers. Preliminary results also show that high-temperature,
free-radical polymerization of butyl acrylate (BA) can lead to the production of
low poly-dispersity index, BA polymers. Thus, high-temperature polymerization
offers better controllability to produce the desired polymer
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF GOALI project is a joint effort between
Drexel University and DuPont aimed at improving the quality of acrylate and
styrenic, homo-polymers and copolymers produced via high-temperature, solution
polymerization. This Faculty-in-Industry project is motivated by the need to
take a fundamental approach to improve the product quality. The PI Soroush will
spend one year in DuPont's Marshall Laboratory to pursue the following research
and education activities:&lt;br/&gt; *Study the kinetics of liquid-phase, high-
temperature (140-200oC), free-radical, BA and butyl methacrylate (BMA),
homopolymerization reactions to develop mathematical models for high-
temperature, BA and BMA, semi-batch, polymerization reactors.&lt;br/&gt;
*Calculation of optimal temperature and feed flow-rate profiles as well as
loading conditions for high-temperature, semi-batch, BA and BMA, polymerization
reactors.&lt;br/&gt; *Formulation of a set of industrial, process modeling,
open-ended problems to be assigned as projects to undergraduate students taking
the process modeling courses at Drexel University.&lt;br/&gt;