* 0216367
* MRI: Development of an X-ray System for Noninvasive 3-D Imaging of Large-Scale Multiphase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Joseph Gray, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 421,845.00

This grant will be used to develop an x-ray system to perform noninvasive three-
dimensional imaging of large-scale multiphase flows. This new instrument will
allow for the study, characterization, and modeling of numerous multiphase flow
processes found in many industries including fuel production, commodity and
specialty chemical production, mineral processing, pulp and paper production,
wastewater treatment, food processing, and biological organism and
pharmaceutical production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphase flows involve gas-
liquid, gas-solid, liquid-solid, and gas-liquid-solid mixtures. The principle
difficulty in characterizing and quantifying multiphase flows is the fact that
the systems are typically opaque; even an air-water system becomes opaque at
fairly low volumetric gas fractions. This necessitates either the use of
invasive measurement probes when determining internal flow and transport
characteristics or nondestructive (noninvasive) methods. The difficulty with
invasive probes is that they can alter the internal flow of the multiphase
system interfering with realistic process measurements. X-ray imaging methods
provide one family of noninvasive measurement techniques used extensively for
product testing and evaluation of static objects with complex structures. The
project will develop an instrument that utilizes x-ray radioscopy, x-ray
stereography, and x-ray computed tomography imaging techniques to characterize
properties of multiphase flow processes, including those properties that are
dynamic and time dependent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop the
x-ray hardware, software, and facilities to complete x-ray computed tomography
(i.e., CT scans) of multiphase flows in large vertical columns, providing time-
averaged local phase distributions with a typical resolution of 500 microns. The
system to be developed in this project will allow for vertical columns up to 4 m
high and 32 cm in diameter to be studied. These dimensions will allow for the
first time, without significant interference of either wall effects or
mechanical interference&lt;br/&gt;from invasive probes, investigation of these
industrially important systems. Various letters of support, from a variety of
industries, have stressed this is a critical need. The explosion of computer
power in the last three years allows for the first time the ability to acquire,
process, and display the data volumes needed to adequately characterize these
complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation that will be developed
will include a novel application of x-ray stereography and stereographic
reconstructions to visualize time-resolved flow structures in three dimensions.
This new and unique capability will allow for the measurement of currently
unavailable phase characteristics found in complex multiphase flows, such as
phase rise/settling velocities, phase trajectories, phase coalescence and
breakup rates, and phase growth and shrinkage rates. With this instrument, data
acquisition will be possible of internal characteristics of multiphase flow at a
sufficient resolution to be used for model validation of these complex flows,
and, to our knowledge, will provide a leading edge research capability currently
unavailable at any institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once this instrument is
developed, many other ISU researchers, as well as industrial collaborators
(e.g., Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., Cargill, Inc., DOW Chemical Company,
Fluent, Inc., Foster Wheeler Development Corporation, Kimberly-Clark
Corporation, Potlatch, Proctor &amp; Gamble Company, and Schlumberger Oilfield
Services), have identified many potential uses of this instrument in studying
gas-liquid, gas-solid, liquid-solid, and gas-liquid-solid flows. Even
traditional computed tomography and stereography of industrial components
requiring a large field of view can be done with this instrument. This
instrument will also provide a unique opportunity to form various
multidisciplinary collaborations between faculty, academic and industrial
researchers, and students, and provide a one-of-a-kind instrument at a public
university to which many different researchers will have access.&lt;br/&gt;