* 0216788
* IMR:   Acquisition of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Organic Magnetic Materials Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 152,390.00

This grant supports the purchase of a continuous wave electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectrometer, which is essential in the synthesis of novel
organic magnetic materials and is valuable in the characterization of other
magnetic materials. The EPR spectrometer system will replace the current 20+
year-old X-band EPR instrument that is no longer functional. The superior
capabilities of this new EPR spectrometer will be tailored to materials research
in magnetism, which will complement existing bulk magnetic measurement
capabilities based upon superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
magnetometry/susceptometry. This new spectrometer will have a significant impact
on the following projects: (1) synthesis of organic polymer magnets with
stability at ambient conditions; (2) coordinating organic ligands with a few
unpaired electrons (high-spin organic molecules) for new organometallic magnets
with improved ordering temperatures; (3) organic molecules for potential
magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents and radical ions of molecules and
polymers with chiral p -conjugated systems; and (4) inorganic metal-based
magnets, transition metal complexes, magnetic nanostructures and films.
&lt;br/&gt;The results of the indicated projects will be disseminated in the
peer review journals, conference presentations, and web-based publications. In
particular, the significant progress toward practical organic polymer magnet is
expected to attract wide attention, promoting better understanding of basic
research in materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research activities will
advance fundamental understanding of magnetic materials and may have a
significant impact on the future electronic technology through the development
of soft magnets based upon conjugated organic polymers. The EPR spectrometer is
indispensable in the training and education of students and postdoctoral
associates in the interdisciplinary area of organic magnetism. The spectrometer
will make possible a more advanced computer-controlled operation that will
facilitate the training of undergraduate and graduate students. The overall
infrastructure for materials research at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln will
be enhanced, which will benefit other researchers studying magnetic films,
nanostructures, and metal-based inorganic magnets and complexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;