* 0216118
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope and the Establishment of an Interdepartmental Microscopy Imaging Facility at the University of Colorado
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Pei-San Tsai, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 306,920.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Stock, Dr. William Friedman, Dr. Pei-San
Tsai, and Dr. Robert Boswell at the University of Colorado to establish a
common-use confocal microscopy facility. The research of these investigators in
the broad areas of developmental and/or evolutionary biology requires three-
dimensional characterization of anatomical structures and domains of gene
expression in relatively thick specimens. Traditional histological methods for
such characterization are laborious, prone to artifacts, and cannot be applied
to living specimens. Confocal microscopy is ideal for such applications, as it
allows collection of data from single focal planes ("optical sections") which
can then be assembled by a computer into a three-dimensional reconstruction.
This technique does not require physical sectioning of samples and can therefore
be used with living material. The major item of equipment to be purchased is a
laser scanning confocal microscope. Two additional pieces of equipment, an
epifluorescence compound microscope and a fluorescence stereomicroscope, will be
purchased to facilitate the preparation of specimens for analysis with the
confocal microscope. These microscopes, along with an existing scanning electron
microscope, will be housed in a facility open to all researchers at the
University of Colorado.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The common-use imaging facility
to be established at the University of Colorado is expected to contribute to
intra- and interdepartmental interactions. Developmental and Evolutionary
Biology, the research fields of the users of this facility, are both split
between two separate departments at the University of Colorado, with the
majority of developmental biologists located in the Department of Molecular,
Cellular &amp; Developmental Biology and the majority of evolutionary biologists
in the Department of Environmental, Population &amp; Organismic Biology.
Interactions between these departments have been minimal in the past, despite
common interests highlighted by the recent rise of the subdiscipline of
Evolutionary Developmental Biology. A facility bringing together researchers on
the basis of shared technology is expected to encourage the exchange of ideas
among developmental biologists of all types as well as between developmental and
evolutionary biologists. In addition to representing a full spectrum of
questions in and approaches to Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, potential
users of this facility employ a diversity of organisms ranging from animals to
plants. As these groups of organisms represent independent inventions of
multicellular development, interactions among plant and animal biologists
catalyzed by the planned facility may bring into sharper focus universal versus
labile features of development and evolution. Students in particular should
benefit from such interactions, as they are likely to be the ones spending the
most time in the facility. Their educational experience will further be enhanced
by the incorporation of confocal microscopy into an existing histology course,
as well as by periodic training sessions aimed at attracting new users. In
summary, in an era of increasing specialization in research and training
throughout Biology, a common use confocal microscopy facility is seen as a means
of exposing researchers in Developmental and Evolutionary Biology to a diversity
of questions, approaches and organisms.&lt;br/&gt;