* 0216598
* MRI:  Acquisition of Semiconductor Technology Lab for Undergraduate Reseasrch/training at Utah Valley State College
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2004
* C. Brent Barageron, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2004
* USD 102,068.00

The primary aim of this proposal is to establish a semiconductor technology
laboratory in the department of physics for students and faculty. We anticipate
the participation of at least 5 faculty members as researchers, advisors and
mentors for about 10 physics students per year. Our aim is to serve not only
professional track students who will continue on to graduate school, but to
provide training opportunities for those majors who will leave school with a
terminal bachelor's degree to directly seek career employment. We propose here
to obtain the equipment necessary to engage in silicon wafer fabrication and
experiments. We propose to obtain a spin coater, argon laser, a sputter coating
device, optics table, and optical accessories, ultraviolet spectrograph,
oscilloscopes, photoresist polymers, and computer interfaces and
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of appropriate undergraduate research
projects spanning solar cell research to thin film optical elements will be
available in our semiconductor technology lab. Hands on experience in silicon
wafer technologies such as photoresist coating and exposure/development
techniques, sputtering methods, and vacuum deposition technologies will be
learned as a matter of course. We believe that experience in fabrication
techniques for wafers will also be invaluable to those physics students who do
not continue to graduate studies, but will require familiarity with these
techniques in industrial careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We anticipate that our
semiconductor technology lab will be versatile enough for some of our advanced
students to develop research projects in areas as diverse as UV and soft X-ray
optics, and perhaps in MEMS or nano-type devices. We also anticipate
collaborations with other departments, such as electrical engineering and
chemistry, providing students and faculty increased research
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines the benefits of
establishing a semiconductor technology lab at Utah Valley State College to both
prepare physics graduate students for university programs, and to produce
industrial physicists, engineers and supervisors and managers for the local
high-tech job market. This will be accomplished with projects and research in
thin film deposition, thin film optics, surface physics, multilayer optics,
silicon semiconductor technology, with possible future investigations into
micro- and nanostructures manufacturing, integrated optics and other unforeseen
new directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UVSC physics baccalaureate degree
requires each recipient to engage in a senior thesis project. We anticipate that
many seniors will choose to perform thesis work through our proposed
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;