* 0216588
* BE/CNH: Complexity Across Boundaries: Coupled Human and Natural Systems in the Yellowstone Northern Elk Winter Range
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Duncan Patten, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2008
* USD 745,669.00

A primary issue in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem is the ecology of the
northern elk herd winter range (NEWR), where elk and wolves cross the
Yellowstone National Park boundary into areas managed as "natural" and "altered"
systems. Land management inside the park and development of the winter range
outside park boundaries suggests that wildlife management plays out on a
landscape mosaic dominated by human decisions, values, and economic
considerations. The main objectives of this research project are to gain a
better understanding of the relationships between ecosystem dynamics and human
decision-making and to use this understanding to construct an ecosystem model
that facilitates exploration of plausible future scenarios in a manner that
captures the uncertainty associated with complex systems. An investigative team
drawn from multiple disciplines and from five different states will develop
spatially explicit elk, wolf, and vegetation submodels and will integrate these
models to assess the impacts of climate variability, land-use decisions, and
economic valuation on the environment under changing conditions. The elk
submodel will extend state-of-the-science energetics-based models to include
information on changing landscapes and climate/snow conditions that affect
winter feeding habits. The investigators will develop predator components that
mimic the impacts of the recent wolf reintroduction in Yellowstone. The
snow/climate submodel will be developed to produce snow depth and snow condition
maps based on local and large-scale climate parameters and field measurements.
Vegetation submodels will focus on willows and aspen, plants that often are
browsed heavily by elk. The investigators will address the impacts of changing
groundwater resources on these species to better understand their resilience to
the combined impacts of elk browse and groundwater stress. Because elk,
vegetation, and other factors have become measures by which humans place values
on the landscape that influence decisions, stakeholder groups will be studied
and interviewed to assure that the resulting models have relevance in the socio-
political context of the NEWR. This is particularly important, because
stakeholders have a long history of conflict regarding land-use decisions. This
project will develop a land-use history, define key stakeholder-identified
variables, and use probability-based land-use models. Knowledge derived from
stakeholder studies will be integrated into the natural system models as
coefficients of habitat availability and quality; as parameters on barriers,
sources and sinks; as qualitative and categorical constraints on modeled
variables and relationships; and as feedback loops between the human and natural
system. The natural and human system submodels will be combined within the
context of a single multi-agent system that can model complex adaptive systems.
The multi-agent system-based model will be used to simulate alternative states
that result from assumptions about decisions, natural conditions, and ecosystem
processes. The results will demonstrate the complex nature of a highly
integrated ecosystem and the role that climate, human decisions, and natural
variability play in producing ecosystem change and/or stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will merge models of ecosystems and human
decision-making. A primary focus is to build robust ecosystem models that can be
integrated with a human system model based on land use decisions and valuation
of ecosystem services. By interacting with NEWR stakeholders and by developing
key linkages within natural and human systems, this project will evaluate
existing and potential land-use strategies and alternative policy options. The
models will demonstrate the complex interactions that exist within this changing
landscape by simulating climate factors, policy decisions, and natural change in
the vegetation. Models will be extended to simulate potential future conditions
based on sound scientific principles, past trends in human decision making, and
possible future human decisions. Scenarios may be used to help build consensus
and diminish conflict in the NEWR before decisions are made. The NEWR is a
critical component of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, and understanding the
complexity associated with human and natural system dynamics will help sustain
the area for future generations. This project will serve as a model for
protected areas worldwide that are undergoing similar boundary conflicts. This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition
in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;