* 0216284
* SBIR Phase II:   No Preparation, Flexible, Dry Physiological Recording Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Frederick Lisy, ORBITAL RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 03/31/2005
* USD 506,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to complete the
development of a low-cost, no preparation required, flexible dry physiological
recording electrode. These electrodes have the potential to significantly
improve quality of care and reduce total cost of biopotential signal analysis by
reducing the time and preparation required to obtain a good signal and reducing
the total cost of fabricating high quality electrodes. The Phase I results
showed feasibility of fabricating dry electrode structures on rigid substrates
onto low-cost flexible substrates. However, further work is necessary to
optimize the fabrication processes and to ensure that the lowest cost and
highest performing flexible dry electrode systems and fabrication processes are
chosen to establish a solid foundation for future use. The key objectives of
this Phase II project include parallel development of two particularly promising
fabrication techniques, selection of a single fabrication technique for further
development, and testing and evaluation of the capabilities of the dry
electrodes in clinical environments. &lt;br/&gt; The commercial applications of
this project will be in the area of physiological monitoring of patients in a
clinical setting. Physiological measurements such as ECG (electrocardiogram),
EMG (electromyogram), and EEG (electroencephalogram) are expected to benefit
from the use of dry electrodes, in part due to the reduced time and preparation
needed to apply the electrodes and in part, due to the elimination of abrasive
skin prepping and electrolytic gels in the measurement procedure.&lt;br/&gt;