* 0216450
* BE/CNH: Complex Interactions Among Policies, People, and Panda Habitat in the Wolong Nature Reserve Landscape
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2009
* Jianguo Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,179,707.00

Human activities are widely recognized as a major force behind rapid landscape
changes and loss of biodiversity around the world, including those in numerous
nature reserves. Many studies have found that government policies can
significantly shape human activities, but most of those studies have focused on
a single policy at a time and ignored the interactive effects among various
policies. Little is known about the complex interactions among the effects of
multiple policies on the spatial-temporal dynamics of biodiversity such as
wildlife habitat. Studying the interrelationships of various policies for
biodiversity conservation is critical and urgent because multiple policies often
are implemented simultaneously. These policies may be nonlinearly complementary
or counterproductive. An excellent site for studying such interactions is Wolong
Nature Reserve in Sichuan Province in southwestern China. The reserve, which is
200,000 hectares in size, is one of the largest homes to world-famous endangered
giant pandas and several thousand other animal and plant species. There are also
more than 4,000 local residents and a variety of human activities in the
reserve, such as farming and fuelwood collection. Since the establishment of the
reserve in 1975, human population size has increased by more than 70 percent.
This rapidly increasing human population plays a novel and unique role in
degrading the pandas' habitat. To prevent further degradation of panda habitat
and promote habitat restoration, the Chinese government is implementing three
conservation policies in the reserve: an eco-hydropower plant program (to
eliminate fuelwood consumption), a natural forest conservation program (to
prevent illegal forest harvesting), and a grain-to-green program (to return
cropland to forest). The interactive effects of these policies on local people
and panda habitat are uncertain, however. The objectives of this research
project are (1) to assess the interactions among the three policies and local
residents; (2) to evaluate the interrelationships between local residents and
panda habitat; (3) to examine the need for and feasibility of policy
modification and improvement; and (4) to model and simulate multi-scale
interactions among policies, people, and panda habitat across space and time.
The methods to be used in this study include field observations, face-to-face
interviews with stakeholders, geographical information systems, remote sensing,
global positioning systems, statistical tools, systems modeling and simulation,
and advanced computer visualization techniques. In addition to addressing many
fundamental ecological and socioeconomic questions, the research will be tightly
integrated with the education of students from elementary school to graduate
school as well as outreach to various stakeholders from local to international
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have significant implications for
biocomplexity theory, methodology, and application. In terms of theory, this
project will shed light on complex patterns and interrelated processes (e.g.,
nonlinearity, thresholds, feedback, uncertainty) among multiple policies,
humans, and wildlife habitat at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Regarding
methodology, the research will take a systems approach by integrating
multidisciplinary methods and advanced technologies to investigate the
complexity of the study system. With respect to application, the project will
provide practical information for conserving panda habitat in Wolong, and it
will provide useful insights for designing and improving policies that attempt
to balance the needs of biodiversity conservation and economic development in
the world's most populous nation. The findings also will be of general interest
to many other parts of the world because of escalating human pressures and
increasingly complicated human-nature interactions. This project is supported by
an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;