* 0217879
* Collaborative Research:  CRCNS: Detection and Recognition of Objects in Visual Cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* David Ferster, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2005
* USD 149,891.00

EIA-0217879&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;Ferster,
David&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Collaborative Research: CRCNS: Detection and
Recognition of Objects in Visual Cortex&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three way
collaboration between the laboratories of Profs. T. Poggio at MIT, D. Ferster at
Northwestern University and C. Koch at Caltech is exploring and evaluating the
hypotheses that the cortical organization and the neural mechanisms of visual
recognition can be explained by a coherent theoretical framework built on two
existing computational models for recognition and attention and, secondly, that
a combination of physiological work on monkeys and cats, together with visual
psychophysics can be used to test and refine the theory. The research is
organized into three main projects. The work at MIT is guided by a quantitative
hierarchical model of recognition, probing the relations between identification
and categorization and the properties of selectivity and invariance of the
neural mechanisms in IT cortex. The work at Northwestern University is testing a
key prediction of the model about the nature of the pooling operation (a max
operation vs. a linear sum) performed by complex cells in V1. The experiments
are done in the anesthetized cat, intracellularly, to allow for a
characterization of the underlying circuit and biophysical mechanisms. Finally,
work at Caltech is extending the basic model of recognition by integrating it
with a saliency-based attentional model. The computational component of this
work, centered around the development of a quantitative model of visual
recognition, constitutes the primary tool to enforce interactions between the
investigators: the model suggests experiments and guides planning and
interpreting new experiments.