* 0217172
* PLN:  Developing a Women Interested in Mathematics and Science Advancement (WIMSA) Network in a Rural Community
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Jane Arledge, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 02/28/2005
* USD 30,000.00

Developing a Women Interested in Mathematics and Science Advancement (WIMSA)
Network in a Rural Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women's deeply
ingrained negative perceptions of science and mathematics are
directly&lt;br/&gt;linked to their underrepresentation in these and related
fields (Gottfried, 1993). The goal &lt;br/&gt;of our project is to increase the
participation of women from rural communities in the &lt;br/&gt;fields of
science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET). To achieve our goal,
&lt;br/&gt;we will initiate a program that involves women throughout the
community in a sustained&lt;br/&gt;network of support. This is an exciting,
complex, long-term project. This proposal is for&lt;br/&gt;a PGE Demonstration
Planning Grant, which will enable us to prepare a strong,
comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;proposal for a full PGE Demonstration Grant. Our full
grant will address the inequities &lt;br/&gt;experienced by girls, particularly
in low-tech rural areas. The full grant will be used to &lt;br/&gt;create a
program, called Women Interested in Mathematics and Science
Advancement&lt;br/&gt;(WIMSA). The WIMSA program will consist of a network of
people and organizations, &lt;br/&gt;all with the goal of increasing the
participation and success of females in mathematics &lt;br/&gt;and science. The
full proposal will address recruitment of WIMSA network members,
&lt;br/&gt;sustaining their membership, and expanding the WIMSA program. The PGE
Demonstration&lt;br/&gt;Planning project will focus on the design of all aspects
of the WIMSA program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the two main planning grant
objectives will be to design our pilot project, the &lt;br/&gt;annual WIMSA
Summer Program (WSP) for middle school girls, which will have the dual
&lt;br/&gt;purpose ofbeing the initial impetus to bring people into the WIMSA
network, and of &lt;br/&gt;increasing the skill level of middle school girls and
teachers. A planning committee,&lt;br/&gt;consisting of two K-12 teachers, two
college students, and the two Principal &lt;br/&gt;Investigators, will be formed
to develop the summer program. The committee will&lt;br/&gt;determine the size
and scope of the program, design program activities and curriculum,
&lt;br/&gt;and will collaborate with community organizations regarding WSP field
activities. &lt;br/&gt;The program design will build on the successes of other
SMET intervention programs &lt;br/&gt;for women across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our other main planning grant objective will be to
design the WIMSA network connections &lt;br/&gt;and activities. We envision this
network bringing together Mesa State faculty and students,&lt;br/&gt;K-12
teachers and students, private businesses, government organizations,
educational&lt;br/&gt;associations, community leaders and any local programs
involved with science and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. Our first activity will be a
WIMSA kickoff meeting, hosted by Mesa State,&lt;br/&gt;which will include people
from all target organizations and will introduce them to the&lt;br/&gt;WIMSA
concept. We will create a WISMA Advisory Board that will oversee all aspects
&lt;br/&gt;of the WIMSA project, including writing the full PGE Demonstration
Grant. We will &lt;br/&gt;design college courses to provide ongoing SMET
activities and training for WIMSA &lt;br/&gt;members, including a graduate
credit component for K-12 teachers. We will &lt;br/&gt;collaborate with local
businesses and professionals to design activities for the&lt;br/&gt;WSP,
internship opportunities for WIMSA college students, job-shadowing opportunities
&lt;br/&gt;for K-12 students, and presentation opportunities at Mesa State. In
order to sustain &lt;br/&gt;such relationshipsand collaborations, there will be
WIMSA meetings at least three&lt;br/&gt;times per year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there are no programs in our area addressing the
lack of females in SMET fields, &lt;br/&gt;there are programs and organizations
committed to improving our community, and many&lt;br/&gt;people who wish to make
a difference. The WIMSA program will provide an incredible
&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to harness and coordinate these resources and create a
&lt;br/&gt;very effective program that will have long-ranging impact.&lt;br/&gt;