* 0217068
* Collaborative Research:  Development and Identity of Sexually Dimorphic Reproductive Signals and Responses by African Elephants
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Thomas Goodwin, Hendrix College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 299,369.00

Collaborative Research: RUI - Development and Identity of Sexually
Dimorphic&lt;br/&gt;Reproductive Signals and Responses by African
Elephants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the spirit of the BIO C-RUI program, this
proposal crosses disciplinary, departmental, and institutional boundaries. The
project will answer five questions regarding the proximate mechanisms of
reproductive communication using innovative techniques at the interface of
biology and chemistry. African elephants will be used to test hypotheses on
developmental patterns of sexually dimorphic reproductive signals and responses.
This is not only for the distinct advantages elephants offer as a research
model, but also because basic scientific research can provide knowledge about
these ecologically important, endangered animals that may aid in their long-term
survival. This research team includes an animal behaviorist (Dr. Schulte) and an
organic chemist (Dr. Goodwin), each with a track record of successful elephant-
related research at predominantly undergraduate institutions. Dr. Rasmussen, who
characterized the pre-ovulatory pheromone in Asian elephants and has made
substantial contributions to the understanding of elephant biochemistry,
behavior and olfaction, joins the team. These scientific collaborators are
educators who believe that undergraduates learn science best by doing science,
i.e. by research participation with scientists, presentation of results at
scientific meetings, and co-authoring manuscripts. Undergraduate collaborators
will actively participate in this research on sexually dimorphic reproductive
signals and responses.&lt;br/&gt;Polygamous animals often display extreme sexual
dimorphism, where males and females may live in very different social
structures. In mammals, females typically raise the offspring often with little
or no male assistance. African elephants (Loxodonta africana) illustrate this
pattern very well. Intersexual interaction is especially prevalent during the
breeding season when individuals use a variety of communicative behaviors to
compete for and select mates as well as maintain social bonds. Chemical signals
and related tactile behaviors are primary means of evaluating reproductive
condition and attracting mates. The development of chemical signal production
and sex-specific responses has received little attention. In fact, sexually
dimorphic communication patterns related to reproduction have rarely been
compared within the same species simultaneously in a single study. Focal
questions in these arenas are posed in three sets:&lt;br/&gt;SET I: What are the
specific chemical signals in pre-ovulatory urine that: A. Elicit male
reproductive behavior? B. Elicit heightened female social
responsiveness?&lt;br/&gt;SET II: During the differential development of males
and females are there recognizable stages of: A. Male responses toward pre-
ovulatory urine and its specific chemical signal(s)? B. Female responses toward
pre-ovulatory urine and its specific chemical signal(s)?&lt;br/&gt;SET III:
Based on the results in the first two sets, what are the comparative ontogenetic
patterns of male and female responses toward known chemical signal sources and
to specific signal compounds and more generally in the display of reproductively
related behaviors? &lt;br/&gt;These questions are investigated first by a study
of female-to-male signals (IA and IIA), then female-to-female signals (IB and
IIB) and finally by comparing the two developmental pathways (III).
Specifically, answers are sought by: (i) Collecting urine from captive and wild
female African elephants; (ii) Performing behavioral bioassays of urine samples
for the responses of both male and female conspecifics; (iii) Chemically
analyzing bioactive urine fractions to identify organic compounds; (iv)
Bioassaying selected urinary components with captive and then wild African
elephants; (vi) Observing wild African elephants for reproductive chemotactile
communication.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will identify proximate chemical
causes of reproductive behavior and elucidate sexually dimorphic developmental
patterns of communication. This study will lay the groundwork for future
investigation on male based signals and of ultimate questions on this topic. The
findings may assist in the conservation of endangered elephants in practice and
other species.&lt;br/&gt;