* 0217104
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Production Technology of High Purity Pig Iron in Small and Medium Cupola Foundries
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Mohamed Abdelrahman, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0217104&lt;br/&gt;Abdelrahaman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This
award is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Mohamed Abdelrahaman,
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tennessee Technological University,
Cookeville, Tennessee and Dr. Ibrahim Moustafa, Foundry Department at the
Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute in Helwan, Egypt. They
plan to develop technology for the production of high purity pig iron by
integrating automatic control technology and optimization of the composition of
the charge materials. While cupola melting is simple in principle the actual
physical and chemical details of the process are quite complex, and the
phenomena occurring in the melt zone are difficult to measure directly.
Automatic control of the cupola melting process promises improved energy
efficiency, a less environmental impact and improved quality of produced iron.
Thus, the project would achieve two objectives: the first is to test and
demonstrate the general automatic control technology for cupola furnaces
developed by the American side and the second is to investigate the production
of high purity pig iron by the integration of optimized charge materials with
the automatic control of the cupola furnace &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;In this project the U.S. PI has been leading research efforts in the
US for developing automatic control systems for cupola furnaces. However, the
cost of performing the experimental testing of the developed control systems in
the US is a hurdle that limits the demonstration of the developed technology and
in turn the deployment of the technology in the industry. The Egyptian side
(CMRDI) has an experimental cupola-melting furnace with a one ton per hour
capacity, in addition to a well-equipped metallurgical laboratory with
facilities to measure the chemical composition of molten metal, microstructure
and mechanical properties. These facilities offer a relatively inexpensive way
for developing and testing the desired technology.&lt;br/&gt;