* 0217730
* Dirac Centenary Conference (Baylor University)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Truell Hyde, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 08/31/2003
* USD 7,500.00

Baylor University's Dirac Centenary Conference (http://www.baylor.edu/Dirac) is
an interdisciplinary evaluation of the seminal contributions of Paul Dirac
(1902-1984) to the methodology, progress, and future of twentieth and twenty
first century physics. Drawing together scholars from theoretical physics,
mathematics, the history of science and the philosophy of science, it provides a
rare chance for students and researchers across different disciplines to benefit
from interaction with each other. The discussion into the cutting-edge
developments in canonical quantum gravity, supersymmetry, superstrings and
geometric functional analysis made possible by Dirac's innovations in
mathematics and physical theory will give physics and mathematics students
exposure to active research in their fields, and also contribute to an
understanding of the development of physical theory in a way that will aid
historians and philosophers of science as they examine the methodological,
epistemological and metaphysical implications of modern physics. The cross-
fertilization of different disciplines will also contribute to advancing
knowledge and understanding within and across fields in beneficial ways. The
fruits of this scholarly interaction will be published in an edited volume of
conference proceedings.

The conference also provides a unique opportunity for undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral researchers in physics, mathematics,
philosophy and history to present their work in a context where they can get
feedback from senior scholars at the forefront of their respective fields. The
conference opens with a poster session competition for students in the physical
sciences and mathematics, and a short paper presentation competition for
students in the history and/or philosophy of science. Conference scholarships
are available for student participation and attendance with minority students
strongly encouraged to apply. The impact of this effort on science education
will be furthered by Baylor's coordination of a consortium of Texas schools co-
sponsoring the conference, and by the recruitment of student involvement from
many of the smaller colleges in the southwest, particularly those that are
historically African-American or Hispanic. Publicity for the conference will
draw public attention to issues in science and contribute to promoting science
awareness and education in central Texas and beyond.