* 0217817
* The Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in Plumage: A Phylogenetic Perspective
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Kevin Burns, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Goggy Davidowitz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 184,005.00

Kevin J. Burns&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in
Plumage: A Phylogenetic Perspective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study uses an
evolutionary tree of a group of birds to investigate the evolution of
differences between males and females in plumage. Evolutionary trees of a
variety of organisms are providing a new perspective to classical ideas about
the evolution of plumage coloration. For example, male ornaments can be lost
frequently, and females often evolve elaborate traits. In this study, DNA
sequences of three genes will be used to reconstruct an evolutionary tree for
species of tanagers and finches. The resulting evolutionary tree will be used to
examine patterns of evolution of sexual differences in plumage. Transformations
between different types of plumage will be tabulated and the frequency of
changes in male plumage will be compared to the frequency of changes in female
plumage. In addition to providing information on the evolution of male and
female plumage differences, the data resulting from this project will also
address questions in a variety of areas including the biogeography of Central
and South America, the prevalence of ultraviolet coloration in birds, the
evolution of feeding characteristics, and evolutionary tree constructing
methods. &lt;br/&gt; Beyond scientific impacts of this proposal, this project
will also provide training and educational opportunities for several students,
at both the undergraduate and graduate level. SDSU is a diverse campus, with no
racial group making up a majority of the students. It is expected that the
students that work on this project will reflect the diversity seen on campus.
Results will be disseminated broadly within scientific journals, the popular
media, and bird-watching literature. Both the molecular sequence data and the
plumage data will be made accessible online. The teaching efforts of the
principal investigator will also be enhanced by the results of this project by
providing specific examples that can be included in lectures and inquiry-based
activities.&lt;br/&gt;