* 0217304
* Swimming and Vulnerability in Pelagic Development
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Richard Strathmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2008
* USD 324,999.00

Early swimming in planktonic development provides a system for testing
hypotheses on advantages of the water column rather than the benthos as a
habitat for animals early in their life histories. Diverse marine animals
release eggs into the water to develop as solitary planktonic embryos that swim
early, often while still in embryonic stages. The widespread existence of early
swimming stages suggests advantages of the water column as a habitat at early
and vulnerable life history stages. Solitary embryos deposited on the bottom may
be at greater risk. Benthic embryos receive greater parental protection, further
indicating that the benthos is a risky place for solitary embryos. This project
will answer three questions. Does early swimming remove early embryonic stages
from benthic predators, despite turbulent mixing? Does early swimming reduce
capture by common pelagic predators? Are animals at early stages less vulnerable
to pelagic than to benthic predators?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will
be addressed through a combination of lab and field studies that assay sinking
and swimming velocities under turbulent and non-turbulent conditions. Because
turbulence turns swimmers away from vertical orientation, experiments will also
compare vertical bias in turbulence with vertical bias in still water to
estimate effectiveness of reorientation to the vertical in turbulence.
Temperature commonly varies with depth, so this project will also measure the
effect of temperature on rates of sinking and swimming. Swimming faster than
sinking could increase encounters with ambush predators, so velocities of
sinking and swimming will be compared with those of predators relative to water,
and to predicted turbulence generated shear within predators' perception
volumes. The hypothesis that swimmers displace water at smaller distances, and
thus produce a smaller signal to predators than do passive sinkers, will also be
tested. Quantifying capture and ingestion of embryos before and after they begin
to swim will test the hypothesis that swimming decreases successful captures per
encounter. Predators will include fish larvae, copepods, medusae, and
ctenophores. Results on vulnerability of preswimming and swimming stages will be
combined with published data on abundance and clearance rates of pelagic and
benthic predators to test the hypothesis that animals at early stages of
development are safer from predation in the water column than near the bottom.
Two graduate students will participate in the proposed research in their
dissertation research, and several undergraduates will participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;