* 0217481
* Collaborative Research/GOALI:  Analysis and Optimization Method for Distributed Sensor Systems in Electronics Assembly Processes Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Yu Ding, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2005
* USD 173,202.00

This Collaborative Research/Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) provides funding for the development and implementation of a
methodology for the analysis and optimization of a distributed sensor system in
electronics assembly processes for the purpose of process fault diagnosis. The
proposed modeling tool will integrate product quality information and process
characteristics in a multi-station assembly system framework using a station-
indexed state space model. Then, the diagnosability of a generic distributed
sensor system will be explored by expending the concept of observability in
control theory. This will further lead to development of the fault diagnosis
method for fault feature extraction based on the multivariate data analysis. The
understanding of the transformation of quality information, offered by the state
space quality-fault model and diagnosability analysis, will guide the optimal
design of a sensing system. This project will be carried out through a close
collaboration partnered by Texas A&amp;M University, the University of Wisconsin
- Madison, and Motorola Florida Research Labs (MFRL). The methodology
development will be based on, and the resulting technology will be tested and
implemented in, the Motorola radio assembly process. &lt;br/&gt; If successful,
the results of this project will contribute to sensing and information
technology in manufacturing: new concepts and criteria regarding the performance
of sensor systems will be defined and effective algorithms for sensing
optimization and data analysis will be developed. Curriculum developed from
research accomplishments will generate long-term impacts on the education of
quality engineering and production system. The resulting technology will also
benefit the US electronics manufacturers who are under great pressure from their
international competitors. According to a White Paper issued by the
Interconnection Technology Research Institute in 1999, over 100 of 650 U.S.
electronics fabricators have gone out of business in the past five years. The
lack of six-sigma quality is identified as the weakest point of for US
manufacturers. Industrial implementation of the resulting methodology will aid
US manufacturers in remaining competitive and could generate substantial
economic impacts.