* 0217894
* ITR/Collaborative Research: FPGA Wavelet Image Compression Systems for Mobile Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Joan Carletta, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 09/30/2006
* USD 144,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many imaging applications, mobile agents--such
as untethered reconnaissance robots and micro air vehicles--transmit and receive
bandwidth-intensive image data over wireless networks. A key issue in developing
small, mobile agents is minimizing their power requirements. The most
significant source of power dissipation in a wireless communications system is
the transmission of data over the wireless link. Compressing the data before
transmission is a direct way to significantly decrease power requirements; thus,
effective image compression algorithms are critical to realizing a mobile,
wireless, real-time, high quality imaging system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various
hardware platforms can be considered for mobile computing. Of these platforms,
field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are the most compelling for wireless,
mobile, fast, low-power, handheld/wearable/embedded, image compression
devices.FPGAs can be used as the basis for implementations that are low cost,
easily updated, and significantly faster than microprocessor-based
implementations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is twofold:
to design new, efficient image compression algorithms and to design, build,
demonstrate and evaluate FPGA implementations of state-of-the-art image
compression systems. Our close-knit interdisciplinary team of image compression
and hardware specialists will allow for end-to-end system performance
analysis.This critical assessment is almost never performed and yet it is
important to understanding the combined effects of algorithmic and
implementation design choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, two or three
real-world interdisciplinary projects that can be utilized in senior-level
digital signal processing and digital design classes will be designed and
published. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;