* 0217266
* The Self as Political and Scientific Project in the 20th Century: A Symposium on the Human Sciences Between Utopia &amp; Reform, University Park, PA, 2003
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Greg Eghigian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/2003
* USD 9,998.00

SES 0217266&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Self as Political and Scientific Project in
the 20th Century: A Symposium on the Human Sciences Between Utopia and Reform
The Self as Political and Scientific Project in the 20th Century: A Symposium on
the Human Sciences Between Utopia and Reform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greg Eghigian,
Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides funding for a two-day conference on "The Self as Political and
Scientific Project in the 20th Century: A Symposium on the Human Sciences
Between Utopia and Reforml" to be held in the fall of 2003 at Penn State
University. The organizers intend to bring together scholars conducting research
in science &amp; technology studies -- in particular, in the fields of the
sociology, history, anthropology, and ethics of the human sciences -- for the
purpose of disentangling the interaction between science and politics in the
shaping of the twentieth-century self. In particular, the forum of a symposium
serves as an opportunity for scholars to discuss how selfhood became a crucially
important focal point of scientific research and social engineering in
contemporary fascist, communist, and liberal polities. The event will be held at
Penn State University-University Park campus and will be open to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tentative themes for the panels are: The Making of the
Socialist Self, Psychiatry and Identity in the United States, Fashioning the
Fascist Self, Medical Ethics and the Making of the Self, Religion and the Self,
and Medicalization and the Self. The focus is to be broadly interdisciplinary
and comparative, encompassing developments within and across Europe, the former
Soviet Union, and the United States. In addition to the panels, planned breakout
sessions will enable participants to address issues raised during the previous
panels and provide an opportunity for participants and audience members to
interact, discuss, and develop ideas across disciplinary boundaries. It is the
intention of the organizers to publish most of the contributions in the form of
an edited volume or a special issue of a journal.&lt;br/&gt;