* 0217532
* Dissertation Research:  The Origins and Development of Combat Information Centers During World War II
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* David Mindell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,000.00

This dissertation research project is an historical study of the United States
Navy's efforts to develop sophisticated "command and control" technologies prior
to and during the Second World War. Specifically, it explores the development of
Combat Information Centers (CICs), focusing on efforts to integrate complex
human-machine systems under the exigencies of war. As developed and utilized
during the war, the CIC was primarily an information station, established to
collect, evaluate, and disseminate tactical information to task force commanders
and ships' commanding officers. How best to organize the equipment and
specially-trained personnel that together made up a CIC was a problem of
enormous complexity. By studying the Navy's efforts to solve this problem, the
project seeks to explain how the evolving relationship between humans and
machines altered warfare at sea. The principal research method for the project
involves traveling to official archives in order to view official and unofficial
documents (e.g., letters, memoranda, reports, etc.) produced during the time
period under investigation and related to the topic under investigation. This
process is time consuming and requires a physical presence at relevant archives,
frequently for several weeks at a time. For this project, the majority of
archival documents are located within the greater Washington DC area.