* 0217318
* Imaging Subsurface Hydraulic Properties From Spectral Electrical Tomographic Images:  Artificial Neural Network Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Fred Boadu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2007
* USD 220,200.00

Geo-environmental, hydrogeological and geophysical studies of the earth's
subsurface involving aquifer characterization, transport of contaminants and
design of contaminant remediation strategies demand accurate and reliable
prediction of the spatial variablity of hydraulic properties. The primary goal
of this research is to develop an integrated approach, which incorporates
physico-chemically based model developments, laboratory measurements,
interpretational and imaging tools using artificial neural networks, to predict
hydraulic conductivity and porosity images of the earth's subsurface from
frequency dependent resistivity images. Models describing the frequency
dependent resistivity of soils based on physico-chemical principles will be
developed that will include hydraulic and petrophysical parameters as primary
variables. Laboratory experiments will be designed to measure frequency
dependent resistivity as well as the petrophysical and hydraulic properties of
over 100 sil samples fromdifferent geological environments aiming to obtain
adequate variablity in soil textural andstructural properties. These
measurements will allow a comprehensive investigation of how spectral electrical
responses of soils are influenced by their petrophysical and hydraulic
properties. The soil samples will be fully characterized by measuring their
hydraulic conductivity, porosity, density, moisture content and particle size
distribution in the laboratory. The capabilities of artificial neural networks
(ANN) to adapt, generalize and identify non-linearities in relations among
variables, will be explored to determine the functional relationships between
the spectral electrical response of soils and their hydraulic properties.
Fieldmeasurements of resistivity and phase at specified frequencies will be
conducted at selected geologic sites with known information on the hydraulic
properties. An inversion procedure using a regularized Newton's method is
proposed and will be utilized to obtain frequency - scanned tomographic images
of electrical properties of the subsurface. Subsurface images of hydraulic
properties will be predicted from the field measured tomographic images of
electrical propertiesusing transformations to be developed based on ANN
functional relationships. Uncertainties in the proposed prediction method due to
noise and model parameter misrepresentations and inefficiencies in the training
method will be assessed. The outputs of the method from field measured hydraulic
properties will be compared to that of existing ground truth information.