* 0217199
* TECH TEAM: A Project Based Technology Sequence for Middle School Girls
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Betsy Newman, ETV Endowment of South Carolina, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2006
* USD 755,257.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Educational Television Endowment of South Carolina, in
collaboration with the South&lt;br/&gt;Carolina Educational Television Network
(SCETV), will carry out a program to increase middle&lt;br/&gt;school girls'
enthusiasm for and understanding of technology and introduce them to women
who&lt;br/&gt;work in science and technology fields. The project is a three-year
pilot program called TECH&lt;br/&gt;TEAM that consists of afterschool technology
clubs, workshops in computer applications at&lt;br/&gt;SCETV and Summer
Technology Day Camps. Partners include the Girl Scouts of the
Congaree&lt;br/&gt;Area, Inc., the Girl Scout Council of the Pee Dee Area, and
the College of Education of the&lt;br/&gt;University of South Carolina. In
addition to the girls themselves, TECH TEAM will train the
club&lt;br/&gt;facilitators - teachers and Girl Scout leaders - in video and
computer-based technologies, project&lt;br/&gt;based curriculum development and
techniques for gender equitable education in an annual series&lt;br/&gt;of
Saturday workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TECH TEAM project will take place
in three South Carolina school districts - the School&lt;br/&gt;District of
Fairfield County, Richland District One and Marion District One - all of which
are&lt;br/&gt;considered critical needs districts. Fairfield is a rural county
in which 40.8% of the adults have&lt;br/&gt;less than a high school education
and unemployment is at the second highest level in the state.&lt;br/&gt;Marion
District One is in a poor, rural area in which 76% of the students qualify for
free or&lt;br/&gt;reduced lunch, over 50% come from single parent homes and 75%
are minority. Richland District&lt;br/&gt;One is an urban district. 80% of
students are minority and 58% qualify for free or reduced
lunch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECH TEAM is designed to increase girls'
technological fluency through a progressive sequence&lt;br/&gt;of technology
applications in a hands-on, project based setting. In the first year, 2002-2003,
the&lt;br/&gt;girls will videotape interviews with local women who work in the
fields of science, math,&lt;br/&gt;technology and engineering. To locate their
interviewees, they will learn and use research skills,&lt;br/&gt;including both
informal and Internet-based techniques. The girls will edit their videos using
a&lt;br/&gt;computer-based editing program, and broadcast them to schools across
South Carolina via&lt;br/&gt;SCETV's Instructional Television Fixed Service
(ITFS). They will host two-way call-in shows on&lt;br/&gt;the ITFS, allowing
students anywhere in the state to respond and ask the girls
questions.&lt;br/&gt;In the second year of the project, 2003-2004, the girls
will create a Web site about TECH TEAM&lt;br/&gt;that will be integrated into
www.knowitall.org, SCETV's Web portal for teachers and students.
The&lt;br/&gt;girls will design the layout of their site and publish writing,
post videos and contribute to a&lt;br/&gt;threaded discussion that will be
developed for the site. In TECH TEAM's third year, 2004-2005,&lt;br/&gt;the
girls will create a searchable database of their videos for inclusion on the
site, adding dynamic&lt;br/&gt;elements that require the use of computer codes,
so that they extend their fluency in the use of&lt;br/&gt;computer technology.
They will learn about SQL (Structured Query Language), and they
will&lt;br/&gt;develop CFML (Cold Fusion Markup Language) to make their
databases Web accessible. In&lt;br/&gt;addition to the afterschool clubs, they
will attend a series of Saturday workshops taught by&lt;br/&gt;SCETV
programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During each summer of the project the TECH
TEAM girls will attend a Summer Technology Day&lt;br/&gt;Camps at SCETV's
Telecommunications Center in Columbia. The camps will allow all
the&lt;br/&gt;participants to meet each other, work in SCETV's computer labs,
and present their work to an&lt;br/&gt;invited audience. Throughout each year a
video crew will document the progress of TECH TEAM&lt;br/&gt;on videotape and
interview the participants. This material will form the basis of a CD-ROM to
be&lt;br/&gt;produced for teachers' professional development. The CD will be
mailed free of charge to every&lt;br/&gt;middle school in South Carolina and
will be made available nationwide through SCETV's&lt;br/&gt;marketing division.
Evaluation and assessment of TECH TEAM will be conducted by Dr.
Kenneth&lt;br/&gt;Stevenson of the College of Education of the University of
South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of TECH TEAM goes beyond gender
equity considerations to universal issues of&lt;br/&gt;technology education,
teacher training, adolescent development, the design of
afterschool&lt;br/&gt;programs, and partnerships between schools and informal
education providers; TECH TEAM will&lt;br/&gt;advance understanding of these
areas as they apply not only to girls but to all students
and&lt;br/&gt;teachers.