* 0217403
* Stress, Spines and New Memories
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Tracey Shors, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,990.00

Shors, Tracey&lt;br/&gt;0217403&lt;br/&gt;STRESS, SPINES &amp; NEW
MEMORIES&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dendritic spines are tiny protrusions that exist
by the tens of thousands on many excitatory neurons in the brain, including
those in the hippocampal formation. Spines are potential sites of synapse
formation and thus represent a means for neuronal integration. Based on their
potential for conferring associations between neurons, it has been hypothesized
that they are involved in the encoding of experience. Exposure to an acute
stressful experience greatly increases the density of dendritic spines in the
hippocampal formation of the male rat. This effect is robust and persistent -
lasting at least 24 hrs after the event has ceased. The effect is also
regionally specific in that it is evident on pyramidal neurons in area CA1 of
the hippocampus but not in the somatosensory cortex. The primary goal of the
proposed experiments is to identify the neuronal and hormonal mechanisms that
are responsible for the experience-induced change in spine density.
Specifically, experiments will be done to determine whether activation of the
NMDA type of glutamate receptors is necessary for inducing the persistent
increase in spine density. It will also be determined whether the presence of
the major stress hormones, glucocorticoids, is necessary for the stress effects
on synaptic anatomy. Although dendritic spines were identified over 100 years
ago, their functional significance has remained elusive. The results from these
studies should provide important insight into their functional significance and
the mechanisms that mediate their plasticity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;