* 0217549
* US-United Arab Emirates Cooperative Research:  Space-Time Coding with Antenna Selection
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Tolga Duman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 31,200.00

0217549&lt;br/&gt;Duman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a cooperative project by Professor F. Tolga Duman, Department
of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona and Dr. Ali
Ghrayeb, Department of Electrical Engineering at the American University of
Sharjah (AUS) in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates. Their research deals with
providing voice and data services over the wireless channel. They have shown
that for a multiple transmit multiple receiver antenna system over a quasi-
static fading channel, with antenna selection, regardless of the underlying
space-time code, the diversity order remains the same as that of the full
complexity system. In this project they plan to: extend their earlier results to
the case of antenna selection principles for space-time codes over various
realistic fading channel models (e.g., block fading, frequency selective
fading), conduct performance analysis and develop optimal code design principles
for space-time codes when antenna selection is employed, consider the use and
design of turbo coded modulation schemes and low-density parity check codes for
multiple antennas and address the antenna selection issues in that context, and
study space-time coded orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems
(to convert the frequency selective fading channel into a frequency flat one)
when antenna selection is employed. The two scientists have studied the problem
from a channel coding perspective and produced some initial promising results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: &lt;br/&gt;Transmitting voice and data services
over the wireless channel is prone to several impairments such as fading and
interference. "Diversity" is a most effective way of combating the adverse
effects of fading. The research seeks to simplify the receiver complexity by
employing antenna selection at the receiver that results in a great reduction in
complexity, as only one receiver circuit is needed. Dr. Duman is presently
carrying out research at his institute on coding for wireless communications and
on smart antennas for wireless communications. This project will help his
current research through the interaction with Dr. Ghrayeb (a Jordanian faculty
member at AUS). Ghrayeb will visit Arizona State University during summers and
Duman will visit the American University in Sharjah during winter break to
continue the project. The proposed work will also have an educational impact
both at ASU and the American University of Sharjah, and will result in a
continued collaboration between the communications groups of the two
institutions. The research results will be incorporated in educational material
at both institutes.&lt;br/&gt;