* 0217615
* Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Indiana
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2008
* Sally Mason, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2008
* USD 2,312,116.00

Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
Indiana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSAMP Indiana project is a result of
collaboration among Ball State University; &lt;br/&gt;IndianaUniversity,
Bloomington; Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis;&lt;br/&gt;Purdue
University, Calumet; and Purdue University, West Lafayette. Each
university&lt;br/&gt;surveyed existing studentretention and minority programs.
At many of our universities,&lt;br/&gt;there are a substantial number of K-12
outreach programs designed to enhance initial &lt;br/&gt;interest in Science,
Math, Engineering, and Technology (SMET) disciplines, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;numerous programs to help freshmen transition from high school into
college. In addition,&lt;br/&gt;there are a substantial number of programs to
support research projects by upper-division&lt;br/&gt;students in SMET
disciplines. However, there are fewer (if any) programs across the
&lt;br/&gt;participating universities to help first-year students identify with
their SMET discipline &lt;br/&gt;and help them to sustain that initial
identification through research and mentoring&lt;br/&gt;experiences over their
next two years of college. In response to this finding, the &lt;br/&gt;involve
institutions formed an alliance to increase the number of minorities receiving
&lt;br/&gt;baccalaureate degrees in SMET disciplines by providing (1) early
research enrichment &lt;br/&gt;experiences; (2) sustained teaching and mentoring
opportunities in gatekeeper as well &lt;br/&gt;as upper-level courses; (3)
personalized interactions with graduate students and faculty&lt;br/&gt;mentors
beginning in the students' freshman year; and (4) professional and personal
&lt;br/&gt;development opportunities. These early experiences with research and
teaching are &lt;br/&gt;designed to encourage students to forge and sustain an
academic and a social &lt;br/&gt;identification within their SMET discipline.
These goals will be reached by the &lt;br/&gt;implementation of the following
three programs:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summer Transition and Academic Research
Programs (STAR Programs) -- The STAR&lt;br/&gt;programs will help LSAMP
students' transition from high school to college by &lt;br/&gt;exposing them to
research and career enrichment experiences designed to enhance &lt;br/&gt;the
student's initialcommitment to a SMET discipline beginning in the
summer&lt;br/&gt;before their first year of college. Importantly, to sustain
this initial commitment,&lt;br/&gt;the STAR programs then continue to provide
research and career enrichment &lt;br/&gt;experiences from the students'
freshman year through the summer after their &lt;br/&gt;sophomore year. STAR
programs will provide research and career enrichment &lt;br/&gt;experiences that
include such activities as the following: (1) participation in
a&lt;br/&gt;summer bridge program with a "hands on" introduction to research
experiences &lt;br/&gt;component; (2) formal and informal meetings with faculty
and/or graduate mentors; &lt;br/&gt;(3) visits to laboratories that emphasize
the active involvement of students; &lt;br/&gt;(4) participation in a higher-
level summer research experiences between their first&lt;br/&gt;and second years
of college; and (5) participation in the annual LSAMP Indiana
Research&lt;br/&gt;and Alliance Enrichment
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supplemental Instruction (SI) -- SI programs
offer participants the chance to lead &lt;br/&gt;and/or participate in review
and study skill sessions to supplement course instruction. &lt;br/&gt;Some of
the universities in this alliance have established SI programs for a few of the
&lt;br/&gt;historically high-risk 100and 200 level "gatekeeper" courses, and
they are particularly &lt;br/&gt;effective in raising participants'(especially
minority participants') G.P.A. and&lt;br/&gt;retention rate. As an alliance,
therefore, we are interested in the following: (1) beginning &lt;br/&gt;the SI
program in SMET courses at universities with no SI program; (2) expanding
the&lt;br/&gt;SI program to (more) SMET courses at universities with an
established SI program; and &lt;br/&gt;(3) adding SI to upper-level courses
known to be difficult for students (i.e., 2 nd level&lt;br/&gt; gatekeeper
courses).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordination and Development Programs -- To forge
the Alliance, all parties involved in&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP Indiana will be invited to
conferences in order to: (1) enhance the alliance by &lt;br/&gt;sharingdata,
program experiences (successes and failures), and ideas for
improving&lt;br/&gt;programs and the alliance; (2) provide conference
experiences that serve academic&lt;br/&gt;and social identification needs; (3)
build a supportive network of SMET scholars &lt;br/&gt;(faculty, graduate
students, administrators, and students) working toward a shared&lt;br/&gt;goal
who can help guide the alliance; and (4) develop diversity competencies among
&lt;br/&gt;faculty, administrators, support staff, graduate students, and
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students affiliated with LSAMP Indiana by developing new
and innovative workshops&lt;br/&gt;that are then adapted and administered on
each campus.&lt;br/&gt;