* 0217551
* RUI:  The Interdependence of GaN Surface Chemistry and Surface Morphology and Reconstruction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Marcus McEllistrem, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 260,933.00

This RUI project addresses the chemistry of GaN surfaces and how these reactions
are influenced by surface morphology (cluster-covered or smooth), and conversely
how surface morphology is modified by reactions. Cluster formation on GaN
appears to be especially facile, and is expected to result in Ga-rich surfaces
compared to atomically smooth surfaces. Surface reactions that pres-age cluster
formation as well as etching reactions will be the focus of the proposed
research. Sur-face reactions will be monitored by changes in surface electronic
structure using ultraviolet pho-toelectron spectroscopy and by determining the
temperature at which molecules desorb from the surface. Surface morphology will
be characterized using scanning tunneling microscopy and low-energy electron
diffraction. Experiments will determine how surface morphology influences
chemistry by preparing a surface with known morphology before surface reactions.
How surface chemistry changes morphology will be characterized by re-examining
the GaN surface after sur-face reactions to assess how local surface structure
or composition has changed. Changes in composition and electron density will
also be evaluated by ultraviolet and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. By
comparing surfaces with known changes in morphology, it may be possible to
establish whether a surface is smooth or cluster-covered by photoelectron
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
research issues in a topical area of materials science having technological
relevance. Undergraduate students will play a primary role in the project, with
op-portunities for research integrated directly into their academic program. A
newly established collaboration between UW-Eau Claire chemistry and physics
faculty enhances the project. In-strumentation recently acquired through NSF MRI
awards has been combined into a common-use materials research facility in which
faculty and students from several groups and departments work as a team on
various research projects. This interdisciplinary approach to materials research
provides an environment where undergraduate students work directly with their
peers, and de-velop cooperative learning skills as well as mentoring less-
experienced students. The research program enables forefront research and access
to state-of-the-art surface science equipment to undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;