* 0217968
* Advanced Modeling and Characterization of the Poole-Frenkel Effect in Dielectrics and Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* William Harrell, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

The classical Poole-Frenkel (PF) effect is the thermal emission of charge
carriers from Coulombic attractive traps in the bulk of dielectrics and
semiconductors, enhanced by an electric field. This mechanism results in higher
than ideal currents in electronic materials, including leakage currents in
conventional dielectrics, Si3N4 and SiO2; leakage in high dielectric constant
materials such as Ta2O5 and BaSrTiO3, which hold great promise as gate
dielectrics in DRAMs and MOSFETs; and enhanced current in Silicon Carbide (SiC)
diodes. The research objective is to investigate advanced models of the PF
effect and experimental techniques to characterize PF conduction in electronic
devices and materials. Our primary goals are: (i) Investigate a PF model using
the Fermi-Dirac function to describe the trap population statistics, while still
incorporating the Boltzmann approximation for the free electron density. Model
the current at voltages above saturation. (ii) Investigate this model as a
function of temperature. Determine if it predicts convergence of I-V(T) curves
at saturation, as our earlier research suggests. (iii) Investigate the
implications of this model on our technique for measuring saturation and trap
ionization potential. (iv) Fabricate MIS structures with Ta2O5, measure I-V(T)
curves looking for saturation, and verify our general technique. (v) Use the
Fermi-Dirac function to describe both trap and free electron population
statistics for the first time. (vi) Incorporate the model in a commercial
simulator, and simulate 6H-SiC p-n diodes. This research will enhance our
understanding of the PF effect, and improve the accuracy of modeling this effect
in electronic devices.

