* 0217856
* SGER: Pathways to Change in Environmental Organizations: Linking Population and Environment
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Clare Ginger, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 02/28/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The linkages between population and environment have become an increasing focus
of attention at a range of scales from global networks of organizations to
community-based projects and in a range of settings, including academic,
government, and non-government organizations. The purpose of this project is to
explore the efforts of two conservation non-government organizations (NGOs), The
Nature Conservancy and Conservation International, to build population-
environment (PE) issues into their portfolios of projects to protect
biodiversity in less developed countries. These organizations have traditionally
focused on the protection of biodiversity and their activities reflect a
dominant concern with ecological aspects of environmental issues. In contrast,
addressing PE issues requires attention to social aspects of environmental
issues. This, in turn, generates a need to incorporate new frameworks of
analysis and methods from the social sciences into conservation projects. Thus,
the efforts of these NGOs raise questions about organizational capacity and
change. The work of these two organizations to consider PE linkages is one
example of a more general trend to incorporate social dimensions into, and
develop integrated approaches for, environmental management. Some authors have
argued that this shift requires a significant change in the dynamics of
organizations in government, corporate, and non-profit sectors. It is not clear,
however, the degree to which such change is episodic or continuous.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates internal and external
organizational dynamics of developing PE activities in field programs in less
developed countries. It examines dynamics for projects that span six countries
(Ecuador, Guatemala, Madagascar, Mexico, the Philippines, and the United States)
with respect to how PE linkages are defined, what frameworks of analysis and
methods are used in to address these linkages, factors internal and external to
the organization that have helped and hindered in incorporating population
issues into field projects, the connections between PE activities and other
activities, frameworks of analysis and methods used in the organizations, the
role of partnership arrangements, and how PE activities are adapted to local
social conditions and priorities at project sites. Data about the field
activities, and the NGOs more generally, are generated from documents, field
visits, interviews, and observations, in collaboration with members of the
organizations. This exploratory project provides lessons for future work on PE
issues, generates insights into the organizational dynamics of linking ideas
across disciplinary fields in environmental management, and contributes to the
development of a larger research agenda. This research agenda addresses a
broader range of organizations in the PE arena to develop understandings of how
interactions in this arena affect the capacity of conservation NGOs to
incorporate innovations related to PE (i.e., ideas, frameworks of analysis,
methods to address conservation issues in new ways) into their programs. In
addition, findings from the project will inform teaching materials and
curriculum development related to the integration of social and ecological
dimensions of environmental issues.&lt;br/&gt;