* 0217421
* Permanently Instrumented Field Sites for Study of Soil-Foundation-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Jamison Steidl, Brigham Young University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2005
* USD 2,113,366.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0217421&lt;br/&gt;Youd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) is a project
funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction
appropriation. This cooperative agreement, under NEES, establishes two
permanently instrumented field sites for monitoring soil-foundation-structure
interaction (SFSI), ground motion, ground deformation, and pore-water pressure
responses. The field sites will be used to monitor responses generated by local
and regional earthquakes and for active experiments with excitation by shakers
such as those being constructed by other NEES projects at the University of
California, Los Angeles (NSF NEES award CMS-0086596 and the University of Texas,
Austin (NSF NEES award CMS-0086605). These two field sites are being developed
by a team of investigators led by Brigham Young University (BYU), in partnership
with the University of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) and the University of
Southern California (USC). The sites will be connected to the NEES network
system through a high performance network. This equipment will be operational by
September 30, 2004, and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment
site, with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new
earthquake engineering research testing capabilities for geotechnical and SFSI
testing through 2014. Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through
the NEES Consortium. This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals
submitted to program solicitation NSF 01-164, "NEES Earthquake Engineering
Research Equipment, Phase 2." The NEES equipment will be located as permanently
instrumented field arrays at two sites in Southern California: the Garner Valley
Downhole Array (GVDA) in Riverside County, east of Hemet, California, and the
Salton Sea Wildlife Refuge Liquefaction Array (WLA) in Imperial County near
Calipatria, California. Both sites are located adjacent to major faults and have
previous histories of recording ground motions and pore-water pressures. The two
sites are underlain by soft, liquefiable ground. The instrumentation at GVDA
will be upgraded and enhanced for real-time data transmission. A reconfigurable,
one-story structure will be constructed at that site and instrumented with
sensors installed in the structure, foundation, and underlying soil. A small
shaker will be permanently mounted on the roof of the building; larger shakers
may be brought to the site and placed on the building or on a nearby pad to
artificially excite the structure and underlying ground. Instrumentation at WLA
will be upgraded and greatly expanded to allow monitoring of three-dimensional
ground motion and pore-water pressure responses. Communications equipment
capable of concurrent data transmission and teleobservation will allow rapid
delivery of data to the NEES network and remote participation in experiments
conducted at the sites. There is need to further study SFSI in real structures
under seismic input, but there are always complexities in real structures that
can mask understanding of SFSI phenomena. Study of ground failure is also
complicated in urban or geologically complex settings. Simple, well-
characterized test sites like these two are needed to increase understanding of
the physics behind SFSI, ground response, and ground failure during earthquakes.
This pair of NEES field sites will also provide an excellent test bed for new
in-situ site characterization techniques and new sensor technologies. The field
sites will have an impact on undergraduate and graduate teaching programs in
earthquake engineering, geotechnical engineering, and engineering seismology by
allowing students to participate in the active experiments through
teleparticipation as well as on-site workshops. Data from both sites will be
contributed to the NEES Data Repository and the Advanced National Seismic System
(ANSS). The collected information will aid development and verification of
simulation models for ground response, pore-water pressure generation, and
dynamic SFSI. Improved simulation of these fundamental earthquake engineering
phenomena will lead to better, safer and more economical engineering design.
BYU, UCSB, and USC will integrate experimentation at these sites into their
research program and curricula, provide training opportunities for outside
researchers through on-site courses and web-based materials, and host visiting
scholars.