* 0217996
* Dissertation Research:  Designing From Below: Embedding Knowledge and Values in Educational Simulations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* David Hess, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,990.00

The goal of this dissertation research project is to explore the design and use
of educational computer technologies (EdSims), with the goal of generating
findings that may both influence both the academic literatures of design,
science and technology studies (STS), and education and also the practice of
education. Study of the development of EdSims as a new educational tool should
improve understanding of the design and use of educational technologies and
technologies in general. Hopefully, EdSim designers and educators will be able
to apply the findings of this study to improve educational pedagogy. This
research project has three main objectives. The first objective is to understand
and evaluate the design and use of EdSims in a broad context. Secondly, the
study aims to train ethically aware and socially conscious designers who will
work to level playing fields among individuals with different identities and
social locations through conscious and conscientious decisions in the design
process. Third, the project seeks to indirectly improve the design and use of
EdSims by reaching out to and working with EdSim designers and educators. The
central research questions in this study match closely with the study's
objectives, as well as the background research and research design. First, how
do EdSims compare to more traditional teaching methods? Next, how are social and
cultural assumptions embedded in EdSims? Finally, how can EdSim design be
improved? The literature review of this study focuses on three specific case
studies of EdSim design and use and relates them to the project's objectives and
research questions. The first case study on flight simulators demonstrates the
importance of EdSims and how they are different from more traditional teaching
methods. Second, animal dissection simulators are used to demonstrate the
ethical implications of EdSim design and use. For third example, gross anatomy
EdSims, specific design recommendations are made, in an effort to improve the
design and use of EdSims. Data collection for this study will make use of a
variety of qualitative and quantitative methodologies and will take place at a
variety of sites, both geographical and virtual. Semi-structured interviews and
participant observation will take place at EdSim conferences, EdSim design
laboratories, and classrooms using EdSims. The Internet will be a site for
collecting interview and survey data and contributing to the community of EdSim
designers and users. Other forms of data collection will include analysis of
EdSim advertising and a comparative usage study of EdSims. A total of 80 semi-
structured interviews and 200 web-based surveys will be conducted. The
intellectual merit of the proposed research project is based on its ontribution
to the design, STS, and education literatures. The study seeks to contribute to
the design literature by providing empirical data on how EdSims are designs,
including the extent to which their design is participatory, culturally
situated, and appropriate. In the field of STS, the research project contributes
to understandings of the convergence of simulation and reality, whereby
educational and training environments are becoming increasingly realistic, while
activities such as aircraft flight and surgery are becoming more technologically
mediated, automated, and simulated. Finally, the project will contribute to the
field of education by exploring how EdSims can be used in combination with the
pedagogies of situated learning and teaching for understanding. The broader
impacts of this study all center around improving the practice of education.
First, the study aims to determine how EdSims can be used in particular
educational settings to meet specific educational goals. Secondly, the study
will develop recommendations about how to use EdSims to make education more
equitable, just, and participatory. The third impact should be to study how
EdSims can be used to make education more economically efficient and
environmentally sustainable.