* 0217473
* GeoSoilEnviroCARS: A National Resource for Earth, Planetary and Environmental Science Research At the Advanced Photon Source
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Gordon Brown, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 6,500,000.00

0217473&lt;br/&gt;Rivers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS) is a
national user facility for frontier research in the earth sciences using
synchrotron radiation at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National
Laboratory. GSECARS provides earth scientists with access to the high-brilliance
hard x-rays from this third-generation synchrotron light source. The research
conducted at this facility is advancing our knowledge of the composition,
structure and properties of earth materials, the processes they control, and the
processes that produce them. All principal synchrotron-based analytical
techniques in demand by earth scientists are being brought to bear on earth
science problems: (1) high-pressure/high-temperature crystallography and
spectroscopy using the diamond anvil cell; (2) high-pressure/high-temperature
crystallography using the large-volume press; (3) powder, single crystal and
interface diffraction; (4) inelastic x-ray scattering; (5) x-ray absorption fine
structure (XAFS) spectroscopy; (6) x-ray fluorescence microprobe analysis; and
(7) microtomography. The unique capabilities of the APS and GSECARS have allowed
groundbreaking experiments to be conducted in research areas relevant to the
NSF-Earth Science program. This project will provide funds to: (1) to support
the continued operation of GSECARS as a national-user facility; (2) to increase
significantly the available beamtime by enabling simultaneous operation of the
two experimental stations on the undulator beamline and completion of a second
station on the bending magnet beamline; and (3) to develop and implement new
experimental instrumentation to extend the capabilities of the facility. Major
new instrumentation to be developed includes: (1) x-ray optics and shielded
transport for tandem operation on the undulator beamline; (2) beamline
components and diffraction instrumentation for a new side-station on the bending
magnet beamline; (3) a monochromator for use at high-energy on the undulator
beamline; and (4) tooling for deformation experiments in the multi-anvil press.
Our mission is to provide a research environment where users receive expert
assistance in planning and conducting experiments, and in analyzing data. This
collaborative mode of operation, which allows the facility to be accessible to
synchrotron radiation novices, requires a staff of highly qualified beamline
scientists and technical personnel. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;