* 0217709
* Doctoral Dissertation: Assisted Reproduction in Ecuador: Social Implications of In-Vitro Fertilization and Gamete Donation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Nancy Scheper-Hughes, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 06/30/2003
* USD 12,000.00

In 1984 the first South American in-vitro fertilization (IVF) baby was born in
Columbia. Since then clinics that offer assisted reproductive techniques like
IVF and gamete donation have begun operations in most Latin American countries.
This dissertation research study investigates the social impact of IVF and
gamete donation in urban Ecuador. It asks what happens when reproductive
biotechnologies travel from their initial sites of development in Europe and the
United States to nations often considered marginal to scientific practice and
research. The investigators will examine how religious practices, issues of
political economy, and kinship narratives affect the way that IVF and gamete
donation have been understood and put to use in Ecuador. The author's
preliminary research in three infertility clinics in Ecuador shows that local
Catholic practice plays a critical role in IVF laboratories in Quito where
images of the Virgin Mary are used to bless eggs and sperm to aid in
fertilization. In addition to documenting how local practice reshapes IVF in
Ecuador, this study will examine how assisted reproduction affects Ecuadorian
society. For example, how does the technoscientific production of children alter
local understandings of overpopulation and the Ecuadorian ictraditionalli
family? This study will focus on four Ecuadorian IVF and gamete donation
clinics. Using the ethnographic tools of participant observation, semi-
structured interviewing and discourse analysis, the authors will investigate how
IVF and gamete donation are understood and practiced by clinical personnel and
patients undergoing infertility treatment. To elucidate both the production and
consumption of public narratives concerning assisted reproduction interviews
will also be conducted with religious leaders, lawmakers, reporters and lay
citizens about their perception of IVF and gamete donation. Although IVF and
gamete donor clinics now operate worldwide, the vast majority of the social
science literature concerning assisted reproduction has focused on North America
and Europe. The data generated from the author's study of assisted reproduction
in Ecuador, concerning issues of political economy, religious and kinship
practices, will be used comparatively in a point by point reexamination of the
Euro-American literature. This rigorous comparative approach to the study of
bioscientific practice brings the cultural dimensions of science and technology
to the forefront, elevating this study beyond a specific focus on reproductive
technologies or Latin America. Ultimately this knowledge will allow for a more
complex understanding of how the biosciences everywhere, both in nations
considered "developed" and "developing", are constituted and affected by the
local social realities surrounding their practice.