* 0217200
* (DIS) Think Again...Girls Can!
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Janice Grackin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 02/28/2005
* USD 96,734.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this dissemination project is to develop a
model public service ad campaign&lt;br/&gt;that will advance the participation
of women and girls in SMET through effecting a&lt;br/&gt;positive shift in
attitudes among parents, educators, students and others in the
community&lt;br/&gt;regarding girls' pursuit of interests / careers in SMET. The
projects lead institution is &lt;br/&gt;Stony Brook University and collaborating
organizations / institutions include the Long &lt;br/&gt;Island Fund for Women
and Girls, Briarcliffe College, and television stations WLIW21 (PBS)
&lt;br/&gt;and WLNY55.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This informal education project will
develop a series of dynamic television spots, to be&lt;br/&gt;disseminated
through local television broadcasts and through online links. The target
&lt;br/&gt;audienceconsists of parents, educators and other authority figures,
as well as peers, who &lt;br/&gt;have a great deal of influence over young
peoples' perceptions of their educational and &lt;br/&gt;future professional
options. Spots will reflect research findings that illustrate
current&lt;br/&gt;gender inequities in SMET education and careers, and "de-bunk"
some of the commonly &lt;br/&gt;accepted beliefs regarding gender-related causes
for these disparities; information &lt;br/&gt;about often ignored or unremarked
historical and current contributions of women in&lt;br/&gt;SMET; and national
statistics on professional shortages in the SMET&lt;br/&gt;employment
pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This video campaign will attempt to re-shape public
attitudes regarding the gender&lt;br/&gt;appropriateness of girls' SMET
pursuits. Using psychosocial research as a guide, the&lt;br/&gt;project will
disseminate information in ways that may directly alter attitudes
among&lt;br/&gt;individuals in the targeted groups, as well as encourage new
behaviors that may then&lt;br/&gt;trigger compensatory attitude changes. This is
a novel approach which combines&lt;br/&gt;technology-based applications,
marketing strategies, and psychosocial research to target &lt;br/&gt;change in
specific underlying public attitudes that hinder the participation of girls
and&lt;br/&gt;young women in SMET.