* 0217007
* PLN - Creating the Next Generation of Women Leaders in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Debbie D'Amore, Pima County School Superintendent's Office
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 08/31/2003
* USD 29,940.00

PLN - Creating the Next Generation of Women Leaders in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pima County
Superintendent of Schools, a local education agency (LEA) will
&lt;br/&gt;develop and pilot an after school program for Hispanic 5th and 6th
grade girls --&lt;br/&gt;Creating the Next Generation of Women Leaders in
Science, Technology, Engineering&lt;br/&gt;and Mathematics (STEM). Creating
Leaders combines innovative leadership training &lt;br/&gt;with enhanced STEM
programming. The Creating Leaders program is innovative and &lt;br/&gt;builds on
research that has identified elements of successful programming for Hispanic
&lt;br/&gt;girls. Innovative components of this program include: 1.combining
leadership development &lt;br/&gt;training with STEM enrichment; 2. teaching
practical applications of mathematics in finance &lt;br/&gt;and investment; 3.
linking STEM with politics and public policy; 4. developing
partnerships&lt;br/&gt;between women in STEM careers, 5th and 6th grade girls
and their parents; and 5. awarding &lt;br/&gt;STEM mini-grants to elementary and
middle school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the planning grant will
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. A more extensive literature search to inform curriculum
design and program planning;&lt;br/&gt;2. The development of curricula for the
after school program to be utilized with Hispanic&lt;br/&gt; girls in 5th and
6th grades and their parents;&lt;br/&gt;3. The development of an Advisory
Board;&lt;br/&gt;4. The development of partnerships for implementing the program
at multiple sites;&lt;br/&gt;5. A pilot test of the after school program in one
elementary school;&lt;br/&gt;6. Focus groups with participants in the pilot;
and&lt;br/&gt;7. The development of a full proposal for the Creating Leaders
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Creating Leaders after school program will be
piloted in the Elvira Elementary&lt;br/&gt;School in Tucson, Arizona. The
culturally relevant program components are designed&lt;br/&gt;to work
synergistically to make SMET fun and relevant to real life, raise SMET
literacy,&lt;br/&gt;reinforce learning through hands-on activities, allow girls
to practice their newly &lt;br/&gt;acquired skills and knowledge through
community problem solving, and inspire girls to&lt;br/&gt;pursue STEM
coursework, careers, and leadership positions in STEM fields. Program
&lt;br/&gt;activities include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Playing the Real Game which teaches
students about the global economy while &lt;br/&gt;reinforcing the importance of
teamwork and cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;2. Raising financial literacy by playing the
Cashflow Game which teaches about investing,&lt;br/&gt;rate of return, business
ownership, and calculating cash flow;&lt;br/&gt;3. Attending field trips to
organizations which employ women in STEM careers and &lt;br/&gt;local colleges
and universities.&lt;br/&gt;4. Utilizing women in STEM careers and high school
students to serve as role models&lt;br/&gt; and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;5. Leadership
development activities.&lt;br/&gt;6. Teaching girls to develop proposals for
funding and receive mini-grants to solve a &lt;br/&gt;community problem using
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;7. Learning about the relationship between STEM, politics and
public policy.&lt;br/&gt;8. Developing STEM educational and career goals through
academic and career planning.&lt;br/&gt;9. Involving family members in
supporting girls STEM educational and career goals.&lt;br/&gt;10. Developing on-
line e-tools for teachers and girls in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multi-disciplinary program will provide significant advances in knowledge
in&lt;br/&gt;the fields of education, leadership development, public policy, and
the wide range of&lt;br/&gt;Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math fields.
The activities proposed will broaden &lt;br/&gt;the discovery and understanding
of how to successfully reach underrepresented groups&lt;br/&gt;and will promote
teaching, training, and learning among K-12 staff and administrators,
&lt;br/&gt;students, families, women in STEM careers, and organizations which
employ them.&lt;br/&gt;Creating Leaders will impact knowledge capital through
the creation of a curriculum for&lt;br/&gt;use with Hispanic 5th and 6th grade
girls and their families, social capital through&lt;br/&gt;the creation of a
community-based partnership designed to improve the STEM achievement
&lt;br/&gt;and career attainment of Hispanic girls, and human capital in the
improvement in STEM &lt;br/&gt;educational and career attainment of Hispanic
girls.