* 0217542
* City University of New York LSAMP Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,06/30/2009
* Louise Squitieri, CUNY City College
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 06/30/2009
* USD 7,258,393.00

City University of New York LSAMP Phase III&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New York
City Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Engineeringand
Mathematics (LSAMP) was initiated within CUNY in 1992 to promote interest in
science engineering and mathematics among underrepresented minority students.
The main goal of&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP Phase III is to build a permanent CUNY
infrastructure through augmentation of our&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated productive
capacity and output built in Phase I and Phase II, with a&lt;br/&gt;coordinated
program of summer and academic year research, teaching and
service&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for participants. The NYC LSAMP Phase III will
continue to work for systemic&lt;br/&gt;changes that will ensure the increased
production of minority SMET graduates, and address&lt;br/&gt;the areas
delineated by the NSF as national priorities. The areas are: 1) The
Educational&lt;br/&gt;Continuum; 2) Institutionalization and Best Practices; 3)
Undergraduate/Graduate&lt;br/&gt;Transition; and 4)
Mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1992, minority undergraduate enrollment in
science, mathematics, engineering and&lt;br/&gt;related technology courses has
increased from 4,216 to 6,976 in 2001, an increase of 65 %.&lt;br/&gt;In that
same period, those earning baccalaureate degrees increased from 404 to 755
per&lt;br/&gt;year, an increase of 86 %. The total number of minority graduates
since 1992 exceeds&lt;br/&gt;5,800. LSAMP programs now serve more than 14,000
CUNY undergraduates annually. Clearly,&lt;br/&gt;the LSAMP has had a positive
impact in the University during a period when CUNYs overall&lt;br/&gt;total
enrollment, both minority and non-minority, decreased from about 230,000 to
200,000,&lt;br/&gt;and is testimony to the success of the LSAMP
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;NYC LSAMP Phase III will augment and make permanent the
following systemic changes and&lt;br/&gt;reforms:&lt;br/&gt;- A hierarchical
organizational structure to foster delivery on its goal.&lt;br/&gt;-
Restructuring of gatekeeper calculus, chemistry and physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;-
Science and mathematics learning centers on CUNY campuses.&lt;br/&gt;- Seamless
academic transitions at all critical points, from high school to
graduate&lt;br/&gt;school.&lt;br/&gt;- The universitys investment in
undergraduate research as integral to the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
experience.&lt;br/&gt;- An undergraduate student and faculty research program
across college boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;- Sustainable agency and industry
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;- Joint planning and resource commitment with other
systemic initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;- Tracking individual student persistence to the
baccalaureate and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;- Producing a steady stream of high
school students entering SMET curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alliance
activities in Phase I and Phase II centered on curriculum reform (Phase I),
and&lt;br/&gt;integrating research into undergraduate education (Phase II). The
strategy of increasing&lt;br/&gt;the enrollment in the SMET disciplines via
curriculum reform in Phase I, led in a systemic&lt;br/&gt;manner to positioning
students to take advantage of the increased research opportunities&lt;br/&gt;in
Phase II. The Alliance Course Restructuring for gatekeeper calculus, chemistry,
and&lt;br/&gt;physics courses included an emphasis on collaborative learning, a
non-competitive approach&lt;br/&gt;to problem solving, and workshops conducted
by specially trained peer tutors and faculty&lt;br/&gt;members. For the period
1997-2001, CUNY enrolled over 46,000 students in NYC
LSAMP&lt;br/&gt;institutionalized or restructured courses. It was in this
context that over 5,800 students&lt;br/&gt;graduated with SMET degrees at the BS
level, with increased numbers of students participating in LSAMP activities as
research assistants. Phase III activities will involve a systemic approach to
increase the number of participants that continue on to graduate school or
teacher education at the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;