* 0217701
* Transmission Expansion in an Open Access Environment:  Reliability and Economics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Chen-Ching Liu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 01/31/2006
* USD 205,000.00

Transmission expansion is a nationally important area for reliable supply of
electric energy and yet it is seriously under-invested in the U.S. According to
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC), '"very few bulk transmission
line additions are planned; new regional planning entities, adequate pricing
incentives, and improved, streamlined approval processes also must be developed
to deal with the need for new transmission lines for an open
market."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a competitive environment, the Independent
System Operator (ISO) (or Regional Transmission Organization (RTO)) is charged
with the responsibility to maintain the system reliability of an interconnected
power grid. The ISO also operates the power grid and implements the transactions
of electric energy. However, the ISO does not invest in the transmission
expansion; the investors such as transmission owners do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
propose a stochastic model for the revenues of the transmission owners. We will
develop analytical methods that determine the point of decision where a
transmission own would be willing to invest in a transmission expansion project
based on the costs and revenues. The proposed method requires power system
optimization incorporating system security and congestion
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research is expected to make an
impact on how the market rules concerning transmission expansion should be
designed. The resulting rules would provide the necessary economic signals in
the market in order to ensure an adequate level of transmission capacity in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;