* 0217774
* Sevilleta LTER:    Long Term Ecological Research in a Biome Transition Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2002,11/30/2008
* James Gosz, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2008
* USD 3,177,024.00

The Sevilleta LTER (SEV) research site is located on the Sevilleta National
Wildlife Refuge in central New Mexico, where a junction of four biomes (Great
Plains Grassland, Great Basin Shrub-steppe, Chihuahuan Desert and Montane
Coniferous Forest) provides a rich assortment of Biome Transition Zones (BTZs).
Interacting with a highly variable climate, elevational range, complex
topography, geology, and soils, this provides a complex spatial and temporal
template for this project. SEV combines long-term research and an increasing
array of collaborative, short-term research efforts that range from genetics to
remote sensing of the landscape and focus on the floral and faunal properties of
transitions between grass and shrub life forms represented by two components of
the Chihuahuan Desert biome and their junctions with the Great Plains shortgrass
steppe biome. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed new work will build upon and expand
foundation studies ongoing since 1989 and initiate new long-term landscape
experiments and measurements to develop and test a general theory of the
dynamics of BTZs. A new conceptual framework will expand past studies to focus
on patch-scale dynamics, biotic and abiotic drivers, and the consequences of
different patch types, sizes, and their mosaics to landscape and regional scale
dynamics. A series of experiments will be initiated that focus on the importance
of plant-soil-animal-microbe interactions and feedbacks with ecosystem dynamics.
An iterative approach combines a synthetic simulation model with data collected
from short- and long-term interdisciplinary studies as a framework for extending
our conceptual model to additional transitions in the future.&lt;br/&gt; Results
will provide an important regional context for studies conducted within the
shortgrass steppe biome at the SGS LTER and within the Chihuahuan Desert biome
at the JRN LTER. Future studies will expand to other major biome representatives
at SEV (e.g., shrubsteppe of the Colorado Plateau, Pinon -Juniper woodlands).
These studies on other BTZs and ecotones present at SEV will further develop and
test BTZ theory applicable to understanding and predicting ecosystem response to
global change. Simulation modeling will be used to predict changes in the
location and composition of BTZs through time under changes in climate and
disturbance regime. Because the region is likely to experience a decade-long
drought, directional changes in climate, and increases in atmospheric
deposition, an understanding of the key processes driving patch and ecotone
dynamics is critical to an ability to manage and preserve the biodiversity and
natural resources of these systems. Common properties and patterns that can be
used for many types of boundaries at many scales are expected. Extrapolating
from patch mosaics, processes, and dynamics to the landscape and region will
also be critical in determining the contribution of the Sevilleta to regional
and global biodiversity and biogeochemical cycles.&lt;br/&gt;