* 0217866
* The Impact of Lean Manufacturing Practices and Principles on Electronics Manufacturers
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Marla Hacker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 82,215.00

This research links the application of specific lean manufacturing practices and
principles to organizational characteristics and business performance metrics
for electronics manufacturers. Lean manufacturing is distinguished from
traditional mass production in that it utilizes fewer resources, but results in
more and a larger variety of products often distinguished by high levels of
product quality and service. The emphasis of this research is on deriving from
theory a practitioner model that can be used by organizational leaders in their
decisions to invest in training, human resource development, equipment
purchases, and/or process development focused on creating a lean manufacturing
enterprise.

Current research demonstrates that manufacturing plants have improved operations
as a result of implementing lean manufacturing practices. However, there is
evidence to indicate that lean manufacturing may not be appropriate for all
manufacturers. Because of the rate at which technology evolves, electronic
manufacturers are under constant pressure to reduce new product introduction
cycle times, reduce product costs, and to incorporate new technology in
supporting processes and materials. While these pressures would seem to create
an environment ripe for the implementation of lean manufacturing principles and
practices, there is little research that links lean manufacturing implementation
to business results for this manufacturing sector. Because existing research and
the supporting literature are based on the automotive industry or related
assembly operations, this research extends the existing body of knowledge by
studying the role of lean manufacturing in the complex realm of electronics
manufacturing, specifically in the area of printed circuit board assembly
manufacturing.

The proposal describes two distinct projects to be undertaken in this research.
The first area is the development of a set of printed circuit assembly
manufacturing profiles that help identify the most relevant lean manufacturing
principles based on the key identifiers contained in the profile. This research
is accomplished through the development of survey targeted at understanding what
lean manufacturing principles and practices have been adopted. Defining
characteristics of these electronic manufacturers will be developed using a
multi-site case study. The second area of focus in the research is linking the
implementation of specific lean manufacturing principles and practices to
organizational results for an electronics manufacturer. This portion of the
research will utilize a single-site case study. This case study will focus on
the specific issues of implementing lean manufacturing practices in the
operations of a typical electronics manufacturer engaged in the assembly of
printed circuit boards utilizing both surface mount and through-hole process
technologies.