* 0217597
* Russian Basic Science:  Changes Since the Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Impact of International Support
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Loren Graham, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 199,814.00

Abstract SES 02-17597 Russian Basic Science: Changes Since the Collapse of the
Soviet Union and the Impact of International Support Loren Graham, MIT

The story of Russian science from the time of the advent of Gorbachev through
the collapse of the Soviet Union and on to the present is a very dramatic one,
but the details of that story are poorly known -- even in Russia. There is no
overall description of these events and an analysis of their consequences. In
just a few years one of the largest and most impressive scientific
establishments in the world nearly collapsed. The combination of a slashing of
the federal science budget to 20 percent of what it was before and the departure
of thousands of the most talented scientists damaged Russian science so
seriously that some observers predicted "the death of Russian science." We now
know that this prediction was incorrect; Russian science has survived and the
first signs of recovery are evident. However, during the transition period it
has become clear that the Soviet forms of the organization and financing of
research inherited by the new Russia are inappropriate for the democratic and
free society that is the hope of most Russian citizens. As a result the
financial supports and organizational principles of Russian science have either
changed or been seriously challenged. This proposal describes and analyzes these
changes, including the important influences exercised by foreign foundations
that have become active in supporting Russian science, strengthening, in the
process, new principles of peer refereeing and open competition. The PI will
work Irina Dezhina in Russia, using archival research, statistical data
analysis, interviews, and scholarly publications and reports of foundations and
government organizations to tell this story within a context of the historical,
political, and economic dimensions of the recent crisis of Russian science.

The product of their efforts will be articles and a book on the recent history
and current policies of Russian science. These publications should interest not
only to historians and science policy specialists, but educated people
everywhere, since several of the questions being considered are of general
interest: How should science change when it makes the transition from being in
an authoritarian society to a democratic one? What organizational structures
best promote excellence in research and teaching? Which aspects of foreign
models should be followed and how closely?