* 0217646
* Wide Bandgap II-VI Compounds for Quantum Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Martin Munoz, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2005
* USD 240,000.00

Quantum Cascade Lasers (QCLs) are a new kind of semiconductor laser based on
intersubband transitions within a quantum well (QW). Among the more attractive
features of QCLs are their unipolar transport, high power emission, ultrafast
modulation (&gt;100GHz) and generation of wavelengths in the mid and far
infrared, not ever obtained before. Considerable advances have been achieved in
the development of the QCLs during the last few years, which have led to the
appearance of the first commercial thermoelectrically cooled
QCLs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, there are still many limitations of these
lasers. A critical one is the unavailability of QCLs operating in continuous
wave (CW) mode at room temperature (RT). Another is the absence of QCLs
operating at short wavelengths, such as l=1.55mm, needed to develop ultrafast
optical communications. Both of these drawbacks are due to insufficient electron
confinement in the materials combinations presently used. Therefore, new systems
based on wide band gap materials are required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
proposes to explore the use of wide bandgap II-VI materials for the development
of QCLs. The large conduction band offsets and deep QWs offered by the II-VI
semiconductors, such as ZnCdMgSe/ZnCdSe, provide the possibility of higher
electron confinement (and consequently the opportunity to obtain QCLs operating
at RT in CW mode) and of QCLs that operate at 1.55mm for a new generation of
ultrafast optical communications lasers. An important issue in favor of using
II-VI semiconductors for QCLs is the fact that these devices are unipolar and do
not require p-type doping, which traditionally has been a problem in most of the
II-VI systems. While GaN-based materials are an alternative, the difficulties
associated with the growth of high quality multi-layered structures of the
nitride materials make them less attractive than the near lattice-matched, well-
developed II-VI material systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several II-VI systems
that are particularly promising for QCLs with low threshold current, operating
at RT and some of them that should be able to generate emission at 1.55mm will
be investigated. The QW properties, such as the energy levels available for
intersubband transitions, will be investigated using modulation spectroscopy and
other optical techniques. Such techniques have also been extensively utilized in
the past by the PIs. Once a system has been identified to have potential for QCL
applications, the QW structures will be optimized and incorporated in device
structures to investigate the emission and lasing
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;