* 0217922
* An EPR Spectrometer for Metallobiochemistry and Environmental Chemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Theodore Holman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 302,657.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of California, Santa Cruz for the
purchase of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectrometer. The goal of
this research program is to develop a deeper understanding of how metals,
especially those found in the environment, influence living systems. Metals such
as iron, copper, manganese and lead are found throughout our environment. Some
of these metals are found as natural components of living systems, such as
plants and bacteria, while others are contaminants. This research program
centered on the new EPR spectrometer will provide critical new information at
the molecular level as to how living systems store metals, utilize metals for
natural biological processes and respond to metal imbalances. &lt;br/&gt;This
research program brings together four interdisciplinary research groups from the
Departments of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry and Environmental Toxicology.
Working together, these research groups will examine the roles metals play in
the prion diseases which include mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
in humans, how metals are used in microbial metabolism, how cellular structures
are chemically modified by metals and how metals such as manganese distribute in
living systems and contribute to environmental diseases. This latter project is
motivated, in part, by the Canadian Government's recent approval of manganese as
a gasoline additive. In all of these projects, the molecular centers containing
the metals will be directly studied with unprecedented detail using the EPR
spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;Our fundamental goal is to reveal important new
molecular insights into how organisms use metals and respond to metal
imbalances. The specific research projects will significantly expand our
understanding of the basic biochemistry of metals. In addition, the findings
will identify potential toxic metal species that could ultimately damage
ecosystems. By identifying such species before they are widely distributed in
the environment, such as manganese as a gasoline additive, we may help prevent a
repeat of previous environmental catastrophes such as those experienced from
lead, PCBs and asbestos. The instrument will be used primarily in research
laboratories. From an educational perspective, having a new EPR spectrometer
will allow us to train our future undergraduate and graduate students with this
modern technique. We also plan to devote about 5% of the spectrometer time to
class laboratories so as to enhance education and expose a new generation of
chemists and environmental scientists to the fundamental technique of
EPR.&lt;br/&gt;