* 0217538
* NanoXerography: The Use of Electrostatic Forces to Pattern Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Stephen Campbell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 399,995.00

The objective of this program is to develop a method to print nanoparticles on a
substrate with 100 nm resolution. The proposed method uses electrostatic forces
to drive the assembly. This program includes three components: 1) the use of
patterned surface charges to trap and position nanoparticles; 2) the use of
externally biased electrodes to generate electric fields to trap and position
nanoparticles; and 3) the study of the interrelation of electrostatic field
strength at a substrate surface, thermal energy of the particles, and particle
localizability. The mid-term goal of this research is to enable parallel
fabrication of nanotechnological devices that use nanoparticles as building
blocks. Device examples that can be realized using nanoparticles as device
components are single and few electron transistors, quantum-effect-based lasers,
photonic bandgap materials, filters, and wave-guides. As a first application the
assembly of silicon nanoparticles to fabricate nanoparticle based transistors is
proposed. It is difficult to overstate the broader impact of this research, if
it proves successful. For example, materials could be created as nanoparticles
in the vapor or in solution, where they could be processed using well
established methods. The ability to localize particles and small components of
arbitrary materials on arbitrary substrates would allow the merging of
technologies based on otherwise incompatible materials. Examples of applications
include quantum electronic devices (addressed in this proposal), data storage,
integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics for wearable intelligence, and merged
optical/electronic structures for optical off-chip and cross-chip communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objectives of this proposal focus on
creating awareness and transmitting excitement about the PI's research as well
as exploratory, interdisciplinary research in general. It emphasizes on the
importance of providing continuous opportunities for student involvement
throughout their academic careers: 1) high school students and teachers will get
a first hand impression of research through lab tours and lab experiments; 2)
undergraduate students will be addressed through seminars where the PI presents
different aspects of the proposed research and by providing the opportunity of
direct research involvement through research assistantships, and honors thesis
projects; 3) graduate students from different disciplines will benefit through
participation in an interdisciplinary lecture in the area of Micro- and
Nanotechnology that the PI proposes to develop within this program. Societal
Implications: "Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology promise to have major
implications for health, wealth, and peace in the upcoming decades. Knowledge in
this field is growing worldwide, leading to fundamental scientific advances. In
turn, this will lead to dramatic changes in the ways that materials, devices,
and systems are understood and create." - after Mihail C. Roco. The proposed
research is one element to advance knowledge. It suggests a dramatic change in
the way that devices and systems are created.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;