* 0217830
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Preparation of Nanoscale Magnetite Dispersed Polymer Particles for Environmental Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Arup Sengupta, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 19,900.00

0217830 Sengupta

Description: This award is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Arun
Sengupta, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Lehigh University,
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and Dr. Ulker Beker, Department of Chemical
Engineering, Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. The primary area of
collaboration will encompass the preparation and characterization of
Magnetically Active Polymeric Particles (MAPPs) for passive environmental
monitoring. Partially sulfonated polymer beads will be prepared and magnetized
in Lehigh University using the three-step procedure. Magnetic susceptibility of
the particles will be determined at Lehigh University. One portion of the MAPPs
will be sent to Dr. Beker in Turkey where she will carry out a series of
sorption equilibrium studies with MAPPs, using both simulated and industrial
wastewaters containing chlorinated hydrocarbons and other volatile organic
compounds. Sorption studies will be carried out for multiple cycles with
different batches of MAPPs. Propanol will be used as the regenerant for
desorption. Subsequently, these MAPPs will be brought to Lehigh University by
Dr. Beker. Magnetic susceptibilities of MAPPs after various cycles will be
determined at Lehigh University and compared with the magnetic susceptibility of
the parent MAPPs. The resulting information on sorption isotherms along with
magnetic susceptibility data will help evaluate the effectiveness of MAPPs as
recyclable passive monitoring agents.

Scope: This project will allow a US scientist to collaborate with a Turkish
scientist in the area of nanoparticle development for environmental
applications. The research could lead to the development of technologically
important materials, and to products for environmental cleanups, especially of
environmental hazards such as organics and metal ions from waste. The project
will involve the training of a U.S. graduate student. The Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems provide funding for this project.