* 0217057
* Workshop: Geometry and Topology of Quotients, December 5-8, 2002, Tucson, Arizona
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Yi Hu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 07/31/2003
* USD 14,820.00

DMS-0217057&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P. Foth, P. Bressler, Y. Hu, and J.
Lu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for active research
mathematicians &lt;br/&gt;with limited means of support to attend and
participate in the&lt;br/&gt;Workshop on "Geometry and Topology of Quotients" to
be held at the &lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona in December of 2002. The main
speakers are &lt;br/&gt;Igor Dolgachev (Michigan), Mikhail Kapranov (Toronto)*,
&lt;br/&gt;Janos Kollar (Princeton)*, Robert MacPherson (IAS and
Princeton)*,&lt;br/&gt;Jun Li (Stanford), Reyer Sjamaar (Cornell), (* - to be
confirmed). The &lt;br/&gt;plenary lectures will survey recent progress and
current directions of&lt;br/&gt;research in Geometric Invariant theory and
Symplectic Reductions,&lt;br/&gt;explain connections with other disciplines and
applications to physics. In &lt;br/&gt;addition to principal lectures, there
will be sessions of contributed&lt;br/&gt;talks and round-table discussions. The
workshop will provide a forum for &lt;br/&gt;young researchers to meet and
interact with leading specialists as well&lt;br/&gt;as for interactions across
the traditional boundaries of&lt;br/&gt;disciplines. Women and minority
researchers are encouraged to participate. Further &lt;br/&gt;information is
available at&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; http://www.math.arizona.edu/~foth/gtq.html&lt
;br/&gt;------------------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;