* 0217915
* Collaborative Research: How Do Social and Habitat Complexities Shape Brain Structure?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Johann 'Hans' Hofmann, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 168,524.00

Caroly A. Shumway1, Hans A. Hofmann2&lt;br/&gt;1New England Aquarium; 2Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: How Do Social and Habitat
Complexities Shape Brain Structure?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human brain is
larger than that of any other primate species. As humans evolved, what
environmental or social forces caused our own brain expansion? If an animal
lives in an extended family group, does the need to identify individual members
within the group lead to a better ability to recognize faces, compared with
species that are more solitary? Since most vertebrate groups offer only a
limited number of species for comparison, these questions will be studied in the
species-rich African cichlid fishes that live in diverse habitats and show an
astonishing range of social behaviors. The principal investigators have found
that complex behaviors occur more often in complex rock environments than in
simpler sand habitats. Because of the large numbers of closely related but
behaviorally diverse species in each lake (which makes cichlids the "gold
standard" for comparative studies exploring how brain and behavior evolved), one
factor (e.g., social behavior) can be kept constant in a comparative study while
varying the other (e.g., habitat). In this way it has been possible to show that
both factors - environment and social - are important evolutionary forces. In
the present study brain structures and cognitive abilities (such as individual
recognition and spatial memory) of species differing in social behavior or
habitat will be compared. Ultimately, this work will shed light on how
environmental and social factors like monogamy and familial groups shape brain
structure and function. The complex behaviors being studied, such as spatial
memory and recognition, are of direct relevance to humans.&lt;br/&gt;