* 0217891
* A Longitudinal Study of the Effects of Absorptive Capacity and Alliance Networks on Innovation in the Global Pharmaceutical Industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Beiqing(Emery) Yao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2004
* USD 69,745.00

Scholars in a variety of disciplines, including organizational theory, strategic
management, and economics, have devoted substantial attention to two related
questions: why are some firms more innovative than others, and when does
innovation contribute to a firm's financial success. These questions warrant
attention because innovative firms are critical drivers of technological
progress and long-term economic growth. This study will enhance our
understanding of these relationships by investigating how characteristics of a
firm's scientific and technological knowledge, often referred to as its
absorptive capacity, and a firm's alliance network jointly affect its ability to
innovate. We focus particularly on how characteristics of absorptive capacity
and alliance networks affect the number and value of patents firms produce,
because these innovation outcomes positively affect firm profits and indicate
how quickly technologies are advancing. Absorptive capacity is believed to
enhance a firm's innovative capacity by enabling it to recognize the value of
externally generated discoveries, to assimilate novel insights, and to apply
this knowledge to technological development. However, attributes of firms'
knowledge stocks, and hence their absorptive capacity, vary greatly, and these
differences may influence innovative productivity. We examine how the breadth
and depth of a firm's absorptive capacity affect the number and value of the
patents it produces. Whereas absorptive capacity facilitates the utilization of
external knowledge, a firm's alliance network shapes the type and volume of
external scientific and technological knowledge it has access to. Certain
attributes of a firm's network, such as its size and the density of connections
among its partners, have been related to the number of patents it produces.
Studies have not yet explored how the type of knowledge a firm is exposed to
through its network affect the value of its innovations, or how network
variables and absorptive capacity interact to affect patent production. By
exploring specific characteristics of absorptive capacity and network structure,
and by investigating their interactive effects on innovation, we will learn when
these two facets of innovative capacity complement each other and when they may
substitute for one another. This is central to understanding how firms can make
the best use of their investments in research and development. Alliances present
opportunities for a firm to leverage the scientific and technological knowledge
it acquires through its own research and development. However, the best mix of
alliance partners may vary according to specific characteristics of a firm's
absorptive capacity, particularly the breadth and depth of that knowledge. Some
network structures may augment the value of a firm's absorptive capacity, while
others may play essentially the same role in the innovation process as a firm's
internal knowledge and hence could be viewed as a substitute for absorptive
capacity. Our study will also shed light on when firms are better served by
choosing between maximizing the quantity and the quality of their innovations,
and when they can achieve both outcomes with an appropriate configuration of
network partners and absorptive capacity. Finally, we expect to provide some
insight into the role of alliance networks in directing and pacing technological
progress. This study is set in the global pharmaceutical industry, where
scientific and technological knowledge is critical to innovation, alliances are
increasingly prevalent, and patents are effective and widely used to prevent
product imitation. The study may have some value for policy discussions of how
to spur innovation in a system of firms.