* 0217633
* The Stock Market and Innovative Capability in the Optical Networking Industry
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* William Lazonick, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2004
* USD 70,000.00

This project analyzes the impact of the stock market on the innovative
capabilities of high-technology companies that have been central to the "new
economy." Through in-depth comparative analyses of the accumulation of
innovative capabilities at various major optical networking companies, the
impacts of the changing roles of the stock market as well as the impact of
volatility in stock prices will be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In the
speculative boom of the late '90s, many highly touted start-ups with little
revenue were able to do IPOs with only a small portion of their stock being
issued to the public while raising unprecedented amounts of cash that could fund
future growth. A high stock price became important in the competitive bidding
among these companies for high-technology acquisitions, and hence played an
important role in determining which companies would exercise strategic control
over new technologies that they did not develop in-house. Then, to develop and
utilize the acquired technologies, the acquirer had to integrate the
capabilities of the acquired companies with its own capabilities. This meant
using a stock-based compensation for recruiting and retaining key personnel,
mostly in non-executive positions, who might otherwise have gone to work for
competitors. In established companies, stock option packages were used to keep
personnel from leaving to join start ups. Corporate stock thus came to play an
important ole in the accumulation of innovative capabilities by both new
ventures and going concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project analyzes the
impact of the use of corporate stock as an acquisition and compensation currency
on the accumulation of innovative capabilities by major optical networking
firms. How did such use of stock, entailing as it did pressure on corporate
executives to maintain high stock prices, affect the strategic decisions of
these executives to invest in innovative capabilities? Did the existence of
start-ups and high stock valuations bias top managers toward acquiring
innovative capabilities externally when their companies may have accumulated
these capabilities more effectively through internal development of the
technologies? Did the use of stock options as a key component of compensation
packages for large numbers of managerial and technical personnel motivate these
employees to engage in organizational learning for the companies that employed
them? Or did it encourage highly individualistic behavior, with concern for
mobility within the labor market?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Has the use of corporate
stock as an acquisition and compensation currency in the boom made these
companies more vulnerable than otherwise to the slump? Has the role of stock
changed in the downturn? This project promises to provide useful answers to
guide corporate growth strategies in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;