* 0217123
* Collaborative Research:  GOALI:  New Directions in Very Large-Scale Neighborhood Search
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* James Orlin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,002.00

This project is concerned with solving several classes of difficult
combinatorial optimization problems using very large-scale neighborhood (VLSN)
search algorithms. The VLSN search algorithms are neighborhood search algorithms
where the size of the neighborhood is very large, possibly exponential in terms
of the input size parameters, and enumerating all neighbors and evaluating them
is prohibitively expensive. The research relies on the use of improvement graphs
for searching large neighborhoods. Improvement graphs allow optimizing over very
large neighborhoods quickly. This methodology has been used to solve some
classic combinatorial optimization problems as well as scheduling problems that
have arisen in airline and railroad industries. For the problems that we have
addressed, VLSN search algorithms, when implemented well, are robust and provide
excellent solutions.

The research project addresses VLSN search algorithms for three problem classes.
The first problem class will be large-scale partitioning and constrained
partitioning problems arising in clustering, data mining and timetabling. The
second problems class will be integer multicommodity flow problems arising in
logistics and telecommunication. Integer multicommodity flow problems are
multicommodity flow problems where the flow of each commodity on any arc is
required to be integer. The third class of problems to be investigated will be
optional flight generation problem arising at United Airlines. The objective in
the optional flight generation problem is to determine a set of good potential
candidates for additional flight legs to be added to an airline schedule to
improve overall profitability. The research of the PIs on VLSN search algorithms
is motivated by the need to develop effective and practical heuristic
(approximate) solution procedures for large-scale and structurally complex
combinatorial optimization problems. The goal is to enhance the toolkit for
heuristic search by developing new methodologies with broad applicability. We
anticipate we and others will successfully develop and apply VLSN search
techniques to a wide range of important combinatorial problem including problems
arising in logistics and transportation and substantial savings will accrue by
the use of these methods.