* 0217567
* Representing Genes: Testing Competing Philosophical Analyses of the Gene Concept in Contemporary Molecular Biology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Paul Griffiths, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 95,046.00

SES 0217567 &lt;br/&gt;Representing Genes: Testing Competing Philosophical
Analyses of the Gene Concept in Contemporary Molecular Biology&lt;br/&gt;Paul
Griffiths, University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is widespread
agreement amongst historians and philosophers of biology that the gene concept
is not merely "vague" or "flexible," but rather that biologists in different
fields conceive of the term "gene" in one or more specific ways that reflect
their research practice. Philosophers and historians of science have made
various claims about precisely how and why the gene concept varies amongst
biologists and have argued that the variation is either functional or
dysfunctional with respect to the actual conduct of biological research.
Previous research by the PI has established that claims in this field can be
operationalized and tested by statistical analysis of questionnaire data
obtained from working biologists. The objective of this study is to construct,
in cooperation with leading researchers in the history and philosophy of biology
and with the help of researchers in other fields with relevant methodological
expertise, testable versions of&lt;br/&gt;philosophical claims about how groups
of contemporary biologists think about genes, and to test those claims. The
purpose of the study is not to arrive at one or more correct "definitions" of
the gene, but rather to map out the variation in the gene concept and to explore
its causes and its effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with a
workshop of leading researchers in history and philosophy of biology and others
with expertise in the relevant biological fields and in social scientific
research. The aim of the workshop is to agree on research questions and
operationalizations. It is to be followed by subject recruitment, data
collection, and data analysis. A second workshop at the end of the project is to
discuss the results and to plan publications by several overlapping
collaborations of workshop participants aimed at several different target
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the many impacts of this project, one
potential broader impact stands out. Although biologists are aware that the term
"gene" means different things in different fields, the outside world is left
with statements from different biologists that appear to be discussing the same
thing, while the validity of those statements, in fact, depends on the specific
gene concept held by the individual biologist. Thus, crucial law and policy
decisions may be made based on faulty public, lawmaker, and policymaker notions
of what import they should attach to these statements. The project can make a
significant contribution by highlighting this circumstance. &lt;br/&gt;