* 0217064
* C-RUI:  Spatial Modeling of a Biological Invasion:  the Spread of Sudden Oak Death and the Importance of Host Genetics, Environmental Forcings, and Community Structyre
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Richard Whitkus, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 810,656.00

Biological invasions represent a major component of global environmental change.
Invasions may lead to reduced biodiversity and often result in permanent
alterations to ecosystems.Invasive non-native plant pathogens have dramatically
affected ecosystems in many parts of the world.The mechanisms underlying
dispersal of these pathogens and their ecological consequences are critical
issues for conservation and ecosystem management.Spatial pattern is a
fundamental property of disease dynamics because it reflects the genetic
heterogeneity and environmental forces acting on pathogen dispersal and life
history.A multidisciplinary approach is required to solve the challenges of
1)incorporating fine-scale processes of pathogen dispersal into landscape-level
models and 2)integrating spatial variation in environmental factors and host
population genetics with disease incidence. In this proposal,we describe
research to analyze spatio-temporal dynamics of Phytophthora ramorum,an
emerging,and probably exotic,pathogen that causes a lethal disease of oaks and
tanoaks in coastal California.This disease,known as Sudden Oak Death (SOD),has
reached epidemic levels in several counties.The proposal integrates spatial data
on host genetics,community structure,and environmental variation with
investigations of mechanisms underlying spread of P.ramorum to model changes in
the distribution of this plant disease across the landscape.Model predictions
will identify critical factors that influence the distribution of SOD and
provide forecasts of habitat loss in oak woodlands as a consequence of SOD.This
proposal describes a multidisciplinary program to model the spread of a
destructive plant disease and to predict its ecological consequences.Our
objectives are not developed as discrete activities for individual
researchers,but rather a collaborative effort among researchers to attack a
single problem.We aim to accomplish the following: 1.Develop a statistically
based model that predicts spatial patterns of SOD risk on the landscape,based on
relationships among several critical environmental factors.These factors include
proximity to previously infected locations,genetic background of host
species,plant community structure,landscape structure,abiotic conditions,and
anthropogenic activities. 2.Develop a mechanistic model that predicts spatial
patterns of pathogen activity and host susceptibility based on empirical studies
of pathogen dispersal between hosts on fine spatial scales and on environmental
conditions conducive to pathogen reproduction and dispersal. 3.Develop a model
of SOD spread that integrates the most predictive components of the statistical
and mechanistic models. 4.Foster participation of undergraduates in this cross-
disciplinary research and integrate the research into the curriculum of core
courses in the Departments of Biology and Geography at Sonoma State University.
Sonoma State University is located within 20 km of the study area,which is
easily accessible to PI s and their students.Previous analyses of the
relationship between environmental variation and SOD spread have concentrated on
the most heavily impacted regions in Marin County where the pathogen has
infected trees throughout the study area.In contrast,the present study focuses
on SOD spread into new areas that presently show no sign of infection.We believe
that this approach will contribute substantially towards a greater understanding
of the biology of this pathogen and to our understanding of the ecology and
genetics of plant-pathogen interactions.The timing of this study will also
ensure involvement by motivated undergraduates at Sonoma State University who
wish to participate in research that everyone recognizes is of critical
significance to the larger community.