* 0217389
* Development of New Diamond Cell Technology for Ultrahigh-Pressure Single-Crystal Structure Analysis Using X-ray Diffraction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Charles Prewitt, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2005
* USD 350,000.00

0217389&lt;br/&gt;Mao, Dera, Prewitt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years,
increasing interest in ultrahigh-pressure research results primarily from the
unique possibility to simulate in the laboratory the conditions that are
characteristic of deep geological environments. The primary tool for achieving
static pressures above about 25 GPa is the diamond anvil cell (DAC). Apart from
isothermal compression studies, the DAC can also be used for in-situ experiments
from room pressure to several megabars at temperatures from close to 0 K to
several thousands of degrees. Most structure analysis at pressures above about
10 GPa has been limited to polycrystalline samples because the technology for
single-crystal diffraction studies at higher pressures is not well-developed.
This project will extend the pressure capability of single-crystal structure
analysis from 10 to 120 GPa and even higher pressures. This pressure region is
extraordinarily rich in phenomena that dramatically change electronic, magnetic,
thermal, elastic, and bonding properties of materials. Precise determination of
atomic positions and electron distributions accompanying these changes is the
key for understanding the processes. The experimental and computational
techniques we are planning to develop will make possible ultrahigh-pressure
crystal-structure studies with both laboratory-based and synchrotron x-ray
sources. With new developments in sample gaskets, pressure media, diamond
anvils, backing plates, and diamond cell design, we will be able to bring a
&gt;(10 ?m)3 sample of an unstrained single crystal to the pressures stated
above. Experiments based on these developments will provide definitive long-
sought answers to important scientific questions in Earth, planetary, and
materials sciences, including the fundamental changes of silicates, oxides,
ices, and condensed gases that are the main components of deep planetary
interiors. &lt;br/&gt;