* 0217293
* Large High Performance (LHP) Outdoor Shake Table
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Lelli VanDenEinde, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2004
* USD 6,189,843.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CMS-0217293&lt;br/&gt;Seible&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The George
E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) is a project
funded under the National Science Foundation Major Research Equipment and
Facilities Construction account. This cooperative agreement, awarded under NEES,
establishes a NEES large high performance (LHP) outdoor shake table site at the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and is an outcome of the peer review
of proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF 01-164, "NEES: Earthquake
Engineering Research Equipment, Phase 2." This outdoor shake table will be a 7.6
m x 12.2 m long single (horizontal) degree-of-freedom system. The table will
have a peak horizontal velocity of 1.8 m/s, maximum stroke of +/-0.75 m, maximum
gravity (vertical) payload of 200 MN, maximum overturning moment of 50 MN-m,
force capacity of actuators of 6.8 MN, and a frequency bandwidth from 0-20 Hz.
The major equipment for the LHP shake table facility consists of servocontrolled
dynamically-rated actuators with large-servo valves, a large power supply, a
vertical load/overturning moment bearing system, a digital three-variable real-
time controller, concrete foundation and reaction mass, and weatherproofing
system. The facility will be the only outdoor shake table in the U.S. and will
enable large/full-scale testing of structural systems and soil-foundation-
structure interaction that cannot be readily extrapolated from testing at
smaller scale, or under quasi-static or pseudo-dynamic test conditions, as well
as testing large-scale systems to observe their response under near source
ground motion. The LHP outdoor shake table will be located 15 km from campus at
the UCSD Camp Elliott field site. This two-acre site was selected so that the
shake table could be used in conjunction with an adjacent soil pit and laminar
shear soil box being provided by the California Department of Transportation.
This site will allow room for multiple test specimens to be constructed and
instrumented before placement on the shake table. A 177 kN rough terrain crane
will be provided at Camp Elliott for loading, unloading, and everyday
construction purposes. For heavier lifting capabilities, an 880 kN crane will be
available on an as needed rental basis, with the individual experiment requiring
the larger crane to cover this cost. This equipment will be operational by
September 30, 2004, and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment
site, with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new
earthquake engineering research testing capabilities through 2014. Shared-use
access and training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium. UCSD is
providing $1,363,000 in cost sharing for this facility. UCSD will integrate this
shake table equipment into its research program involving undergraduate and
graduate students, Department of Structural Engineering curriculum, and K-12 and
general public outreach. The University will also provide training opportunities
for outside faculty, students, and practitioners through web-based tutorials and
on-site training. &lt;br/&gt;