* 0217212
* Northwest Girls Collaborative Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Karen Peterson, EdLab Group Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 02/29/2004
* USD 99,982.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the Pacific Northwest there currently exist
numerous organizations providing&lt;br/&gt;valuable but uncoordinated activities
and support services related to motivating and supporting&lt;br/&gt;girls
interest in SMET careers. Twenty such organizations in Washington State
alone.&lt;br/&gt;The activities of these groups are not coordinated and in fact,
some groups appear to be in&lt;br/&gt;competition for access to girls and to
resources, particularly for resources from the corporate&lt;br/&gt;community.
This funding source, in the face of recent layoffs, is less inclined to support
such&lt;br/&gt;programs. Under these circumstances it becomes increasingly
important to coordinate existing&lt;br/&gt;and evolving activities to
effectively utilize resources.&lt;br/&gt;This project includes three primary
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination and Outreach: In partnership with
the Northwest Girls Coalition,&lt;br/&gt;document and promote coordination and
collaboration among girl serving SMET&lt;br/&gt;programs in Washington and
Oregon and establish an on-going communication system&lt;br/&gt;linking these
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creation of a Program Evaluation Rubric: In
collaboration with the Northwest&lt;br/&gt;Regional Educational Lab create a
program rubric reflecting best practice models and&lt;br/&gt;program assessment
tool based on the rubric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mini-Grants: With the support of
Washington and Oregon MESA, we will offer mini-&lt;br/&gt;grants to a minimum of
twenty-two girl-serving STEM focused programs to
support&lt;br/&gt;collaboration, assessment activities and projects related to
addressing gaps and overlaps in&lt;br/&gt;service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is under the guidance of a Champions Board made up of individuals such
as Dean of the College of Engineering at the University of Washington, current
presidents of the state Math and Science teacher associations, and
representatives from both the Washington and Oregon state education
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;