* 0217831
* US-Botswana Cooperative Research:  Geologic and Geophysical Investigations of the Southwestern Branch of the East African Rift System
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Estella Atekwana, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2006
* USD 63,742.00

0217831 Atekwana

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project between
Professor Estella Atekwana, with the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the
University of Missouri-Rolla, Professors Motsoptse Modisi and Henri Kampunzu,
with the Department of Geology at the University of Botswana, and Professor
Stanislas Sebagenzi, with the Department of Geological Sciences in the
University of Lubumbashi, in the Democratic Republic of Congo. They will study
geologic and tectonic processes during incipient rifting in the East African
rift.

Rift basins represent the initial stages in the development of passive margins.
They are also target areas for sediment accumulation, and these sediments
typically contain paleoenvironmental and climatic indicators that can provide
important clues to past climate and global change. The seismically active
Southwestern Branch of the East African Rift system (EARS) is one of the few
places in the world where embryonic rifting can be studied at the beginning of
continental extension--before volcanism has occurred. Atekwana and her
colleagues will conduct kinematic studies, using a combination of field data and
remote sensing data from sites in Botswana, Zambia, and Democratic Republic of
Congo, in order to: 1) assess the role of pre-existing structures on rift basin
development; 2) determine fault kinematics and direction of the extension; 3)
characterize the geometry of the basins, and the underlying crustal and
lithospheric structure of the Southwestern Branch; 4) assess current models for
fault array development and linkage to form border faults; and 5) develop
tectonic and geologic models for the evolution of rifts during the incipient
stages of continental extension. The group will also map zones of potential
earthquake activity. This project combines Dr. Atekwana's expertise in
environmental geophysics and tectonics, with Dr. Kampunzu's expert knowledge of
African geology, and that of Dr. Modisi, who is a structural geologist. Dr.
Sebagenzi has worked on the extension of the Southwestern rift in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Zambia, and he will contribute field data for those
locations as well as his gravity data. The project also includes the
participation of a student from the University of Missouri-Rolla as well as a
student from the University of Botswana.

The results of this project should expand the current knowledge about the
geologic and tectonic processes that occur during the earliest stages of
continental extension. The maps on potential earthquake activity will provide
valuable hazard and mitigation information that can be applied to similar rifts
that experience some of the largest and most damaging earthquakes in the world.
The maps will also provide a detailed picture of the subsurface geology of this
part of the Kalahari, which may be important for mineral resource exploration.

The Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
Sciences are jointly providing support for this project.

