* 0217399
* GLOBEC-01: Patterns of Energy Flow and Utilization on Georges Bank
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Jeremy Collie, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2007
* USD 507,382.00

This project synthesizes key aspects of production and energy flow, based on US-
GLOBEC studies in the Northwest Atlantic, and augment the US-GLOBEC data with
information from other sources on production processes at the lower and upper
levels of the food web. The primary objectives examine several alternate model
outcomes of GLOBEC and GLOBEC-related studies that help address a number of
outstanding issues and re-examine patterns of energy flow on Georges Bank. This
research enhances and expands the findings of previous investigations, with
explicit consideration of factors not addressed in earlier models of this system
including: (1) the microbial food web, (2) consideration of new and recycled
primary production, (3) spatial heterogeneity of primary and secondary
production on Georges Bank, (4) changes in biomass and production at higher
trophic levels, and (5) the effects of environmental forcing on production
processes. Incorporation of these elements into the modeling effort permits a
more detailed understanding of production processes on the Bank. &lt;br/&gt;The
first four elements provides the broader ecosystem context, while the last
provides the link to one of the US-GLOBEC program.s principal themes, climate
change. The latter is being addressed by comparing several different decadal-
scale time periods that reflect differing environmental and fish community
regimes: (1) the cold 1960s characterized by abundant groundfish stocks fished
by distant water fleets; (2) the 1970s, characterized by "average" water
temperatures, increased domestic fishing effort, and depletion of groundfish
stocks; (3) the 1980s, characterized by "average" water temperatures,
overfishing of groundfish stocks, and increases in elasmobranchs; and (4) the
"average" temperature, lower salinity 1990s, characterized by reduced fishing
mortality, rebuilding of groundfish stocks, and increases in elasmobranchs and
pelagic fish. Because of large-scale changes in the fish community structure as
a result of over-exploitation, a full understanding of the population dynamics
of the target species will not be attained without consideration of changes in
other ecosystem components. Individual model networks are being formulated to
represent each of the above periods. Subsequently, dynamic modeling will be
developed to describe the transformations or shifts between these regimes.
&lt;br/&gt;