* 0217001
* The Origins and Determinants of Technological Change in Late Nineteenth Century Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Edward Beatty, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

SES 0217001 -- The Origins and Determinants of Technological Change in Late
Nineteenth Century Mexico&lt;br/&gt;Edward Beatty, University of Notre
Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Where domestic invention and subsequent innovation
largely underlay early industrialization in Britain and the United States, later
industrializing nations relied heavily on the importation of technologies from
abroad. Yet new machines and processes rarely transferred across national
borders without substantial friction and adaptation in new environments.
Moreover, transfer did not always or automatically lead to the diffusion of
productivity gains and, in many places, had little impact on domestic
technological capabilities. This historical project uses late nineteenth century
Mexico to explore current conceptions in the economic and social construction
literature about technology transfer and its impact on domestic capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the project reconstructs Mexico's late-century
experience of technological change. Historians of Mexico have long known that
new productive technologies lay at the center of accelerating economic and
social change in these decades. But they have conventionally viewed this
experience as one dominated by foreign technologies, initiated by foreign
entrepreneurs, and limited to a relative handful of industries and regions.
Railroads, electricity, and metallurgy provide the classic cases in a limited
and anecdotal literature. Most assert that there was little diffusion of know-
how, arguing implicitly or explicitly that imported foreign techniques had
little or no impact on domestic capabilities. Yet no systematic work on these
issues has been done. Using quantitative evidence and several case studies, this
project traces and explains central patterns of technological
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the project explores those factors which
shaped the relationship between technology transfer and domestic technological
capabilities. This requires moving beyond attention to the physical importation
of machines and processes. Disparities between imported technology and the local
environment (including the economic, political, and socio-cultural context)
condition whether technology transfer leads to dependence or to an increased
capacity to invent, improve, and innovate. In late nineteenth century Mexico,
these disparities were substantial, and the question remains, to what degree did
they retard diffusion and domestic capacity or, in contrast, were surmountable?
Recent work suggests that in some cases (but not all) socio-cultural differences
were malleable and technology transfer could effectively stimulate an initially
laggard domestic capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based upon the archival research
supported by this award, the project makes contributions to the study of Mexican
economic history as well as to historical studies of technology. The PI adopts
insights from both economic and social approaches to technological change and
ultimately seeks to integrate these in publications and teaching. Collaborative
work with scholars in Mexico and Spain broadens the reach of this work. In
addition to detailed case studies, one by-product includes a computer database
of 11,000 Mexican patents registered between 1850-1910. The database is to be
made available to researchers in Mexico and elsewhere. Other projected outcomes
of the project include a series of articles and a university press
monograph.&lt;br/&gt;