* 0217221
* Girls Creating Games: Increasing Middle School Girls' Interest in Technology
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2006
* USD 892,552.00

The vast success of products like the "GameBoy" sends a clear message that
technology is&lt;br/&gt;the domain of boys. The Girls Creating Games Program is
a demonstration project designed&lt;br/&gt;to challenge this message by teaching
girls to design and program a computer game. This &lt;br/&gt;project is unique
in its approach: it puts girls in the role of producers of technology, rather
&lt;br/&gt;than simply consumers. One hundred eighty middle school girls will
participate in a study &lt;br/&gt;to determine whether producing technology
(computer game design) can increase girls'&lt;br/&gt;fluency, interest, active
participation and persistence in technology studies. The&lt;br/&gt;specific
project goals are to a)increase girls' knowledge, interest, attitudes,
and&lt;br/&gt;confidence with computers, b) increase adults capacity to support
girls in technology,&lt;br/&gt;and c) add to research on the kinds of programs
and technologies that increase the interest &lt;br/&gt;and persistence of middle
school girls in technology studies and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will take place with small groups of girls after school and
during&lt;br/&gt;the summer in a small, urban county (70% White, 21% Hispanic)
in California. It involves an&lt;br/&gt;unusual partnership between four
entities: 1) researchers and program developers from a &lt;br/&gt;non-profit
health promotion agency (ETR Associates); 2) school personnel and
students&lt;br/&gt;from New Brighton Middle School; 3) staff and youth from a
Boys &amp; Girls Club; and 4) &lt;br/&gt;female technology students, teachers,
and professionals from local colleges and&lt;br/&gt;companies. This partnership
is essential for building knowledge (e.g., identifying&lt;br/&gt;effective
program strategies to increase girls interest and persistence
in&lt;br/&gt;technology studies), and increasing social capital (e.g., building
the capacity of&lt;br/&gt;adult female role models, teachers, and staff to
provide a supportive environment).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teaching computer game
design holds great promise as an intervention strategy for&lt;br/&gt;increasing
girls' interest in technology. Indeed, interactive games have an
early&lt;br/&gt;influence on theskills and attitudes that are the best
predictors of future &lt;br/&gt;technology-related behavior (Greenfield &amp;
Cocking, 1996; Levine &amp; Donitsa-Schmidt,&lt;br/&gt;1998; Subrahmanyam &amp;
Greenfield, 1998). Only two other known programs (with &lt;br/&gt;elementary and
high school students) have used game creation as an intervention
&lt;br/&gt;strategy or as part of a research-driven agenda (Kafai, 1995; Miller,
Chaika, &amp;&lt;br/&gt;Groppe, 1996). Our work extends that research by working
with middle school students &lt;br/&gt;in an informal learning (out of school)
environment, and using theoretically and&lt;br/&gt;empirically-based program
activities that build on girls development research. &lt;br/&gt;Our project is
also innovative in that it includes identity formation as part of
the&lt;br/&gt;program as a way to transform, not simply respond to existing
gender roles&lt;br/&gt;(Cassell &amp; Jenkins, 1999). Our program strategies are
designed to appeal to girls.&lt;br/&gt;They include having fun with computers;
linking technology with its real-world &lt;br/&gt;application; focusing the game
content on social issues; using a collaborative &lt;br/&gt;instructional model;
involving technical female role models, school teachers and &lt;br/&gt;program
staff; and assessing the impact of game design on participants as well
as&lt;br/&gt;the teachers and staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
intervention will be evaluated using a quasi-experimental, pre-post
test&lt;br/&gt;design. Two hypotheses will be tested. First, compared to the
control group, the &lt;br/&gt;participants in the intervention group will report
a greater increase in problem-solving&lt;br/&gt;and computer skills, interest in
computers, positive attitude toward computers, intention &lt;br/&gt;to pursue
computer studies, confidence using computers, knowledge about tech
careers,&lt;br/&gt;and support to pursue a career in technology. Second, the
instructional model that uses &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with peers and guidance
from teachers, staff, and female role models &lt;br/&gt;will increase the
adults' capacity and interest to support girls active participation&lt;br/&gt;
in technology, and challenge stereotypes about who is good at computers. Data
will &lt;br/&gt;be collected using surveys, interviews, and student notebooks.
The findings will result &lt;br/&gt;in a replicable version of the program that
can be used to increase girls interest in &lt;br/&gt;technology and adults
capacity to support them in other school and after school settings.