* 0217860
* Collaborative Research:    A Framework for Effective Optimization via Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Sigrun Andradottir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 07/31/2006
* USD 200,001.00

We will develop algorithms (and supporting theory) for optimizing the expected
performance of a stochastic system with respect to discrete decision variables.
We assume that the stochastic system of interest is represented by a simulation
model, and hence that the performance of this system can only be estimated with
noise. Our focus is on ``general-purpose'' optimization techniques that do not
exploit particular problem structure, because we want our techniques to be
suitable for inclusion in general-purpose simulation software. The goal is to
produce algorithms that have provable asymptotic performance, competitive
finite-time performance, and valid statistical inference at termination. The
keys to our approach are (1) our algorithms will work within a global guidance
framework that guarantees asymptotic convergence, while giving us wide latitude
to be aggressive and adaptive; (2) within this framework, we will embed
aggressive local-improvement schemes; (3) we will enhance the local-improvement
schemes with highly efficient selection-error control to insure improvement even
in the presence of estimation error; and (4) we will provide valid statistical
inference at algorithm termination so that the solution reported as best will be
the best, or near best, of all those solutions actually visited by the search,
with a prespecified confidence level.

In the United States, computer simulation is widely used to design and improve
("optimize") manufacturing, service, military, telecommunication and financial
systems that are subject to uncertainty. Our research will provide theoretically
sound optimization algorithms that can be incorporated into new or existing
simulation software packages. There is a critical need for this research,
because every day simulation users are formulating and attempting to solve
optimization-via-simulation problems using commercial products that ignore, or
only slightly notice, that the simulation experiment incorporates uncertainty.
These commercial products often work well, but they can also be dramatically
misled, and the user has no indication of, or protection against, the incorrect
and costly decisions that may result. The availability of optimization tools in
nearly all commercial simulation modeling packages implies that optimization-
via-simulation problems will be "solved." The question is whether they will be
solved efficiently with theoretically sound algorithms that provide specific
guarantees of, and inference on, their performance. The goal of our research is
to develop such optimization-via-simulation algorithms, representing a
substantial advance over the state of the art in both theory and practice.