* 0217560
* Collaborative Research:  Majorities and Minorities:  A New Look at Ethnonationalism and Electoral Extremism
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Jeffrey Kopstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2004
* USD 24,455.00

&lt;br/&gt;Scholars agree that multi-ethnic democracies are vulnerable to the
polarizing and zero-sum political competition that breeds anti-liberal politics.
Yet despite this consensus there is still fundamental disagreement about who
defects from liberal democratic politics and the conditions under which this
occurs. This proposal will identify the social bases of extremist voting in
multi-ethnic democracies. An original data base of 20 elections and matching
censuses from the interwar era (1920-1939) in five East European countries will
be assembled. Settlement-level voting data will be matched with census data on
ethnicity, language, religion, occupation, social class, settlement size,
industrial structure, and the structure of land holding. Estimates of social
support for extremist and non-extremist parties among discrete social and ethnic
groups will be derived using aggregate data analysis and ecological regression
techniques. Causal models of extremist voting will also be developed using the
derived individual estimates as dependent variables. &lt;br/&gt;This project
serves three broader objectives. First, the estimates obtained will bring new
information to bear on a number of questions regarding the social bases of
political radicalism, in particular the contexts under which minority and other
groups defect from liberal democratic politics. Second, in explaining electoral
behavior in countries that would eventually fall victim to fascism and
communism, this project will shed new light on deeply divisive scholarly and
political debates concerning the loyalty of ethnic minorities and the role of
both ethnic minorities and majorities in undermining first wave democracies.
Finally, the resultant data base as well as estimated vote choice will be put in
the public domain, allowing others to explore their own questions and theories
concerning electoral behavior in multi-ethnic democracies. &lt;br/&gt;