* 0217744
* Collaborative Research on Landslide Generated Tsunamis and Tsunami-Structure Interactions Using NEES Tsunami Basin Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Philip Liu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

0217744, Philip Liu, Cornell University "Collaborative Research on Tsunami-
Structure Interaction Using the NEES Tsunami Facility"

This project addresses the forces generated by, and the destructive effects of,
tsunamis. At some coastal locations, the tsunami runup occurs with a bore-like
wave front with destructive energy - the steep wave front exerts high impact
forces on coastal structures. In other locations, the greatest damage occurs
during the rundown phase, where masses of water sweep already weakened
structures back toward the ocean. As tsunamis move up and down a coast, they can
transport large quantities of debris, such as cars, boats, boulders, and poles.
These objects can impact and damage structures along the paths of the tsunami.
Therefore, a means of estimating the forces on a structure resulting from the
impact from a tsunami-borne moving object is needed.

The objectives of this research program are. (1) To understand the dynamic
interactions between a tsunami, rigid and flexible structures, and moving
objects; (2) To improve the modeling capability of the complex runup flows
within the context of their interactions with flexible structures and moving
objects; and (3). To develop benchmark problems with high quality experimental
data for validating numerical simulation models. These objectives are achieved
via an integrated experimental and theoretical (numerical) research program. The
analysis is based on the Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations and
the turbulence closure model, yielding simulation models describing the
interactions between a tsunami, moving objects and flexible structures. To
validate the simulation models, a series of experiments is conducted at the new
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) tsunami facility at Oregon
State University. The research team at Cornell University also participates in
the experiments at OSU, both in person and remotely using the facilities of the
NEESgrid.

This research operates at the interface between traditional fields of science
and engineering - fluid dynamics, structural mechanics, soil mechanics and
applied mathematics - and thereby serves as a bridge among these fields. The
numerical simulation model being developed can be used as a research or design
tool. For instance, engineers can use it to perform preliminary designs for
offshore and coastal structures, and to study the impact of coastal structures
on the environment. It can also be employed as a research tool to investigate
ship slamming, submarine hydrodynamics, and mine detection methodology.