* 0217728
* A Landscape Approach to Archaeological Variability at the Acheulian to Middle Stone Age Transition in the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 274,176.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation a team of archaeologists and
geologists led by Dr. Sally McBrearty will carry out three seasons of field work
in the Baringo region of Kenya. The team will investigate how Middle Pleistocene
landuse patterns changed with the appearance of Homo sapiens in the East African
Rift Valley about 300,000 years ago. They will focus upon three stratigraphic
intervals within the Kapthurin Formation, where sites containing Acheulian
artifacts, thought to have been made by Homo erectus, are interstratified with
those containing Middle Stone Age artifacts, thought to have been made by Homo
sapiens. The ancient topography will be reconstructed by geological mapping with
laser transit, and a three-dimensional model of each target interval will be
reconstructed using GIS software. The ancient plant and animal communities will
be documented through the study of mammalian and plant fossils, as well as
fossil soil and fossil tooth stable carbon and oxygen isotopes. Surface
collection, trial trenches, and horizontal excavation at two sites per
stratigraphic interval will provide evidence for early human behavior in the
form of stone tools and fossil bone which has been processed for food by early
hominids. Patterns of association of these behavioral traces of with topographic
features and plant communities will be sought for each target interval. A change
in landuse patterns with early Homo sapiens, reflecting greater cognitive
abilities, technical competence, and geographic range, can be predicted on
anatomical and archaeological grounds, but the evidence to date has been drawn
from widely dispersed sites which are not well dated. The Kapthurin Formation is
confined to a single depositional basin, and the ages of the stratigraphic
intervals to be studied are well calibrated by the 40Ar/39Ar dating method. Any
landuse patterns detected in the three stratigraphic intervals will be compared
to assess the nature and tempo of change through time. Dr. McBrearty and her
collaborators will focus on five questions: 1) Is there a detectable change in
landuse patterns between the Acheulian and Middle Stone Age? 2) Did Middle Stone
Age hominids use a broader array of microhabitats than Acheulian hominids, such
as uplands and distal floodplains, in addition to stream and lakeside settings?
3) Were Middle Stone Age hominids able to range further from sources of water or
raw material for stone tool making than Acheulian hominids? 4) Were either
Acheulian or Middle Stone Age tool makers designing specific implements to
exploit particular habitats? 5) How does the competence of Acheulian hunters
compare with hunters of the Middle Stone Age? This research is important because
it will illustrate the nature of the behavior of the earliest members of Homo
sapiens and illuminate some of the processes leading to the origin of our
species.