* 0217371
* Collaborative Research:  Complex Networks Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Alfredo Garcia, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2005
* USD 73,530.00

This research project will study optimization algorithms rooted in the ideas of
game theory in the context of complex network optimization, and particularly
decentralized network optimization. Probably the central issue in managing such
decentralized networks has been how to set prices so as to motivate the
competing users to evolve to an overall system optimal configuration. The
research will investigate the powerful paradigm of economic competition in the
framework of artificial dynamic games that are played off-line, resulting in an
algorithm that is potentially practical for large-scale systems optimization.
The basic paradigm that will be investigated derives from Fictitious Play which
is an adaptive procedure wherein each player assumes that other players will
play according to the empirical distribution of their previous plays. The
Fictitious Play method is a novel paradigm for optimization that draws from
several distinct disciplines and application areas, including classical
optimization, game theory, transportation science, and queueing network
protocols. The robust nature of the algorithm allows for the ill-structured
black box models of real systems which seldom exhibit the kind of smoothness
properties that classical optimization methods demand. Its applicability in the
context of two important real-world systems: a) internet traffic routing
protocols and b) dynamic route guidance will be tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex networks optimization is an important capability
in a society increasingly dominated by ever more complex networks of people and
machines. Examples include intelligent transportation systems, computer
networks, and supply chains of customers and suppliers. The success of the
research will lead to the development of a theoretical basis for the
optimization of such complex-structured systems. The applicability of the
proposed algorithmic paradigm of game theory through its application to
realistic problems arising in the design and operation of the communications and
transportation networks will be tested and refined. This research will not only
lead to potential improvements in these application arenas but will also
necessitate significant interactions with industry and government to insure
realism for the models and data developed. &lt;br/&gt;