* 0217653
* Integrative Functional Genomic Resource Development in Vitis Vinifera: Abiotic Stress and Wine Quality
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Pedro Mendes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,732,858.00

Abiotic stress in the form of drought, salinity, and cold has a major impact on
grape production and quality. Several studies have shown that water-deficit-
stressed grapevines produce superior quality wine. The molecular genetic and
biochemical basis for this correlation remains poorly understood. An integrative
and quantitative analysis of mRNA, protein, and metabolite changes following
abiotic stress imposition is required to enhance production efficiency under
stress conditions and to understand the plant-derived contribution to
constituents of wine quality. It will also require the customization and
application of comprehensive bioinformatics systems to track and analyze changes
that arise in response to abiotic stress and potentially related aroma, flavor,
and color characteristics of grape juice and wine. One long-term goal of our
research is to develop comprehensive genomic tools to facilitate the genetic
engineering of improved abiotic stress tolerance traits in V. vinifera. The
specific objectives for accomplishing this goal include: 1) extensive gene
discovery through large-scale expressed sequence tag (EST) sequencing and mRNA
expression profiling using oligonucleotide microarray-based expression
monitoring in roots, leaves, and fruits of grapevines exposed to multiple
abiotic stresses; 2) global mRNA expression profile data will be complemented by
protein expression analyses using state-of-the-art proteomics methodologies; and
3) identification of specific metabolites and metabolite profiles in grapevines
and fruit following abiotic stress that confer desirable aroma, flavor and color
quality characteristics and improved health benefits. Metabolite profiles from
grape juice of well-watered and water-deficit-treated vines will be compared
with quantitative data from mRNA and protein expression patterns using
comprehensive bioinformatics systems to store and analyze data sets. Ultimately,
these data sets will be integrated into a reliable prediction model for wine
characteristics. The proposed research will greatly facilitate future gene
discovery and enable improvements to be made in both production efficiency and
wine quality under environmentally adverse growing conditions.