* 0217176
* Biomedical Technologies, Ethics, and Islam in Contemporary Egypt
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Faye Ginsburg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 08/31/2004
* USD 9,605.00

This dissertation project posits that biomedicine, even in the face of mounting
ethical dilemmas raised by Islamic scholars' condemnations of new body-modifying
and life-altering possibilities such as organ donation, maintains authority and
social legitimacy in the culture of contemporary Egypt. Further, the project
proposes that the Egyptian state plays a crucial role in maintaining biomedical
authority and its cultural legitimacy by closely mediating the relationship
between Egypt's biomedical community and the opinions of Islamic legal
scholarship. The project seeks to critique the polarization of "Islam" and
"science," predominant in local and international discourse, by uncovering the
ways in which the production of knowledge about bioethics in the domains of
biomedicine and Islamic scholarship in Egypt in fact occur within the same
social and structural field. This study further questions how patients'
interests and understandings of bioethical dilemmas fit within this
institutional complex in Egypt through a detailed ethnography of the reception
and application of emerging biomedical technologies, Islamic legal decisions
about them, state legislation, and their consumption by the general public. The
politics of organ donation, currently the central problematic in contemporary
Egyptian bioethics, constitutes a primary site through which to analyze how
these various institutions manage bioethical debates. The project will rely on
ethnographic analysis of biomedical practice involving organ donation in
clinical settings (based in Kasr el Aini Teaching Hospital) in order to analyze
patients' lived experiences of these debates. Specifically, it will examine the
ways in which physicians and patients encounter and manage ethical dilemmas.
Further evidence will be drawn from analyses of medical training in ethics
(whether explicit or implicit), interviews with Islamic legal scholars and state
legislators, and textual analyses of contemporary bioethical debates in Egypt
(including Islamic legal texts, state legislative reports and decisions, media
reports, and biomedical treatises). This project will contribute significantly
to the study of how Islamic scholarship deals with, and may often be
overshadowed by, new scientific knowledge. It will also offer a non-western case
study to the emerging field of science studies, in which scholars have provided
analyses of the ways in which biomedical knowledge is produced and codified into
daily practice. By focusing on ethics in an Islamic context, this study will
offer new insights into the role religion plays in simultaneously embracing and
shunning new biotechnologies. The study focuses on the place of an "Islamic
response" to biotechnologies within the confines of the modern state, and within
the context of global debates about bio-ethics. Results from this research will
have broader implications for understanding what the collusion among dominant
fields of knowledge (Islamic scholarship, science, and state legislature), in
their negotiation of bio-ethical concerns, means for ordinary people faced with
new technological possibilities for the management of their lives.