* 0217366
* Large Displacement Soil-Structure Interaction Facility for Lifeline Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Thomas O'Rourke, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2004
* USD 2,137,279.00

ABSTRACT 0217366 Stewart The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) is a project funded under the NSF Major Research
Equipment and Facilities Construction appropriation. This cooperative agreement,
under NEES, establishes a NEES collaborative facility for advanced experimental
investigations for large displacement soil-structure interactions in lifeline
systems. Cornell, in partnership with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI),
will develop advanced experimental facilities to simulate, at both centrifuge-
scale and full-scale, capabilities for testing, evaluation, and analysis of
soil-structure-foundation interaction (SFSI) in critical lifeline facilities.
Full-scale testing usually is expensive and time consuming so supplementary
centrifuge experimental models and analytical/numerical simulations will be used
to expand the scope of the testing, as well as to investigate parameter
sensitivity and identify possible unforeseen effects prior to full-scale tests.
This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program
solicitation NSF-01-164, "NEES Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment, Phase
2." Equipment located at Cornell will consist of upgrading the existing servo-
hydraulic system for large geotechnical and structural testing of lifeline
systems, and includes a) a hydraulic distribution system with one 190 liter/min
(lpm), 3-station hydraulic service manifold and three 1-station manifolds, each
with 115 volt controls and 1 liter accumulator, b) electronic control systems
and controllers, c) two large stroke hydraulic structural actuators with load
capacities of 295 kN tension to 500 kN tension with strokes of +/- 0.91m, d) one
large stroke hydraulic structural actuator with load capacities of 445 kN
tension 650 kN compression with a stroke of +/- 64 m, e) one 227 lpm, 21MPa
hydraulic pump, and f) friction grips for use in cyclic testing of advanced
composites used in lifeline retrofit and design. In addition, a modular reaction
wall will be designed, constructed, and installed at Cornell to accommodate the
actuators used for large-scale physical models of reinforced composite
cementitious materials used in bridge structures. Other support equipment at
Cornell consists of a networked data acquisition system that will be tied in to
the NEES data network. Video cameras and operational systems also will be
installed for direct support of teleparticipation capabilities. New equipment at
RPI consists of two advanced large split centrifuge boxes for longitudinal and
transverse movements. These two new advanced containers allow for modeling large
ground displacement of both large- and small-diameter pipeline centrifuge
models, pulling on an elbow, etc. In addition, special container(s) to be used
with existing RPI in-flight shaker (the shaker is provided under a separate NEES
award to RPI) will study: a) the effect of uplift forces on pipelines during
soil liquefaction, b) lateral forces on pipelines due to liquefaction induced
lateral spreading, and c) pipeline damage due to slope failure. The equipment at
Cornell and RPI will be operational by 2004 or earlier and will be managed as a
national shared-use NEES equipment site, with teleobservation and teleoperation
capabilities, to provide new earthquake engineering research testing
capabilities through 2014. This NEES equipment site will be connected to the
NEES network system through a high performance network. Shared-use access and
training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium. Both Cornell and RPI
will integrate the testing equipment into research and outreach programs at the
undergraduate and graduates levels, as well as promote additional interest in
earthquake engineering and simulation at the K-12 levels.