* 0217206
* Linking Teacher "Talk" and the Development of Children's Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Peter Ornstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 396,442.00

During the elementary school years, children become increasingly skilled in the
use of a broad array of techniques for the storage and retrieval of information.
For example, kindergartners and fifth-graders differ markedly in the ways in
which they rehearse and organize to-be-remembered material. Unfortunately,
however, even though much is known about the memory skills of children of
different ages, relatively little information is available concerning the ways
in which the skills of individual children change over time. Moreover, even less
is understood about the factors that influence the emergence, modification, and
effectiveness of these abilities. To a considerable extent, these gaps in
understanding reflect the widespread use of cross-sectional research designs in
which age differences in performance are examined by assessing different groups
of children at each of the ages of interest. Although these methodologies can
yield precise descriptions of the skills of children at different ages, they do
not permit statements about developmental change. To do so requires a commitment
to a longitudinal design in which a sample is established and then assessed
repeatedly over time as the children mature and reach specified age points. In
this way, it is possible to identify contrasting developmental patterns and also
to explore potential mediators of change. This research will address these
issues using a short-term longitudinal study of memory development in the first
and second grades of the elementary school. A sample of 120 first grade
children, drawn from 12 first grade classrooms, will be followed for two years,
with a wide range of memory assessments being made four times each year. In
addition, in order to understand the forces that propel developmental change,
the research will examine key features of the children's classrooms thought to
influence the acquisition and consolidation of mnemonic skills. An extensive
series of observations in the classrooms of the participants will emphasize in
particular the nature of "teacher talk" about remembering, the memory demands
that are expressed, the specific strategies that are modeled or discussed, and
the expectations that are transmitted by teachers. The focus on linkages between
the classroom and individual memory development emerges from a number of lines
of evidence that suggest the role of formal schooling in the development of a
repertoire of effective techniques for remembering. The multiple measures, both
of the individual children and of the classrooms, will enable the research to
describe in considerable depth children's changing skills as well as the context
in which they develop. Moreover, the research will relate the children's
trajectories of memory performance over time to various characteristics of the
"teacher talk" to which they are exposed in their classrooms. The results of the
research should have clear relevance to the educational enterprise in terms of
helping to craft teaching strategies that will encourage the development of
effective memory strategies in children and thus encourage them to reach their
educational potential.