* 0217874
* Investigating the Effects on Firm Performance of Product Portfolio Innovativeness and Organizational Learning through Experimentation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mitzi Montoya-Weiss, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 80,661.00

This project studies the effects of organizational learning through
experimentation on firm performance and on the success of the firm's product
portfolio. The research methods take a much finer grained view of the
relationship between portfolio structure and performance. Builds on two existing
knowledge streams in a novel way, the central hypothesis is that portfolios that
contain too much innovation may result in organizations that are less
successful, i.e., that some organizations may be too innovative and thus suffer
problems. By rigorously controlling for external contexts, which have never
before been controlled for in portfolio analysis, this research has the
potential to uncover significant relationships that have eluded previous
researchers.

Past research suggests that innovative firms outperform their competitors,
measured in terms of market share, profitability, growth and/or market
capitalization, but research has not examined how best to balance the product
portfolio mix in terms of innovativeness. A portfolio approach to innovation
creates both variety and redundancy, which in turn allow flexible responses in
the face of uncertainty. While a portfolio approach to innovation sounds good in
theory, making it happen in practice is reputedly not simple. This project
proposes to study the effects on firm performance of product portfolio
innovativeness and the moderating role of external market characteristics.
Intelligent failure through experimentation is argued to be the foundation of
learning that creates forward momentum in innovation. Experimentation in
innovation is a key sense-making and feedback mechanism that drives
organizational learning. Though past research has not examined how
organizational learning through experimentation drives product portfolio
innovativeness and firm performance, a successful product portfolio likely
builds progressively (in steps or leaps) from an accumulation of learning
resulting from experimentation and the development of new knowledge that
transfers to all products in the portfolio.

The proposed research program consists of three distinct phases. Phase 1 will
involve qualitative research with six industry experts across a variety of
industries to ensure the completeness, validity, and generalizability of the
conceptual model and measures. Phase 2 will involve an empirical study in
conjunction with Theatre Communications Group (TCG). The purpose of the
empirical study will be to collect objective and subjective measures for the
focal constructs and test the conceptual model. Based on prior research with
TCG, participation of more than 120 of the largest professional theatres in the
United States is expected. Phase 3 will involve sharing the study results with
the six industry experts to inform inferences and explore the generalizability
of the results.