* 0217247
* PLN: POWER SHIFT:  A Proposal to Augment the Performance of Girls in SMET Studies
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Anne Hartmann, Maine Discovery Museum
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 08/31/2003
* USD 29,928.00

POWER SHIFT: A Proposal to Augment the Performance of Girls in SMET
Studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In keeping with the mission to educate children and
families, encourage&lt;br/&gt;creativity, and challenge all learners in new and
innovative ways, the Maine Discovery&lt;br/&gt;Museum plans out-of-school-time
programs that will increase competence in science and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and
promote technological fluency for middle school students. With
the&lt;br/&gt;passage of a landmark initiative by the 119th Maine State
Legislature that equips all 7th&lt;br/&gt;and 8th grade students with laptop
computers, MDM plans programs that will expand the&lt;br/&gt;use of laptop
computers beyond the school day, encourage parent involvement,
and&lt;br/&gt;convey fresh ways of learning and teaching math and science. With
a history of&lt;br/&gt;providing exhibits and educational programs that are
based on recognized learning&lt;br/&gt;theories and that accommodate a wide-
range of learning styles, we have an excellent&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to
implement project-based activities that encourage creative
problem&lt;br/&gt;solving, social interaction, and group communication. We
believe these program&lt;br/&gt;ingredients, along with staff development
workshops that focus on gender equity issues,&lt;br/&gt;will foster improved
achievement and greater participation by females in SMET&lt;br/&gt;professions.