* 0217330
* Engendering Engineering: An Intellectual, Institutional, and Social History of Women's Engineering Education in the US
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Amy Bix, Iowa State University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2003
* USD 54,995.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES # 0217330&lt;br/&gt;"Engendering
Engineering: An Intellectual, Institutional, and Social&lt;br/&gt;History of
Women's Engineering Education in the U.S."&lt;br/&gt;Amy Bix, Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project traces the history of
technical training for women in the United States from the 1800s through 1980s,
concentrating on forces which transformed engineering from a male-defined field
to its current status as a permanently yet tensely co-educational discipline.
Bix presents a series of case studies showing how colleges approached
engineering coeducation, how administrators and faculty in different
institutions at&lt;br/&gt;different times dealt with both practical problems and
social questions about attracting and integrating women. This work further
examines the history of female engineering students themselves, looking at their
attitudes and actions in light of changing opportunities and obstacles during
the early twentieth-century, World War II, and the Cold War. Finally, analysis
of events during recent decades discusses the role of support groups such as the
Society of Women Engineers and the ways in which women worked to gain control
over their own future in the masculine world of engineering. This research
represents a multidisciplinary approach to science, technology and society,
combining history of engineering and professionalization with issues in U.S.
history, education, women's studies, and policy. To date, there is no
comprehensive account of how women's engineering education developed. Bix's work
builds toward such systematic analysis, addressing fundamental questions about
technology and gender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This book on the engineering
education of women promises to attract widespread interest across scholarly
disciplines. For historians of technology, this work should add new dimensions
to current understanding of American engineering. It should also carry
significant interest for students of American history, women's studies,
sociology, and education. Finally, this book should have a timely appeal to a
broader audience, including female engineers and male and female engineering
educators themselves, who have already expressed interest in better
understanding how events of the past connect to ongoing debates about the place
of women in engineering and in engineering education today.&lt;br/&gt;