* 0217581
* American Chemical Society Symposium on Polymer Diffraction Methods; Orlando, FL; April 7-11, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* John Blackwell, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2003
* USD 3,000.00

This award provides partial support for travel expenses for participants in a
symposium entitled "Polymer Diffraction Methods" to be held at the national
meeting of the American Chemical Society (ACS) in Orlando, FL, during the week
of April 7-1, 2002. The symposium is sponsored by the Polymer Division of ACS,
and is chaired by John Blackwell (Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH) and Kenn H. Gardner (DuPont Central Research, Wilmington, DE.). It seeks to
explore the latest research advances and to review the state of the art in
structure analysis for polymers at the molecular level. There will be three full
days for oral presentations by 36 invited speakers, plus a poster session with 7
contributions. The symposium will be truly international, with speakers from
France (7), UK (6), Japan (2), Spain (2), Germany (1), Canada (1), Italy (1),
Korea (1) and Russia (1), as well as from the USA 914). In addition to inviting
the leading researchers in the field the organizers have also made deliberate
efforts to include presentations by younger scientists: new faculty still
establishing their careers (3) and highly promising postdoctoral research
associates (7), whose participation as vital to the long-term continuity of
research in the field.

Polymer diffraction techniques provide the basis of much of our structural
understanding of this important class of materials.