* 0217129
* U.S.-Slovak Research on Properties of Glass-Forming Materials and Proton-Conducting Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* John Fontanella, United States Naval Academy
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2005
* USD 38,000.00

This U.S.-Slovak materials research project between John Fontanella of the U.S.
Naval Academy and his partner, Josef Bartos of the Polymer Institute of the
Slovak Academy of Sciences, will study the mechanisms of ion transport and
dipole reorientation in polymer electrolytes. To do so they will draw upon
Slovak expertise in positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) and
electron spin resonance (ESR) and the U.S. team's experience with electron
relaxation and conductivity in polymer electrolytes at varying pressures,
temperatures and frequencies. The goal is to produce experimental data for
analysis that can better describe the free volume microstructure of polymer
matrices, the segmental motions of polymer chains, and the diffusional motions
of ions. Based on the free volume concept, theoretical methods will be developed
jointly and applied to interpret these results, using modeling and computer
simulations. If successful, findings should improve current understanding of the
conductive properties of glass-forming materials and proton-conducting polymers
with direct implications for developing better fuel cells and batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project in polymers research fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.