* 0218112
* GOALI:  To Understand Flow-Induced Crystallization Characteristics of Polyethylene
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Julia Kornfield, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 07/31/2006
* USD 240,003.00

In this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project,
coordinated studies of materials will be conducted. Semicrystalline polymers
offer the highly desirable combination of strength conferred by crystalline
material and toughness provided by finely dispersed noncrystalline regions among
the crystallites. The morphology and orientation distribution of this nano-scale
composite structure dictates the ultimate material properties. This class of
polymers enables production of high strength fibers, films and injection molded
parts widely used from automotive to biomedical industries. Polyolefins are the
dominant semicrystalline polymers (over 125 billion pounds produced annually)
and play a vital role in economic growth and increased standard of living. Yet
the fundamental understanding of structure formation that underlies their
processing-structure-property relations remains largely a mystery. Scientists at
Caltech and Chevron-Phillips Co. are teaming up to discover the molecular basis
of the dramatic effects of processing history on the microstructure and material
properties of polyethylene. Unique experimental capabilities at Caltech enable
real-time observations of structure development during and after precisely-
defined shearing under isothermal conditions. Chevron-Phillips is providing an
array of polyethylene samples that span the molecular variables considered most
important in industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordinated studies of these
materials will be conducted at Caltech and Chevron-Phillips to provide insight
into the cascade of events that occur during flow-enhanced crystallization, how
these dynamics depend on molecular attributes, and how these dynamics relate to
the structure and mechanical properties of blown films made from precisely the
same polyethylene samples. In turn, the molecular insights into processing-
structure-property relations emerging from this university-industry
collaboration can speed development of new polyethylene resins for improved
production rates and/or superior product performance. The partnership between
Caltech and Chevron-Phillips will provide shared mentorships for graduate and
undergraduate students relating their academic training to the industrial
issues.&lt;br/&gt;