* 0218744
* Collaborative Research:   MEMS Tuners for Multiband High-Efficiency Wireless Transmitter Front Ends
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 07/31/2006
* USD 168,000.00

0218744&lt;br/&gt;Popovic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses design
and implementation of adaptive RF front ends for the next generation
communication systems that will require operation at several frequency bands.
The adaptive RF front ends will be developed by a collaboration between the
University of Colorado at Boulder (CU) with expertise in microwave high
efficiency circuits, and the Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT) with
expertise in tunable RF MEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this
project will focus on the development of a multi-band RF power amplifier used in
the transmitter sections of all communication hardware. The goal is to
demonstrate adaptation of tuning impedances on the millisecond scale using MEMS
switches for multiband transmitter operation (e.g., the 5.7 and 24-GHz
unlicensed bands), resulting in a larger overall average efficiency and multi-
band frequency coverage. For this reason, switched-mode PAs (classes E and F)
will be tuned with a multi-band MEMS output circuit and a reconfigurable MEMS
input circuit. Linearization using bias and drive control of multi-band high
efficiency PAs will also be studied, with the main goal of proving that these
amplifiers are advantageous for modulation schemes that require linearity.
Results of this work will have direct impact on worldwide commercial wireless
systems moving from 2G to higher standards in which RF front-ends must support
multi-band operation under various modulation schemes. It could also potentially
lead to revolutionary miniaturized load-pull systems that replace the bulky and
very expensive load-pull systems currently available. The proposed solution
adheres with the low-power, small-size, low weight and low-cost requirements of
next generation communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort
covers a period of three years during which the following will be accomplished:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oDesign and demonstration of a multi-band impedance tuner
using MEMS&lt;br/&gt;oDesign and demonstration of a multi-band high-efficiency
power amplifier using switched-mode topologies (such as classes E or F) with a
simple switch between two output and input matching circuits&lt;br/&gt;oStudy of
linearization of multiband high efficiency saturated PAs using dynamic drive and
bias control&lt;br/&gt;oIntegration of the amplifier and
tuner&lt;br/&gt;oIntegration of transistor with tuners for miniaturized MEMS
load-pull&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be complemented by
educational activities that will integrate the research findings into the
curriculum of both universities and other related outreach efforts. GIT and CU
will provide travel funds for the PIs to visit the collaborator and give
seminars to undergraduate and graduate students each semester. The PIs plan to
propose REU projects, in addition to UROP, SMART and SIRFs (undergraduate
research and minority programs funded by our respective universities), so that
GIT undergraduates work at CU in the summer, while CU students work at GIT for a
semester, with the goal of a graduate student recruitment program between the
two universities. The investigators will follow NSF's reporting requirements and
will also publicize their results in peer reviewed journals and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;