* 0218376
* QuBIC: Novel DNA Nanostructures for Targeted Molecular Scale to Micron Scale Interconnects
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2006
* USD 373,999.00

EIA-0218376&lt;br/&gt;Thomas LaBean&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel DNA Nanostructures for Targeted Molecular
Scale too Micron Scale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of this project is
to develop fabrication techniques which bridge the gap between two size scales:
(i) the micron scale, where conventional lithographic methods provide efficient
top-down object construction, and (ii) the molecular scale, where viable bottom-
up techniques for object assembly are beginning to emerge. The key problem
addressed is how molecular scale structures can be selectively attached and
interconnected with micron scale structures such that the molecular scale
structures are functional. Bridging this gap is particularly important for
advancing molecular-electronics into practical applications and for continuing
the miniaturization trend of micro-electronics. This project approaches the
scale gap challenge by the use of novel DNA nanostructures that have a scale
between the two and can be made to selectively assemble with either. These
structures present unique opportunities: (i) they provide for selective
attachments via DNA annealing, (ii) they have length scales and flexibility
permitting attachment to micron scale structures (iii) they can be metallized to
provide conductive interconnects, (iv) potentially they can be used to orient
other nanostructures such as carbon nanotubes. The major research steps to be
taken include: (1) development of a diverse family of DNA nanostructures, (2)
further characterization of existing DNA nanostructures, (3) further development
of metallization techniques for these DNA nanostructures, (4) attachment
experiments to various materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project impacts
important educational objectives by providing training opportunities for science
students at several educational levels. Funds are included for a high school
student from the SEED project for under-represented minority students, as well
as for a graduate student and half the salary of a post-doctoral fellow.
Training of students at graduate and undergraduate levels is helping to create
future scientists with strong interests in nanotechnology, DNA engineering, and
related fields critical to continued growth in electronics and computer
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;