* 0218328
* ITR: Optimal and Suboptimal Routing and Wavelength Assignment in Optical and Circuit Switched Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Dimitri Bertsekas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

We propose to investigate the problem of routing and wavelength assignment (RWA)
in optical data networks. This problem is widely viewed as critically important
for increasing the efficiency of wavelength-routed all-optical networks.
Mathematically, this problem contains an important special case the problem of
routing in circuit switched networks.

We propose several novel optimization problem formulations that offer the
promise of radical improvements over the existing methods, which are mainly
heuristic in character. Our work aims to use a blend of analysis and algorithmic
development to obtain a better understanding of RWA, and to develop efficient
and practical methods for computing optimal or near-optimal RWA and circuit
switching policies under realistic assumptions.

We plan to address the problem using two types of methodology: stochastic
optimization, based on dynamic programming (DP), and deterministic optimization,
based on linear programming (LP). There is some methodological coupling between
the two types of methodology, because the deterministic methodology can be used
to obtain cost-to-go approximations, which can in turn be used as the basis for
an approximate DP method.

In the framework of a stochastic model, we allow a dynamic and stochastically
varying demand of the network resources, and a decision-making mechanism that is
forward-looking and takes into account the cost of blocking future lightpath
requests. This resulting optimization models are of the DP type, but typically
cannot be solved exactly because of high dimensionality. We propose to address
such problems using approximations and neuro-dynamic programming (NDP), a recent
methodology that has been used to address challenging DP problems.

In the framework of a deterministic model, we propose a new integer/linear
programming formulation. The salient feature of our approach, which
distinguishes it from similar approaches proposed in the literature, is that it
does not require the time-consuming and uninsightful machinery of mixed integer
programming. We have shown this for some practically useful ring network
topologies, and we propose further investigation and extension of our
methodology to more general topologies. This is a pleasantly surprising
circumstance, and offers the promise of spectacular improvements over the
current state of the art. We plan to investigate and develop algorithms that may
be used during the design or reconfiguration of a network, as well as during its
on-line operation. We also plan to explore ways to use the deterministic linear
programming methodology in the stochastic/dynamic context and in combination
with the NDP methodology.

