* 0218341
* Single Photon and Single Atom Sources for Quantum Information Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Thad Walker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 477,535.00

EIA-0218341 Mark Saffman University of Wisconsin-Madison

Single-Photon and single atom sources for quantum informaiton processing

This research project is demonstrating new ways of engineering single photon and
single atom sources for a range of applications in quantum information science.
The experimental approach starts with several thousand Rb atoms that are trapped
at ultrahigh densities in a far-off-resonance optical beam. A many atom
entangled state is then created using the dipole blockade mechanism that arises
from atom-atom interactions in a dense atomic vapor as proposed recently by
Lukin, et al. (2001).

The trapped ensemble of entangled atoms is manipulated optically to create novel
sources at the level of single atoms and single photons. Using additional near-
resonant laser beams atoms are selectively ejected from the trap depending on
their internal state. This enables deterministic loading of a single atom in an
optical trap, as well as "single-" or "multiple-atom-on-demand" sources with
optically controllable trajectories. By using entanglement between atoms in
ground and excited internal states a single-photon source is being created that
has a diffraction limited, steerable emission pattern. This approach is enabling
a number of novel solutions to manipulation of matter and fields at the level of
single quantum objects with applications to quantum communication, cryptography,
and computing.

A key component of this work is the enhancement of its impact through outreach
and educational activities. Presentations at local schools and lectures for the
general public on quantum information and computation are allowing the
University of Wisconsin to communicate to the local community, including the
burgeoning photonics industry in the Madison area, the importance and
intellectual excitement of this research program.