* 0218288
* Far UV Spectroscopic Ellipsometry of Electronic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2006
* John Freeouf, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 01/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

0218288&lt;br/&gt;Freeouf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project
are to build upon the successful construction of a Far UV spectroscopic
ellipsometer and apply this tool to improve the PIs understanding of new
materials - and of older materials becoming newly important. The PI intends to
share the impact of this new, next-generation tool by collaborative research
with a variety of colleagues from many disciplines throughout the country. The
project should train at least one PhD student at OGI and assist the research
efforts of others at many locations. This effort will emphasize materials of
technological importance and concentrate upon proposed high-K gate dielectrics
such as HfO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system offers a substantially increased
photon energy limit (hv &lt; 9 eV) over conventional systems (hv &lt; 6.5 eV),
thereby permitting us the PI to examine critical point structures that would
otherwise only be accessible at a synchrotron radiation source. This energy
range especially impacts studies of wide band gap materials; both dielectrics
such as HfO2 and wide band gap semiconductors such as diamond, SiC, and GaN are
of immediate and urgent interest. This permits the PI to impact the current
semiconductor industry search for materials with which to replace SiO2 as the
gate dielectric in CMOS technology. It has permitted the PI to study surface
damage layers on polished SiC surfaces, since the higher energies available also
offer increased sensitivity to surface films. He seeks funding to continue to
apply this instrument to such studies. He has partnerships with several groups
that seek to strengthen his own efforts by using the information available from
the proposed studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific area of emphasis will be
on high-? dielectrics for future CMOS technologies. This international effort is
driven by the fundamental limitation upon CMOS scaling that is imposed by the
onset of tunneling through a thin barrier layer. This quantum mechanical effect
appears to restrict the use of SiO2 based gate dielectrics, even with the
addition of nitride layers, to greater than 1 .0 nm thickness, and will
fundamentally impact device design and production in this decade. In fact, the
2001 editio of the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors envisions
these materials being required by 2005 for low power logic chips. The PI has
already applied his current system to the study of some of these materials and
established that there are clear areas where he extended photon energy range
provides new and unique information. He seeks to build a database of dielectric
response for many of the candidate materials, and to use this database in the
study of these films as deposited upon silicon substrates. His partnerships
permit him to study materials deposited by e-beam, jet vapor deposition,
molecular beam epitaxy, and atomic beam deposition. The details of these
depositions can strongly alter the interface and the film itself - as he has
demonstrated for HfO2 already. At the same time it is crucial to ascertain what
impact absorption involving the d-levels of transition metal and rare earth
elements in these candidate materials will have upon the electrical properties
of transistors containing those materials. The PI's studies will help to clarify
the location and properties of these energy levels.&lt;br/&gt;