* 0218652
* QuBIC:    A Qubit Based on SINIS Josephson Tunnel Junctions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* John Ketterson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 02/28/2006
* USD 500,000.00

EIA-0218652&lt;br/&gt;John Ketterson&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Qubit Based on SINIS Josephson Tunnel
Junction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forming controlled super positions of quantum
states lies at the heart of quantum computing and devices that perform this
function have been termed "qubits". The device chosen here to realize a qubit is
based on a double-barrier SINIS Josephson junction (where S is a superconductor,
I is an insulator, and N is a normal metal). The basic strategy involves the
controlled manipulation of the occupations in a 2-level system comprised of the
two lowest (the ground and the first excited) Andreev bound states (ABS) that
can form within an SINIS junction. In fact the parameters of the SINIS-based
qubit can chosen such that only the above two ABS levels are present; this
conclusion, which independently follows from the theory, is in agreement with
preliminary experimental data taken on Nb/AlOxAl/AlOx/Nb double-barrier
junctions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The required control of the two Andreev
states is achieved by applying appropriate bias voltages and transport currents
to a device fabricated in a three-terminal geometry. The control parameters turn
out to be the voltage across one of the barriers, and the transport current
across one of the super conducting layers; these quantities play the role of the
dynamic magnetic fields, which enter the associated qubit Hamiltonian.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The primary goal of this proposal is to achieve the
controlled manipulation of the Andreev bound states and, in parallel, advance
the understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms. This will include: i)
extending the present technology for preparing two-terminal SINIS devices to
3-terminal devices; ii) performing measurements on the ABS characteristics,
including the observation of Rabi oscillations between the two ABS levels, iii)
further developing the theory of localized ABS inside double barrier junctions
to allow for arbitrary barrier transparency and arbitrary impurity
concentrations in all three electrodes, iv) performing detailed numerical
simulations of the switching dynamics; v) studying the recombination and
decoherence effects that relate to the performance of these devices, and lastly
vi) examining strategies for connecting qubits to form simple logic circuits.
&lt;br/&gt;