* 0218210
* Konza Prairie LTER V: Long-Term Research on Grassland Dynamics and Global Change
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2009
* Alan Knapp, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 10/31/2009
* USD 5,321,772.00

The proposed research would continue and expand a comprehensive, long-term
program in grassland ecology at Konza Prairie. The 20-year old, broadly-based
KNZ LTER program crosses multiple ecological levels and spatial and temporal
scales. Since its inception, the overarching integrates fire, grazing and
climatic variability as essential and interactive factors responsible for the
structure and function of tallgrass prairie. Organism-to-ecosystem processes and
dynamics at KNZ are products of spatial and temporal variability in multiple
limiting resources, primarily water, light and N. The interplay of these three
disturbances across a heterogeneous landscape leads to the high species
diversity and complex, non-linear behavior characteristic of mesic grassland
ecosystems. Results from KNZ have relevance not only for understanding
grasslands worldwide, but for broader ecological issues including human-caused
global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals for LTER V are to expand the
strong core Konza LTER experiments on fire, grazing and climatic variability
begun over 20 years ago, with site-based and inter-site studies and synthesis
activities; 2) to further develop mechanistic and predictive understanding of
grassland dynamics with particular emphasis on responses of grassland ecosystems
to multiple global change factors; and 3) to use KNZ results to develop and test
general ecological theory (e.g., diversity-stability relationships, community
invasibility, top-down vs. bottom-up controls, soil-plant community feedback
models, river continuum model).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New studies of the causes
and consequences of land-cover change in the region will be initiated,
incorporating both sociological and ecological perspectives. Short-term
experiments focused on key processes and mechanisms underlying responses to
changing fire, grazing and climatic regimes will continue to be essential
components. Broader impacts of the research include training a future generation
of ecologists, contributing to public education, and development of a knowledge
base essential for the ecologically sound management of grassland ecosystems
worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;