* 0218563
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Monte Carlo Algorithms and Quantum Circuit Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Cristopher Moore, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 175,000.00

EIA-0218563 Christopher D. Moore University of New Mexico

Collaborative Research: Quantum Mote Carlo Algorithms and Complexity

This collaborative project with the University of Connecticut is exploring both
new quantum algorithmic techniques and tools for proving impossibility results
for quantum computation. Specifically, the focus is on quantum Monte Carlo
algorithms, which try to solve problems by doing a random walk in the space of
possible solutions. In addition, fundamental limits on the power of quantum
computation, developing impossibility results for quantum circuits is being
explored and proving that simple generalizations of Shor's factoring algorithm
will not work for the Graph Isomorphism problem, which along with Factoring is a
likely candidate for a quantum algorithm.

Specifically, quantum walks (unitary analogues of stochastic processes) on
various combinatorial structures by employing both Fourier analysis for groups
and new tools suited for less symmetric Spaces is being studied. Cases where
quantum walks explore the space more quickly than their classical counterparts,
and other cases where they become localized and mix more slowly than a classical
walk are being explored. In addition Fourier analysis to develop lower bounds
for shallow quantum circuits and information-theoretic bounds on the process of
sampling from the quantum Fourier transform are being studied. In particular,
the quantum Fourier transform over non-Abelian groups, and hidden subgroup and
hidden subspace problems for such groups is being investigated. This is closely
related to Graph Isomorphism, and explore tractable special cases while showing
it is hard for a Shor-type algorithm in general.

