* 0218605
* Intonational boundaries in sentence production and comprehension
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2006
* USD 352,130.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Edward Gibson will conduct three
years of psycholinguistic research on relations between intonational (or
prosodic) phrasing and syntactic structure in sentence production and
comprehension. This research asks where people tend to place intonational
boundaries (pauses, roughly speaking) in producing sentences, and where people
perceive such boundaries in sentences. The working hypothesis of the production
experiments is that the probability of producing an intonational boundary at a
given location is proportional to the sum of (1) the number of phonological
phrases over which the most recently processed syntactic phrase extends, and (2)
the number of phonological phrases over which the upcoming syntactic phrase
extends, as long as it is not an argument of the most recently processed word.
This and related hypotheses will be tested using analyses of natural speech
corpora and a reader-listener paradigm. Participants in the reader-listener
paradigm say sentences that they have read in advance. Other participants answer
comprehension questions on the sentences after they are produced. The research
also investigates whether preferences in comprehension mirror those in
production. Methods for investigating comprehension will include complexity
ratings, comprehension question accuracy, and cross-modal lexical decision. This
project is important for several reasons. First, it will broaden our knowledge
of the relationship between language and other aspects of human cognition, such
as memory. The results of the work will also be of interest to researchers in
computer speech generation and analysis, and language acquisition. Speech
processing systems need to model human preferences in intonational boundary
placement in order to both improve understanding of human speech and synthesize
more natural sounding speech. With respect to language acquisition, it has been
proposed that intonation can help learners acquire syntactic knowledge.
Uncovering the relationship between intonational phrasing and syntactic
structure will help to evaluate whether such claims are viable.