* 0218156
* Corporate Initiatives to Serve Poor Markets as a Driver for Innovation and Change:  A Longitudinal Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Stuart Hart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 02/28/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The increasing competitiveness of North American, Western European, and some
Asian markets is forcing firms to search for new growth opportunities around the
globe. At the same time, discontent with globalization has increased over
concerns about environmental degradation, a widening gap between rich and poor,
and loss of both local autonomy and cultural diversity. Consistent with theory,
a growing number of US and foreign companies are seeking new business
opportunities by focusing attention on the most ignored market segment of the
world: those 4 billion at the bottom of the economic pyramid who earn less than
$5 a day and lack access to goods and services that meet their most basic needs.
The ability of firms to serve a market they have traditionally ignored requires
significant reframing of the business challenge by managers, the development of
cutting-edge innovations and technologies, and fundamental organizational
transformation through the creation of new business models. With support from
the National Science Foundation's Innovation and Organizational Change Program,
this study will follow the attempts of five multinational firms over time to
test that theory in the field as they conceive, propose, implement, expand or
terminate projects that meet the needs of a new market segment. The study will
occur over a period of three years, during which time managers expect that their
initiatives will either succeed or fail. If successful, these initiatives will
become businesses that signal a significant change for their firms in terms of
strategy, structure, and process. This research will focus on how firms can most
effectively organize to develop, implement, and diffuse these disruptive
innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five firms in three industries -- Chemicals
(Dow and Dupont), Consumer Products (Johnson &amp; Johnson and Procter &amp;
Gamble), and Beverages (Coca-Cola) -- have committed to provide access to use a
multi-method approach to collect longitudinal data on more than eight
initiatives. Primary data collection will occur through on-site, semi-
structured interviews with key managers who can lend insight into the processes
employed to affect change in their companies. Interviewees range from members of
the company's Executive Team to in-country project managers, as well as external
stakeholders (e.g., NGOs, public entities) utilized by the focal organization to
move their projects forward. Investigators will also analyze internal
communications including memos, reports, meetings, and email, to validate data
collected in interviews. These data will be used to inductively build and refine
a testable model of organizational change related to these types of ventures. To
test and validate the model, the final phase of the study includes the
development of a survey instrument and its distribution to a larger sample of
firms engaged in projects to serve the world's poorest people. This research has
important intellectual and practical implications. Management literature has
recognized that over the past decade a set of complex issues has emerged as a
critical challenge for corporations attempting to optimize economic, social, and
environmental performance. A substantial body of scholarly work focusing on
global issues calls for fundamental industrial transformation in the future, but
offers little insight or prescription for how or why that might occur. By
grounding this work in the actual activities of real firms, this study will not
only provide insight into actual bottom-up and top-down change and innovation
processes employed by companies in the marketplace today, but also help explain
how and why such processes succeed or fail. Results of the study will be
extremely valuable to a broad group of stakeholders. Companies are interested in
more tangible recommendations of how they might transform themselves to meet the
challenges of sustainable development and grow in the future. NGOs and
governments around the globe are interested in forming a better understanding of
how to effectively engage companies to work together to increase the economic
fortunes of a broader group of the world's population.