* 0218629
* Control and Modification of Electric Currents on Existing Structures for Use as Effective Antennas in Wireless Communications Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 09/30/2006
* USD 312,000.00

0218629&lt;br/&gt;Long&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is focused on
an innovative approach to develop radiation systems for wireless networks in
which the antennas are effectively indiscernible in their local environment. It
seeks to examine how both exterior and interior parts of existing buildings and
structures might be used as transmitting and receiving systems for various
wireless applications. The major issues that must be solved to successfully
develop antenna systems that are essentially invisible, include understanding
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;how to effectively excite existing
structures&lt;br/&gt;how to examine their basic radiation
properties&lt;br/&gt;how to predict their radiated fields&lt;br/&gt;how to
control their radiation characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In some cases
minor modifications may have to be made to the existing structures, but the
visual and structural impact of such actions would be minimal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Possible candidates for investigation include flashing and
gutters around the tops of buildings, lightning protection systems, metallic
window frames, building supports, power lines and supports, portions of existing
towers and billboards, metal roofs or cupolas, portions of the metal structure
interior to a building, and non-structural conductors such as door frames and
ceiling tile support grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial phase of the
proposed research program will address the following
tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;development of appropriate feeding and matching
techniques&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of the radiation properties for the proposed
radiation elements&lt;br/&gt;investigation of the use of perturbing materials
and modifications of the structures for&lt;br/&gt;current and pattern
control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the successful implementation of such
antenna systems on the world of telecommunications should be most significant.
The final results of the proposed study should provide essential information on
the feasibility of using existing structures as effective radiators, as well as
providing preliminary tools and procedures for the design of this new class of
antenna systems.&lt;br/&gt;