* 0218254
* US-Kenya Dissertation Enhancement:   Aloe Secundiflora Shrubs as Facilitators in Semi-Arid Kenyan Rangelands, and Their Potential Use in Restoration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2004
* USD 22,400.00

0218254&lt;br/&gt;Stanton &amp; King&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate student, Ms. Elizabeth
King, working under the direction of Professor Maureen Stanton, in the Center
for Population Biology at the University of California- Davis, to conduct a
study in Kenya to evaluate the facilitative effect of the succulent shrub Aloe
secundiflora on a perennial grass species, Cenchrus ciliaris, in degraded, semi-
arid savannas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Facilitative interactions between members of
different plant species can impact the population dynamics of the interacting
species and the structure of plant communities. But the relationship between a
facilitator and a beneficiary species is not constant and, depending on the life
history stage of the species, can even become negative at certain times and
under certain conditions. Under an array of different environmental conditions,
Ms. King will measure the effect of transplanted aloe shrubs on each life
history stage of the beneficiary grass in order to project the population-level
consequences of the presence of the transplanted aloe shrubs. She will address
the following questions. How does the interaction vector vary under a spectrum
of possible environmental conditions? How does the interaction vector vary
depending on the life history stage of the beneficiary? How do indirect effects
of additional species in the plant community impact the interaction vector for a
focal beneficiary species? When stage-specific fitness measurements are used in
demographic models, how does the presence of a facilitator affect the projected
population growth rate of the beneficiary? The results will be used to evaluate
the potential impact of the use of these transplanted succulent shrubs as a
means to enhance the recovery of grasses in overgrazed dry savannas. Dr. Joshua
Muasya and Ms. Emily Wabuyele at the National Museums of Kenya will provide
guidance on this project to Ms. King.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study are expected to add to the current knowledge on the interactions of
facilitator plants with a beneficiary species. It will also contribute valuable
information to resource managers and policy makers involved in curtailing
environmental degradation and improving human welfare--problems that face arid
areas in Kenya and elsewhere in the world. This project will also support an
international research experience very early in the career of an outstanding
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Environmental Biology jointly support this
award.&lt;br/&gt;