* 0218209
* Use of Giant Superelasticity Effect for Improving Interface Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Eugene Rivin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2006
* USD 149,018.00

The much promoted promise of advancing mechanical design by using such "smart
materials" as shape memory and superelastic alloys (SMA and SEA) did not
materialize to a significant degree. The main applications of such materials are
in medicine (arterial stents, bone reconstruction, etc.) and consumer products
such as women's bras and "non-destructible" eyeglass frames. This project will
extend application of the smart materials, especially of SEA, to structures of
high productivity precision machines machine tools. SMA and SEA materials are
largely produced as wires, tubing, or strips. Up to now, they were used in
tensile or bending modes of load accommodation, wherein relatively small loads
cause relatively large deformations. Structural applications are usually
associated with high loads and relatively small deformations. A limited scale
preliminary (non-funded) study demonstrated that very high forces can be
accommodated while causing small deformations if the off-the-shelf wires or
tubing made from SEA are loaded radially. Moreover, it was discovered that such
loading mode is associated with extremely large elastic limits. The radially
loaded SEA wire exhibit elastic limit 20-24 percent, similar to rubber-like
materials, while having elastic modulus at least one thousand times greater than
rubber ("giant superelasticity effect"). This unique and until recently not
known property opens large areas for beneficial applications. Detailed
experimental and analytical (finite element modeling) studies of properties of
various SEA and SMA materials (wires and tubing) under radial loading will be
performed in the course of this project, to accumulate data necessary for using
the "giant superelasticity effect" in structural design applications.
Application of this effect for toolholders will be explored, together with
Command Tooling Systems Co. (one of the largest US manufacturers of toolholders
for CNC machine tools).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated, based on the
previous results, that application of structural dimensional compensators
utilizing the unique elastic properties of the radially-loaded SEA wires and
tubing will result in a significant enhancement of stiffness and accuracy of
many thousands machine tools in the U.S., thus in increasing their machining
quality and productivity. These effects will be achieved in a very cost-
effective way, with minimum modifications of the existing toolholders.
Assessment of other design applications of the giant superelasticity effect will
be performed , such as for modular tooling systems and for reconfigurable
machining systems.