* 0218858
* ITR: Solution of Eigenvalue Problems for Multi-Scale Phenomena by Quantum Monte Carlo Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* M. Peter Nightingale, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 430,000.00

This is an award made in response to a (small) proposal submitted to the
Information Technology Research (ITR) initiative. The award is co-funded by the
Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry. The highly computational research
concerns quantum mechanical and statistical mechanical problems in which a
multiplicity of length or time scales renders approximate solutions inaccurate
and exact numerical methods intractable. The research focuses on problems that
can be reduced to the solution of eigenvalue problems for which one can use and
develop quantum Monte Carlo methods without uncontrolled
approximations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In critical phenomena, a multiplicity of
scales arises from the divergence of the correlation length and the relaxation
time. For weakly-bound clusters, the quantum mechanical component of this
research, strong anharmonicity with the attendant floppiness yields a
multiplicity of length scales. Here solution of the Schroedinger equation poses
the computational challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop
novel computational methods to obtain quantum mechanical spectra of weak-bound
clusters. In particular, it addresses a problem that was identified in 1997 as
an important, unsolved problem in cluster physics, viz. the computation of
energies of bound states of small 4He clusters. These clusters find themselves
in the vicinity of continuous dissociation transitions, where ground or excited
state is about to merge with the continuous part of the spectrum, and the
various length scales in turn go to infinity continuously.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the statistical mechanical portion of the research, the
goal is to perform high accuracy computations of dynamical critical exponents,
which in particular will be used in high precision tests of extended scaling
relations proposed for the two-dimensional XY model. The work is of theoretical
interest for the field of dynamical critical phenomena, and has implications for
the study of superconducting films, Josephson junction arrays, and 4He
films.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is an award made in response to a (small)
proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research (ITR) initiative. The
award is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry. The
highly computational research concerns quantum mechanical and statistical
mechanical problems in which a multiplicity of length or time scales renders
approximate solutions inaccurate and exact numerical methods intractable. The
research focuses on problems that can be reduced to the solution of eigenvalue
problems for which one can use and develop quantum Monte Carlo methods without
uncontrolled approximations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research deals with two
complementary projects. In critical phenomena, a multiplicity of scales arises
from the divergence of the correlation length and the relaxation time. Here high
precision calculations will be done to test scaling relations. For weakly-bound
clusters, the quantum mechanical component of this research and of great
interest in chemistry, strong anharmonicity with the attendant floppiness yields
a multiplicity of length scales. This component of the research will be done in
collaboration with the theoretical chemistry group at
Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;