* 0218074
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:   Steganalysis Techniques for Images and Audio
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Nasir Memon, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0218074 Memon

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Professor
Nasir Memon, Department of Computer Science, Polytechnic University of New York,
Brooklyn, New York, Dr. Bulent Sankur, Department of Electric Engineering,
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey and Dr. Ismail Avcibas, Department of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey. They
plan to develop new steganalysis techniques for audio and image data. The
development of techniques for audio and image steganography and the widespread
availability of tools for the same have led to an increased interest in
steganalysis techniques for image data. Their approach is based on the
hypothesis that hiding a secret message in audio or image data leaves definite
artifacts that can be detected using statistical analysis. The steganalyzer is
built using multivariate regression on selected audio and image features and a
training set of cover and stego images.

Scope: The three scientists, N. Memon, I. Avcibas and B. Sankur have already
been collaborating on an international project for three years. The project is
expected to lead to joint publications and to the development of software to
detect hidden messages in audio signals and image files. The steganalysis tools
developed would be of significant benefit to the intelligence community for
surveillance and monitoring purposes. The project involves visits between the
PIs for short periods and visits by one U.S. graduate student and two Turkish
graduate students for longer periods. The proposed plan also involves co-
advising of all the graduate students working on the project.