* 0218200
* A New Approach to Optical Microscopy of Sub-Wavelength Diffraction Structures:    Shape Reconstruction from Ellipsometric Back-Focal-Plane Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Michael Yeung, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Yogesh B. Gianchandani
* 08/31/2003
* USD 56,638.00

The objective of the proposed project is to use computer simulation to study the
feasibility of a new type of optical microscope for measuring the sizes and
shapes of three-dimensional objects whose dimensions are smaller than the
wavelength of the light employed. Conventional optical microscope based on
measurement of the intensity distribution on the image plane is not capable of
resolving spatial details much smaller than about one wavelength. The proposed
optical microscope, however, is based on ellipsometric measurements of the
electric field scattered by an object onto the back focal plane of the objective
lens. The ellipsometric data allow the relative phases among different
components of the Jones matrix of the optical system to be computed. This phase
information is then used to determine the shape of the object by solving an
electromagnetic inverse problem.

The proposed microscope idea should be of great scientific interest, since the
technique of using the phase information obtained from back-focal-plane
ellipsometric measurements for object shape reconstruction is novel. Also, the
proposed method is insensitive to positioning and focus errors of the sample,
which is an important consideration if the method is to be applied to solving
metrology problems in industry.

The proposed feasibility study will consist of using computer simulation to
generate hypothetical data, which will then he used to test the convergence and
robustness of various numerical algorithms for solving the electromagnetic
inverse problem of shape reconstruction from the hypothetical data. In the
process of carrying out the feasibility study, the graduate student involved
will gain in-depth knowledge of optical imaging theory and firsthand experience
with various numerical methods of electromagnetic. As such, the proposed project
should be of great value in the education of graduate students interested in
working in an interdisciplinary area involving both optics and electromagnetics.
Also, if the results of the feasibility study appear promising, future research
projects may he initiated to test the proposed microscope idea experimentally

