* 0218289
* Dissertation Research:  The Many Varieties of the Naturalist: a life history of Karl Jordan
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Paul Farber, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

In an effort to redress the dominance of the evolutionary synthesis on histories
of natural history between 1890 and 1940, this dissertation research project
will examine the life and work of Karl Jordan (1861-1959), a German-born
naturalist who worked during the first half of the twentieth century as curator
of insects for Walter Rothschild's Tring Museum, in Britain. It will investigate
the context and influence of Jordan's contributions to the development of
biology and the discipline of entomology, his experience as a German national
living and working Britain during a series of tumultuous decades, and his
constant endeavor to increase international cooperation between zoologists
through both the International Entomological Congresses and the International
Commission for Zoological Nomenclature. Jordan consistently corresponded with
major entomologists for a period of six decades, organizing international
cooperation, working on tedious insect systematics, and driving research into
evolutionary theory. In its most general sense, this study is part of a broader
aim to illustrate the various, dynamic contexts within which naturalists have
worked, from the idealistic internationalism of the turn of the century to the
post-World War world, and from the taxa-bound disciplines of the nineteenth
century to the problem-based biology of the twentieth. In examining Jordan in a
number of contexts, from the museum desk to the international stage, the
research will examine the multifaceted variation in naturalists' activities.
Research has already been completed at the archives in the Eastern U.S.,
including the National Research Council, the Smithsonian Institution, and the
American Philosophical Society for correspondence between Jordan and American
entomologists. In addition entomological journals and the proceedings of the
International Congresses of Entomology (ICE) have been surveyed. This funding
supports archival work based predominantly in Britain (particularly at the
Natural History Museum, London), with brief trips to continental Europe.