* 0218065
* 3rd Biennial Workshop on Subduction Processes Emphasizing the Kurile-Kamchatka-Aleutian Arcs to be held June 9-15, 2002 in Fairbanks, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2003
* USD 26,800.00

Eichelberger&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0218065&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will be used
to support the participation of various professional scientists and graduate
students on a workshop devoted to processes along the Kurile, Kamchatka, and
Aleutians arcs that comprise one of the most active and least understood regions
of volcanism and tectonism on Earth. This workshop will bring together workers
from the US, Japan, and Russia who are dealing with understanding the same
natural processes but within different politically designated intervals of this
zone of subduction. The benefits are expected to extend beyond basic science to
the coordinated monitoring and mitigation of natural hazards, such as those from
earthquakes, tsunamis, and explosive volcanic eruptions and the sharing of
information relevant to natural resources. An important role of the meeting will
be to acquaint students with the broader context of their areas of fieldwork and
to facilitate direct contact with students from other countries. The intent is
to stimulate international and interdisciplinary collaborations that will last
throughout their careers. The meeting will also serve to inform and stimulate
involvement by American geoscientists in their own island arc, the Aleutians.
Although there has been rapid growth in hazards-driven monitoring and research
there, the academic community of the lower 48 states has yet to take full
advantage of the opportunities for basic research that the high level of
activity of the Aleutians offers. The wish is to stimulate broader American
participation in the volcanology of subduction, with a view toward developing a
center-type initiative in the future.&lt;br/&gt;