* 0218039
* LTER: Long-Term Ecological Research in the Luquillo Experimental Forest 3
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2009
* Nicholas Brokaw, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2009
* USD 3,323,451.00

The Luquillo Experimental Forest LTER program (LUQ) focuses on the long-term
dynamics of tropical forest ecosystems characterized by large-scale, infrequent
disturbance, rapid processing of organic material, and high habitat and species
diversity. Research by LUQ has stimulated a new appreciation of the significance
of large-scale disturbances in tropical forested ecosystems and the key role of
the biota in shaping the response to these events. Hurricanes occurring one and
10 years after the LTER program began permitted scientists to capitalize upon
landscape-scale natural experiments which are followed closely. Among the most
important findings from these natural experiments is that detrital dynamics
plays a central role in forest recovery by influencing carbon and nutrient
storage and flow. &lt;br/&gt; The central theme proposed is that disturbance,
through its effects on detrital dynamics, is a dominant ecosystem driver at LUQ.
Pulses of detritus shift the flow of energy within the food web, modify the
availability and distribution of nutrients, and feed back on the composition and
productivity of plant and animal communities. Rapid processing of detritus
distinguishes LUQ from other forested LTER sites, where decomposition takes 2-20
times as long. &lt;br/&gt; A combination of long-term measurements, field
experiments, simulation modeling, and cross-site comparisons are proposed to
address five questions: (1) How do climatic factors, litter quality, and
detritivore diversity regulate decomposition of detrital pulses? (2) How do
terrestrial and aquatic food webs differ in response to detrital pulses? (3)
What is the effect of disturbance frequency on nutrient cycling, plant community
composition, and the accumulation of soil organic matter? (4) To what degree is
the export of carbon and nutrients from watersheds a result of soil
characteristics that are affected by detrital dynamics? (5) How do elevationally
related changes in climate impact plant and detritivore communities, and how do
these feed back on the quantity and quality of litter inputs and decomposition?
&lt;br/&gt; The research will be conducted in two spatial contexts. In mid-
elevation tabonuco forest, LUQ will continue long-term measurements of ecosystem
response to hurricanes, landslides, and anthropogenic disturbance. An experiment
will be initiated to mimic increased frequency of hurricanes to investigate the
effect of increased detrital inputs on nutrient cycling, community composition,
and organic matter accumulation, along with. Manipulations of key groups of
invertebrates to gain a better understanding of similarities in detrital
processing between aquatic and terrestrial food webs. New plots will be
established to examine the effect of elevationally related changes in climate,
plant communities, and decomposers on detrital processing. Manipulative
experiments will compare the relative importance of abiotic and biotic controls
on decomposition in terrestrial and aquatic habitats. &lt;br/&gt; Long-term
measurements of hydrological and nutrient fluxes in watersheds will relate soil
characteristics to stream nutrient and organic matter losses and provide
information to gauge the effects of future disturbances. Simulation models of
key population, community, biogeochemical, and landscape processes provide null-
model predictions to inform these new observations and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;