* 0218594
* Digital Representation of Structural Response for the Reliability Assessment of Complex Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Gene Golub, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2006
* USD 239,929.00

DIGITAL REPRESENTATION OF STRUCTURAL RESPONSE FOR THE RELIABILITY ASSESSMENT OF
COMPLEX SYSTEMS

ABSTRACT

Current research efforts in structural engineering are geared toward the
development of performance based design and safety evaluation criteria that take
into consideration the various uncertainties in estimating system behavior and
future loading conditions. System reliability methods provide the means to
address these important points. However, most existing analytical reliability
techniques have one or more limitations in their ablity to: a) accurately model
structural behavior at high loads, b) consider different performance criteria,
c) identify multiple equally important failure modes, and d) account for load
combinations. The application of simulation techniques in conjunction with
general purpose finite element packages provides methods with a strong potential
for resolving many of these outstanding issues. The purpose of this research is
then to develop a simulation-based method for the reliability assessment of
structural systems, which would realistically model their behavior at high
loads, be implementable in practical situations, and provide accurate solutions
for complex structures using efficient algorithms.

The first tool required to perform a simulation-based reliability analysis of a
structural system consists of an accurate and efficient nonlinear analysis
program capable of modeling the behavior of the structure for a specific
(deterministic) set of conditions. The second tool is a systematic search
algorithm that can identify probabilistically dominant failure modes accounting
for the randomness of loads and material properties. Closed-form solutions for
the response of complex nonlinear structures are difficult to obtain and only a
digital representation of their behavior is possible through the application of
the finite element method. Point estimates of the response under different load
intensities and material properties are usually obtained from variations on the
Newton-Raphson algorithm. These point estimates may often misidentify the
ultimate capacity and may not accurately model the softening part of the loading
curve due to the accumulation of numerical errors and because of the properties
of the stiffness matrix in these ranges. In this study, the Singular Value
Decomposition, SVD, method in combination with the Lanczos algorithm will be
used to accurately trace the response of a structure at high loads. The
efficiency, robustness, and stability of the proposed method will be
demonstrated.

Due to the random nature of the problem, the safety assessment of a structure
can only be established using reliability techniques. Since the behavior of a
structure with several failure modes is best represented in digital form, modern
heuristic techniques may provide the most appropriate tools to assess its
reliability. In particular, Genetic Algorithms, GA, have been shown to provide
robust techniques for the reliability analysis of structures with multiple
failure modes but may be inefficient due to the shotgun search strategy that
they are based upon. To improve the efficiency of GA, a filtration operator will
be introduced based on the principle of genetic elitism. The modified GA will
provide an efficient method to estimate the reliability of complex structures,
as well as identify its dominant failure modes and controlling random variables.

This project will introduce advanced tools of computational mathematics into the
field of structural mechanics. The study will stress the application of the
proposed methods for the simulation based design of civil engineering structures
although they will be applicable to fields as varied as electronic circuit
design and Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems. Training of students in the
subjects of matrix computational methods, artificial intelligence, and
statistical computing will be a primary goal. Such training will provide future
generations of structural engineers with the well-rounded education needed to
make decisions and provide solutions to real life complex problems under
uncertainty.