* 0218511
* Environmental Dynamics and the Evolution of Human Adaptability
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Richard Potts, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,415,584.00

Adaptability refers to an organism's ability to endure environmental change, to
spread to new habitats, and to respond in novel ways to its surroundings - all
of which typify the living human species, Homo sapiens. The main objective of
this project is to investigate the emergence of human adaptability in the
dynamic settings that characterized the past four million years. Human origins
during this period involved a lengthy transition from small apelike populations
confined to equatorial regions of Africa to a worldwide, highly diverse human
species capable of altering its surroundings in unprecedented ways. In this
project scientists from diverse fields (anthropologists, paleontologists,
geologists, and environmental scientists) will gather new data to further our
understanding of how major human adaptations evolved in response to ancient
environments. The period of human ancestry was typified by a very complex
sequence of environments, including progressive change (global cooling during
the ice ages), large climate oscillation (repeated change between glacial-
interglacial and arid-moist conditions), and times of stability. It is not yet
known, however, whether early technological change, brain enlargement,
geographic dispersal, development of symbolic behavior, among other key events
in human prehistory, coincided with periods of directional change, strong
fluctuation, or stability. This project will compare detailed environmental,
fossil, and archeological records in Africa and East Asia in order to test when,
where, and why human ancestors developed a greater ability to adjust to new
surroundings and to modify their habitats. This project will include the first
comparative analysis of fossil and environmental records from both Africa and
East Asia, funded by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Excavations and
laboratory analysis in the two distant regions offer a novel opportunity to
explore the connection between environmental and evolutionary change and the
common prehistory of the two regions. Project research teams will collect data
to measure change in early human behavior (from archeological sources) and in
anatomy (from the fossil record). Change in past animal communities and
ecosystems will also be studied to provide a context in which to judge the
development of uniquely human strategies of interaction with the environment.
Environmental research teams will use state-of-the-art techniques to examine the
nature and rate of global change, evident in the ocean record, and of local
change in areas where humans emerged and spread. The project also includes
geneticists who will experimentally evaluate the possible genetic processes by
which adaptability evolves. This research will investigate the model organism C.
elegans (nematode), and will test for mechanisms of genetic change that favor
adaptive flexibility to emerge in response to experimental sequences of
environments. The combined components of this project are thus designed to
stimulate communication across experimental and historical approaches within and
across the natural and social sciences. Through workshops, conferences, and a
publicly accessible website and database, our project seeks to unify fields that
only together can address an unanswered scientific question, the origin of
adaptability in humans and other organisms. The broader impacts f this research
will include public outreach through the web, museum exhibitions, distance-
learning curricula, and opportunities for student internships.