* 0218104
* GOALI:  Strategic Pricing and Inventory Management of Constrained Capacity with Repeated Transactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Guillermo Gallego, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 381,727.00

This research project will explore the impact of customer learning and behavior
on the optimal pricing of constrained capacity. The research team seeks to
characterize instances when incorporating customer behavior will lead to
strategically optimal policies that deviate significantly from tactically
optimal policies that ignore customer behavior and implicitly assume a single
interaction between buyer and seller. This research will provide insight into
how pricing dynamics are influenced by the interplay between seller policies and
customer expectations. It has the potential to lead to significant improvements
in current commercial pricing policies in practice. Such improvements would lead
to better capacity allocation resulting in improved economic efficiencies. The
key results of this research project will be published in archival and trade
journals and presented at national conferences, academic and industry seminars.
In addition, the principal investigators will create and co-teach a new Ph.D.
level course in revenue management and develop educational software embodying
the key concepts of this rapidly developing field, thereby promoting teaching,
training and learning.

The problem of optimal pricing of perishable constrained capacity over time has
received considerable attention. If a good perishes instantaneously and the
willingness to pay for the good increases over time -- as in the case of airline
seats and hotel rooms -- the problem of determining optimal prices is known as
revenue management. If the willingness to pay decreases over time -- as in
fashion goods and consumer electronics, the problem is known as markdown
management. Revenue management has been estimated to provide $1 billion annually
for large airlines while markdown management has been credited with increasing
revenues by up to 7%. It is therefore not surprising that both revenue
management and markdown management have been the topics of considerable academic
research and substantial industry investment. Research into pricing of
constrained products has generally focused on maximizing the total expected
revenue (or profitability) achieved from fixed capacity. This is the goal of the
EMSRb approach to airline revenue management as well as the focus of markdown
management systems. This approach is appropriate when buyers and sellers will
interact only once. However, if there are repeated interactions among buyers and
sellers, then a seller's action today will influence the expectations (and hence
the behavior) of buyers in the future. For example, a seller who offers
distressed inventory at a deep discount will train some buyers to expect this in
the future and change their behavior accordingly. Similarly, a seller who
provides more availability of inventory to a particular market segment than the
competition will train buyers to turn to him first. In both cases, sellers may
achieve higher returns over time from pricing policies that incorporate the
impact of customer behavior rather than simply maximizing the return from their
current stock of inventory.