* 0218077
* Faculty Workshop on Teaching of First Course on Power Electronics, Electric Drives and Power Systems Applications of Power Electronics; Arizona State University; January 2-4, 2003
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Rajapandian Ayyanar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 08/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

Faculty Workshop on Teaching of First Course on Power Electronics, Electric
Drives and Power Systems Applications of Power
Electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to organize a faculty workshop
on "Teaching of First Courses on Power Electronics and Electric Drives and
Advanced Course on Power System Applications of Power Electronics" during
January 2-4, 2003 at the Arizona State University, Tempe. This workshop is
intended to promote teaching of power electronics and electric drives courses
with the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provide the highest quality
undergraduate and graduate education in this field.&lt;br/&gt;Motivate and
attract talented students.&lt;br/&gt;Discuss up-to-date laboratories with
digital control.&lt;br/&gt;Facilitate teaching of these courses by EE faculty
specializing in other fields.&lt;br/&gt;Identify best practices and learn from
the experiences at different universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will be organized jointly by Arizona State University and University of
Minnesota. At University of Minnesota, as well as at ASU, restructuring of power
electronics related courses is being actively pursued since 1994. Two NSF funded
projects namely, "Innovations in Power Engineering Education" in 1997 and "DSP-
Based Software-Reconfigurable Laboratory to Nationally Revitalize Electric
Drives and Power Electronics Curricula" in 2000, provided a big impetus to these
efforts at University of Minnesota. In January 3-5, 2002, a workshop was
organized at the Arizona State University, Tempe, where the new methods of
teaching first courses in Power Electronics and Electric Drives were presented
and the newly developed hardware laboratory setups were demonstrated. This
workshop was extremely successful with approximately 125 registrants from across
the country.&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed workshop in January 2003 at ASU, new
significant developments in the undergraduate power electronics and electric
drives laboratory setups will be demonstrated. Teaching methods developed and
the improved lecture notes based on suggestions at the previous workshop will be
presented. A poster session for interested faculty will be organized, where they
will have an opportunity to describe their own efforts at improving the related
curriculum. A panel session consisting of experts from government agencies and
industry will be arranged to discuss challenges and opportunities in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;Applications of power electronics in power systems, made
possible by the advancements in power semiconductor devices, represent the new
frontier in the field of power electronics. A course on this topic, which has
important applications in electric power network efficiency and security, will
be discussed at this proposed workshop. &lt;br/&gt;As a part of the workshop
proceedings, copies of poster presentations, complete lecture notes, lecture
transparencies, and the simulation exercises discussed during the workshop will
be distributed. Ample time will be provided to critique the course material and
the laboratories developed through NSF funding. Ways of tightly coupling lecture
material to simulations and hardware laboratory will be discussed. Plans to
acquire laboratory equipment in a collaborative manner and to develop laboratory
experiments will be discussed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;