* 0218182
* Enhanced Polymer Properties Through Controlled Melt Manipulation During Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* John Coulter, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 390,640.00

An interdisciplinary research team at Lehigh University is exploring melt
manipulation during polymer processing. Melt manipulation is promising for the
manufacturing of polymer-based products with enhanced properties. Because
property enhancements can be realized the expanded usage of recycled materials
also becomes possible. During melt manipulation, an otherwise conventional
molding cycle is augmented by the application of oscillatory mechanical energy
to the polymer melt during processing. This affects the material orientation and
relaxation dynamics that occur during processing and in-turn the internal
structure and overall properties of the final product. The project is focused on
learning how, when, and where to apply the technique to yield beneficial
results. The detailed sequential cause and effect relationships that connect
applied melt manipulation conditions to final product quality attributes are
being explored using a coupled experimental and analytical approach.

Components of the study are focusing on relationships between 1) applied machine
processing conditions and localized processing conditions throughout the mold,
2) localized processing conditions and molecular orientation, 3) local molecular
orientation and localized material response, and 4) localized material response
and overall product performance. To assure the relevance and success of the
effort, significant industrial involvement and guidance is included. The broad
educational impact of the program is being enhanced by the inclusion of
undergraduate students from a number of schools. In addition, a target group of
middle school students from an under-represented minority population are being
exposed to the research as part of an established and award winning cooperative
education program.