* 0218299
* Origins of Cod on Georges Bank: Contributions of Early Developmental Stages from the Scotian Shelf
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Richard Radtke, Sea of Dreams Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2003
* USD 56,900.00

Origins of Cod on Georges Bank: Contribution of Early Developmental Stages from
the Scotian Shelf

Recent work in the Georges Bank-Gulf of Maine area has documented significant,
and apparently episodic, fluxes of Scotian Shelf Water (SSW) from the Nova
Scotian continental shelf to Georges Bank. SSW is a relatively cold and fresh
water mass with a significant component from the St. Lawrence River, and is
commonly identifiable with T-S analyses of hydrographic data and in satellite
images of sea surface temperature. One such flux episode was observed March 1997
in satellite imagery and from shipboard hydrographic sampling on Georges Bank.
Qualitative at-sea analyses of ichthyoplankton sampled on the March cruise
revealed a remarkably tight association between abundances of gadid eggs and the
distribution of SSW suggesting, along with other lines of evidence, that most of
those eggs were spawned on the Scotian Shelf and were advected with the SSW
water mass to Georges Bank. The fundamental question thus arises: to what extent
are cod on Georges Bank imported to the Bank as early development stages by
advection from Canadian waters to the east? The goal of this research is to
answer this question. The approach will be two tiered: (1) performing
retrospective elemental analyses of otoliths from archived larval cod samples,
as well as of ichthyoplankton samples to be collected in 1998 and 1999 as part
of the continuing Georges Bank GLOBEC project, analyzing them for Sr/Ca ratios,
using an X-ray electron microprobe, and elemental "fingerprints", using UV lazer
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICPMS); and (2) assessing
the genetic identity of the larvae relative to larval and adult populations from
Georges Bank and from the Scotian Shelf using nuclear DNA microsatellite
techniques.