* 0218731
* ITR:    Molecular Qubit Transformations with Phase-Shaped Femtosecond Pulses
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Stephen Leone, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

In this ITR-Small project funded by the Chemistry Division, Stephen Leone of the
University of California-Berkeley will investigate single and multiple qubit
operations on pairs of superposition states formed among rotational,
vibrational, and electronic degrees of freedom in diatomic molecules. Using
multiple pulse sequences from ultrafast lasers, phase and amplitude pulse
shaping, and evolutionary algorithms, optimal pulses will be determined for
single qubit transformations in molecules, such as Z-gates and Hadamard
transformations. The work is further extended to multiple qubit operations such
as controlled-Z and swap gates. Lithium dimers will be used as the molecular
system for these studies. The experiments in this project will address for the
first time the use of molecular rotational states as a motional control qubit
for controlled transformations of an electronic qubit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on exploring logic gates that may be useful for constructing a
quantum computer. In the course of this research students will receive training
in quantum mechanics and the use of ultrafast lasers and pulse shaping. Since
these areas are already of great relevance to optical communications and optical
computing efforts, the students will experience the integration of basic science
and its applications in advanced information technology applications. In
addition, what is learned from molecular systems may enable the formation of
qutrits (three-level systems) and multi-qubits (superpositions of many levels at
a time) that will broaden thinking about potential algorithms for quantum
information processing. This research has other possible applications to areas
such as quantum cryptography and code-breaking, information storage and
retrieval, and faster processing with quantum computing. Fields affected include
fiber optic communications, information transmission, and data
encryption.&lt;br/&gt;