* 0218318
* Single-Play and Repeated-Play Decisions with Fungible and Non-Fungible Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael DeKay, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 125,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Something is fungible if one part or quantity may be replaced by
another equal part or quantity in the satisfaction of an obligation. Oil, grain,
and money are usually considered to be fungible. In the context of repeated
monetary gambles, the money won in one gamble can replace the money lost in
another, dollar for dollar. In other decision contexts, the outcomes of repeated
trials may not be fungible. Consider, for example, a medical practice guideline
that recommends surgery for a particular ailment. In one instance, successful
surgery may extend the patient's life by some number of years. In another
instance, unsuccessful surgery may result in the patient's immediate death. The
life lost by the second patient cannot, in any real sense, be replaced by an
equal quantity of life from the first patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perceived
fungibility is important because it may affect how people make decisions. When
considering decisions about monetary gambles, people often make different
decisions when they can play the gamble many times instead of just once, because
they realize that the money won in one gamble can replace the money lost in
another. For example, many people would decline a gamble that provides a 50%
chance of a $200 gain and a 50% chance of a $100 loss (a single-play decision),
but would readily accept a series of 10 or 100 plays of the same gamble (a
repeated-play decision). However, when outcomes are perceived to be non-
fungible, as in the surgery example above, it is expected that people will not
make different decisions when there are multiple patients instead of just one,
because good outcomes do not really offset bad
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial experiments in this project will
assess the extent to which people perceive outcomes to be fungible in many
different decision situations. In subsequent experiments, situations in which
outcomes are perceived to be fungible or non-fungible will be used to determine
how perceived fungibility affects single-play and repeated-play decisions. In
addition to other contributions to the understanding of risky decision making,
the planned research will help to establish limits on the appropriateness of
aggregating outcomes across multiple decisions, with potentially broad
implications for decision making in fields as diverse as marketing, research and
development, medicine, law, land-use planning, and free-trade
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;