* 0218809
* ITR: A Unified Representation for Non-homogeneous Models Manifesting Surface, Volume, and Vector Attributes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Elaine Cohen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 505,982.00

This research project will develop improved mathematical representations of
three-dimensional objects, for use across a variety of applications. Underlying
model representations in computer graphics, computer-aided geometric design,
engineering analysis, and medical visualization have historically been driven by
different requirements. Thus, different algorithmic and computational
foundations have evolved yielding two largely disparate formulations.
Differences in model representations impede cross-pollination of valuable
techniques, hinder model sharing, and limit cross-area applications. To attack
this historically intractable problem, a unified mathematical representation
that can work across a broad spectrum of applications will be developed, based
on an extended, multidimensional, parametric tensor product B-spline hyper-
volume. High dimensional NURBs (Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines) are used as a
basis because of their ubiquity in practice, universality in modeling, good
overall computational and interactive behavior, and extensive understanding.
Distinguishing itself from the straightforward generalization, the extended
representation will support a non-hyperrectangular domain (non-hexahedral for
the trivariate) appropriate to the model, and include supplementary attributes,
defined over a common multidimensional parametric domain. The attributes will
model both functional characteristics and data represented as scalars or
vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in several key technologies are
creating demand for higher dimensional representations and corresponding
visualization algorithms to design and analyze truly solid geometry, i.e.,
working in a design space of non-homogeneous materials manifesting
multidimensional attributes. This calls for fundamental advances in our
computing and visualization environments. One of the practical applications is
designing optical lenses that achieve refracting power by smoothly varying the
index of refraction and keeping a simple geometric shape. The combination of
simple shape with no discontinuities in the index of refraction offers
substantial optical and mechanical advantages over traditional multifarious lens
systems. The project will also have educational benefits, training students in
the laboratory to help them become leaders in this increasingly important
field.&lt;br/&gt;