* 0218071
* Conference on Psychological Science and North American Natives (American Indians),Fairbanks, Alaska, June 2003.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Keith James, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/29/2004
* USD 75,250.00

This project involves a conference on social science disciplines and American
Indian peoples. The conference (a) integrates existing knowledge of Native
psychology and develops a research agenda for advancing such knowledge, (b)
exchanges information on strategies and tools for teaching Native social science
and developing a model for such courses and curricula, (c) examines ways to
better integrate social research, teaching and practice with the needs and goals
of Native communities, and (d) plans strategies for enhancing links between
social science and Native communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Native communities
and individuals face a variety of unique problems and opportunities. Effective
scientific assistance is needed to help address those problems and
opportunities. Skills and expertise from social science could play a critical
role in assisting with such important issues as Native economic advancement,
educational attainment, community and individual health, and management of
tribal resources and services. The potential value of psychological science to
these outcomes especially exists because many past efforts to execute applied
projects in Native communities have floundered as much or more due to human
factors (such as factional infighting, poor planning, poor leadership, or
inadequate skills) as because of financial or technological inadequacies to the
projects. Social science has only scratched the surface in investigating the
unique dynamics of Native cultures, Native social patterns, and Native psyches.
This project will 1) summarize the state of social science knowledge of Native
individuals and communities. 2) Develop a social science research agenda. 3)
Promote exchanges and development of collaborations among social science
researchers who focus on Native issues. 4) Plan a curriculum to teach Native
Psychology and create an educational pipeline and an educational structure to
develop Native Psychology scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;