* 0218466
* ITR:    Modeling Distributed Denial of Service Attacks and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Kathleen Carley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2007
* USD 818,974.00

Distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks have emerged as a prevalent way to
take down web sites and have imposed financial losses to companies. The CSI/FBI
survey (CSI 2001) shows that 36% of respondents in the last 12-months period
have detected denial of service, which imposed more than $4.2 million financial
losses. The effectiveness of DDOS defenses depends on many factors such that the
nature of the network's topology, the specific attack scenario, and various
&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of the network routers. However, little research has
focused on the tradeoffs inherent in this complex system. The researchers are
developing a computational testbed to study security policies and the associated
technologies that provide defenses against DDOS attacks. The researchers are
using this framework to evaluate various policies and technologies. Out model
and the ensuing analyses are informed by research in the areas of computer
science, information science, organizational theory and social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been a number of proposals on how to
control the on-going DDOS attack traffic. None have been widely deployed. The
effectiveness of DDOS defenses depends on many factors, such as the type of
network topology, the type of attacks and whether all ISPs are compliant in
&lt;br/&gt;establishing defenses. However, little is known about the
interactions among these factors. Knowing what tradeoffs will occur as these
factors vary will enable stakeholders to make more informed security policy
decisions in which they adjust for the chance that others may not make
&lt;br/&gt;the same decisions. Our research illuminates these tradeoffs.
Moreover, the computational model the researchers are building enables the user
to examine the tradeoffs associated with various DDOS defenses and attack
scenarios at the router level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers focus on two
basic research questions. First, how do ISPs provide DDOS defenses at the lowest
cost while their subscribers remain satisfied with the availability of network
connections during attacks? A cost-performance analysis of the effectiveness of
DDOS defenses is being conducted using results from the computational model.
This cost-performance analysis will aid ISPs and local network administrators in
their evaluation of DDOS defenses. Second, the researchers ask where are the
critical points in a network to deploy defenses? The researchers examine the
impact of network topology on the deployment location of defenses. Graph level
&lt;br/&gt;indices and models from social network studies will be used to
categorize network topologies and to select deployment locations for defenses.
This analysis will provide guidance to decision
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits of this work research include: The policy
framework the researchers are developing will help ISPs and subscribers to
consider the benefits of providing DDOS defenses and to realize the tradeoffs in
DDOS defenses. Results from this study will enable decision makers to make more
&lt;br/&gt;informed security policy decisions for computer networks. It is
costly and unethical to conduct real world experiments of DDOS attacks on large
networks. This research will provide a cost effective and ethical means for
evaluating various attack scenarios and defenses. Further, topological measures
developed in this research should be useful for studies of other large-scale
topologies. As such, this work extends social network measures typically used on
small person-to-person &lt;br/&gt;networks to large-scale computer networks.
Finally, this research provides a theoretical basis for evaluating DDOS defenses
building on interdisciplinary studies from the fields of computer science,
&lt;br/&gt;information science, organizational theory and social network
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;