* 0218499
* Local Raw Material Variability and Hunter-Gatherer Lithic Economy in the Portuguese Magdalenian
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Paul Thacker, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 108,984.00

&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Paul Thacker and
colleagues will conduct three seasons of geological and archaeological fieldwork
in three different regions of Portugal: Estremadura, Ribatejo, and Alentejo. The
interdisciplinary team includes Portuguese and American specialists assembled to
investigate regional differences in flaked stone tools during the Magdalenian
period, ca. 15,000 years ago. Changing environmental conditions at the very end
of the Pleistocene make the Magdalenian especially interesting and appropriate
for examining the articulation of prehistoric technology with hunter gatherer
subsistence and settlement strategies. Untangling the meaning of stone artifact
assemblage variability requires understanding the situational environment in
which prehistoric tools were made and used. This project is of broad
archaeological interest because each of the three study areas is characterized
by different stone raw material types, abundances, and sizes. For example, high-
quality, large chert cobbles were exploited throughout the Paleolithic in the
Rio Maior region, in contrast to the Sor drainage which lacks chert sources but
has abundant quartz and quartzite gravels. Comprehensive sampling and
statistical description of these different raw material deposits will provide
the context within which Magdalenian foragers generated stone tool assemblages.
Four Upper Paleolithic open air campsites will be excavated to obtain large
lithic assemblages with associated radiometric dates, two in the Alcobertas
valley and two in the Sor valley. Intrasite spatial analysis of three-
dimensionally plotted occupation levels will determine the impact of post
depositional processes and the degree to which site assemblages are
functionally-comparable analytical units. This sampling strategy will provide at
least one Early Magdalenian and one Late Magdalenian assemblage in each region,
facilitating chronological comparison as well as regional ones between the
valleys and numerous Magdalenian assemblages previously published from the Rio
Maior vicinity. Laboratory analyses and refitting studies of excavated flaked
stone assemblages will explore variability at the site and regional level. The
organization of stone tool technology, transport decisions and artifact use
lives will be compared and contrasted across the three regions.
Paleoenvironmental data will be obtained through charcoal-wood species
determination while residue and use wear studies will contribute to the
functional interpretation of site assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is important for several reasons. Planned archaeological fieldwork will
provide new data on the Stone Age occupation of two previously unresearched
regions of Iberia. The comparative approach of this project will investigate the
numerous behaviors that result in Portuguese Magdalenian lithic variability,
possibly revealing stone acquisition and reduction behaviors that are social
rather than functional in origin. Results will have theoretical and
methodological significance for archaeologists working in other geographic
regions and chronological periods, especially researchers exploring the
interface of hunter-gatherer technological organization and raw material
exploitation with subsistence and settlement strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;