* 0218469
* Toward Quantum Computing with Molecular Magnets:  Studies of Spin Dynamics in a Radiation Field
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Myriam Sarachik, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2006
* USD 456,000.00

EIA-0218469 Jonathan R. Friedman Amherst College

Toward Quantum Computing with Molecular Magnets; Studies of Spin Dynamics

The viability for using molecular magnets as qubits, the processing elements of
quantum computers by using pulsed microwave and millimeter-wave radiation to
perform quantum operations on the spin states of these systems are being
investigated. In the process, some important issues regarding the tunneling
mechanism by which the magnetic moments of these systems reverse direction at
temperatures below a few Kelvin are also investigated.

A series of experiments are being performed to measure the effect of the applied
radiation on the magnetic relaxation of the molecular magnets. These experiments
include photon-assisted relaxation, which occurs when the radiation helps the
molecule's spin reverse direction, Rabi oscillations of the probability of
reversal with radiation-pulse duration, and free-precession of a quantum
superposition of spin states produced by a series of radiation pulses. These
experiments are aimed at providing a measure of the decoherence time of the
excited spin state, a crucial parameter for determining whether the molecular
magnets can be used as qubits. The project is also investigating methods of
mitigating inhomogeneous broadening effects due to dipole interactions with
neighboring molecules, nuclear spins and defects.

The project has potential impacts for the fields of quantum computation and
information storage. It is also promoting the education of undergraduate
students, especially underrepresented groups like women and minorities.

