* 0218443
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Monte Carlo Algorithms and quantum circuit complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Alexander Russell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 149,997.00

EIA-0218443&lt;br/&gt;Alexander C. Russell&lt;br/&gt;University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Quantum Mote Carlo
Algorithms and Complexity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project with
the University of New Mexico is exploring both new quantum algorithmic
techniques and tools for proving impossibility results for quantum computation.
Specifically, the focus is on quantum Monte Carlo algorithms, which try to solve
problems by doing a random walk in the space of possible solutions. In addition,
fundamental limits on the power of quantum computation, developing impossibility
results for quantum circuits is being explored and proving that simple
generalizations of Shor's factoring algorithm will not work for the Graph
Isomorphism problem, which along with Factoring is a likely candidate for a
quantum algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, quantum walks (unitary
analogues of stochastic processes) on various combinatorial structures by
employing both Fourier analysis for groups and new tools suited for less
symmetric Spaces are being studied. Cases where quantum walks explore the space
more quickly than their classical counterparts, and other cases where they
become localized and mix more slowly than a classical walk are being explored.
In addition Fourier analysis to develop lower bounds for shallow quantum
circuits and information-theoretic bounds on the process of sampling from the
quantum Fourier transform are being studied. In particular, the quantum Fourier
transform over non-Abelian groups, and hidden subgroup and hidden subspace
problems for such groups is being investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;