* 0218914
* ITR: Virtual Porous Medium for Modeling Contaminant Spreading in Groundwater
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Eliot Winer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2006
* USD 269,802.00

0218914 Jankovic

The focus of this research is large-scale contaminant spreading in aquifers that
exhibit significant variations in properties that influence groundwater flow and
pollutant transport. It is widely accepted that spatial changes in hydraulic
conductivity play a major role in contaminant spreading. The main goal of the
study is to apply novel mathematical solutions, powerful numerical models, and
visualization tools to examine and quantify the influence of spatial variations
in hydraulic conductivity on contaminant spreading in highly heterogeneous
aquifers. Existing mathematical models of contaminant spreading can only be
applied to aquifers that exhibit small variations in hydraulic conductivity.
Existing numerical models can not be used to simulate large-scale three-
dimensional contaminant spreading in highly heterogeneous aquifers. The key
element of the present study is a new structural model of hydraulic
conductivity, introduced by Gedeon Dagan that contains isolated inclusions and a
homogeneous background. Hydraulic conductivity of each inclusion is constant.
Actual statistical structure of hydraulic conductivity is reproduced by varying
locations, sizes, and conductivities of inclusions. Both approximate analytic
models and highly precise numerical models are developed based on this new
structure. Analytic and numerical models are used in this study to predict rates
of contaminant spreading in highly heterogeneous aquifers. Inability to
visualize three-dimensional flow and transport is a bottleneck that prevents
better understanding of many three-dimensional transport phenomena. A new
visualization tool, designed for immersive virtual-reality facilities, will be
developed and used to investigate transport phenomena such as transverse
dispersion, contaminant tailing, preferential flow and molecular diffusion. The
visualization tool will include the ability to interact with a simulation in
real time. A user will be able to stop the simulation of contaminant spreading
and get specific data associated with any part of the model. For example, it
will be possible to choose a location in the three-dimensional medium, to
introduce a contaminant particle at that location, and to follow the particle
throughout the aquifer with a "camera" mounted on the particle. A web-based
interface will also be developed to enhance research by facilitating
interactions amongst scientists in different geographical locations and to
integrate research and teaching. Development and application of these models and
visualization tools, termed "Virtual Porous Medium", will likely increase our
ability to understand and predict contaminant spreading in aquifers. In
addition, this first version of the Virtual Porous Medium will serve as a
platform where other transport mechanisms (such as reactive transport) may be
implemented at a later stage.

