* 0218521
* CRCNS: Modeling Pathfinding and Target Recognition in the Olfactory System
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Golan Yona, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,000,000.00

EIA-0218521 Lin, David Cornell University-State

CRCNS: Modeling Pathfinding and Target Recognition in the Olfactory System

Statement for public consumption

The proper development of the nervous system is essential to the f unction of
any organism. The nervous system integrates sensory input, coordinates motor
output, controls autonomic functions, and shapes memory and cognition. To
accomplish these tasks, the nervous system employs billions of neurons that will
form trillions of connections with their appropriate targets. For example, in
the olfactory system, odorant in the environment are detected by olfactory
sensory neurons (OSNs) located in the nose. In order for odorant information to
be properly transmitted to the brain, however, these neurons must be connected,
or "wired together," with their appropriate partners in the brain. How this
critical feat of pathfinding and target recognition is accomplished is still
largely unknown. In one model, this process is mediated b cues located at
various points within the brain that would interact with and guide neurons to
their target. These cues would form, in essence, a "roadmap", that would help
guide neurons to their target. In this proposal, we will combine bioinformatics,
statistical methods, and genomics to begin to determine the shape of this map.
As a model system, we will study the ability of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs)
to identify their targets in the olfactory bulb.