* 0218397
* ITR:  Development and Applications of the PS-I Computational Modeling Platform for Problems of Ethnic Conflict, Globalization, State Stability, and Terrorism
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Ian Lustick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 299,989.00

Abstract: "Development and Applications of the PS-I Computational Modeling
Platform for Problems of Ethnic Conflict, Globalization, State Stability, and
Terrorism,"

Professor Ian S. Lustick, University of Pennsylvania, P.I.

Problems featuring non-linearities, local effects, multiple equilibria, positive
feedback loops, and widely distributed processes among heterogeneous units, are
understood to be common in the social world. They are also known to be
intractable for conventional mathematical approaches, no matter how
sophisticated, and have posed insuperable difficulties for the extension of
formal modeling approaches in political science and other social sciences.
Agent-based modeling, also referred to as computational modeling, is a technique
for simulating and studying such complex problems by leveraging knowledge of
simple mechanisms of interaction and performance at the micro-level to achieve
insights into patterns that emerge at the macro-level. In the social sciences
many attempts are being made to harness computers for the production of
evolutionary simulations corresponding systematically enough to the empirical
world to produce reliable explanations and predictions. The project's principal
objective is to advance this general approach in three ways: 1) by providing
social scientists with access to and training on PS-I, a flexible and powerful
platform for the production of theoretically coherent agent-based models of
social and political phenomena that does not require end-users to possess
computer programming skills; 2) by working with these scholars to develop
enhanced graphical and point and click interfaces for substantively-oriented
rather than computer-oriented users; and 3) to use PS-I capabilities to produce
high-end research addressing crucial substantive and theoretical problems.

This project includes applications of PS-I simulation techniques to problems
including the impact of globalization on ethnic and other identity related
conflict, the potential of different institutional structures for the management
or containment of ethnopolitical conflict, the consequences of catastrophic
terrorism for the performance of market economies, mechanisms and conditions for
political learning at the collective level, the evolution of threat perception,
relationships between regional integration, nation-state integrity, and
subnational self-determination movements, the peculiar dynamics of bio-
terrorism, and the identification and operation of threshold effects and
cascades of change in various political contexts. Of particular importance are
applications of this simulation technology for producing templates to capture
patterns of variability and similarity associated with particular kinds of
countries, kinds of situations, or kinds of threats. The implications for
intelligence gathering and analysis are direct and manifest. Indeed the most
impressive obstacle to the effective use of these techniques for intelligence
purposes has been the necessity for users to be computer programmers. An
objective of this project is to make the open-ended potential of computational
modeling available to any scholar or analyst with the requisite knowledge of
his/her subject matter, the imagination to use virtual tools to think about the
real world, and access to a standard computer.