* 0218920
* ITR: A Virtual Stress Testing Machine
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Thomas Impelluso, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 05/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This proposed effort will create an internet-distributed, physics-based, three-
dimensional virtual reality stress-testing machine. A stress testing machine
(STM) will be purchased and then reproduced as a 3D CAD model, thereby creating
a real STM and a virtual STM. The real STM will be placed on the internet using
a personal computer. The virtual STM will be displayed using a semi-immersive
virtual reality theater and also using a 3D web page. A large deformation
elasto-plastic finite element code will be written and deployed on both a remote
high performanc eomputer and on a local cluster of workstations. MPI will be
used as a platform independent tool for process parallelization. A haptic
interface and a data acquitstion tool will drive both the real STM and the
virtual STM. The real STM will simply deform tensile specimens. The virtual STM
will also deform a virtual object; however, the deformation parameters will be
obtained from the near real-time finite element code running on the two
aforementioned acrchitectures.Data regarding network communication, process
parallelization, fault-tolerance, and graphical displays will be acquired and
analyzed. The intellectual merit of this work will be the research into the
creation of a platform in physics-based virtual reality for education and
research. The broader impact of this effort will be the creation of tools to
enable undergraduate students to possess their own personal, virtual physics
labs. The result of this will enable universities to save on cost and wear and
tear of expensive large-scale hardware.