* 0218304
* The Role of Technology on Work Practices in Police Departments
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Sherry Thatcher, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 12/31/2005
* USD 356,325.00

Technological advances have made effective knowledge management (KM) a
requirement in many organizations and industries. As these technologies and
applications become more ubiquitous, the ability to use these technologies for
knowledge sharing and to impact work outcomes becomes even more urgent. This
urgency is nowhere more evident than in the public sector, specifically in the
law enforcement community. As a result of the events of September 11, 2001, we
have witnessed an increased effort of law enforcement agencies to share
knowledge and collaborate to promote attentiveness for homeland defense and the
security of local communities. These changes may be improved by a better
understanding of how police use new knowledge management technologies now
available to them. Similarly, we need to assess how these technologies will
affect the nature of police work. Based upon a solid theoretical foundation,
this research draws upon existing knowledge about communication and knowledge
sharing, individual differences, organizational culture, group characteristics,
incentive systems, and technology to understand organizational change in police
departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three major objectives of the proposed
research are: (1) to understand individual, group, and organizational factors
that influence work practices in police departments, (2) to understand how
changes in technology impact work practices, and (3) to understand how these
changes in work practices affect individual, group, and organizational factors.
The research uses multiple methods from empirical social science and behavioral
research to validate our model of factor that influence police work in police
departments. The research will have theoretical implications for the disciplines
of social psychology, organization science, information systems, and
criminology. The research outcomes will be particularly applicable to law
enforcement agencies, academics studying public sector institutions,
organizational change theorists, and knowledge management practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is organized in three phases. The first phase
serves to evaluate our original model, based on previous literature on the
effects of individual, group, and organizational factors. The second phase
builds upon our model to investigate the effects of KM technology implementation
on work practices. The third phase investigates the issue of organization change
over time by looking at the impact that KM technologies can have on the
underlying individual, group, and organizational factors in police departments.
By focusing on some of the most pressing issues for police departments, this
research could have substantial impact on police departments throughout the
United States and national homeland defense agencies.