* 0218840
* Materials Research Society Symposium DD "Solid-State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials IV"
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Martha Greenblatt, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

The Materials Research Society Symposium on Solid State Chemistry of Inorganic
Materials IV will be held in Boston, MA December 2-6, 2002. The goal of the
conference is to facilitate multidisciplinary interactions information exchange
within a broad spectrum of researchers, to include CAREER grantees, and top post
doctoral scholars and graduate students working in priority areas of the broad
field of solid-state chemistry. The NSF funds will be used exclusively to offset
the expenses associated with attending the symposium for U.S. participants,
specifically graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, junior faculty and
selected plenary speakers in the area of solid state chemistry of inorganic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Solid State Chemistry community continues to
have a direct impact on important technological areas that are crucial to
advancing society through the design, synthesis and application new materials.
Examples include porous solids for catalysis, thin films for electronics and
electrooptic devices, and nanostructured materials for high-strength composite
structural materials. Since these technical areas are of very high priority to
industry, students educated and trained in these multidisciplinary areas
involving solid-state chemistry compete very well in the job market and go on to
contribute in many significant ways to the global economy.&lt;br/&gt;