* 0218161
* GOALI:  Integrated Signal Processing for Bearing Health Assessment and Life Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 337,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) provides
funding for the development of a unified time-scale-frequency domain signal
processing technique that is germane to the health assessment and time-to-
failure prediction of rolling bearings. The project is aimed at bridging an
existing gap between the state-of-the-art of signal processing research in the
academia and current bearing condition monitoring practice on the factory floor,
and will focus on establishing the theoretical foundation for an effective and
efficient algorithm to estimate a defective bearing's damage status and
remaining service life. The research will consists of numerical simulations in
multiple domains, custom-designed experimental validation, and systematic
analysis of historical data provided by the industrial partner of this project.
The developed technique will be implemented in the form of a bearing assessment
firmware, residing on a Digital Signal Processor platform, and installed in a
handheld bearing data analyzer, suited for direct industry translation to
bearing manufacturers and end-users.

This research, if successful, will lead to improved capability of concurrent
machine fault feature extraction in multiple domains. Such a technique will be
essential to reducing costly and unexpected machine downtime, and improving
product quality. In a broader context, the research will enhance existing
curricula in manufacturing and mechanical engineering, create new, research-
based educational materials, promote collaborations between a major public
university and the bearing industry, and improve the overall education
infrastructure at the PI's institution. Ultimately, by being able to more
reliably predict the health status of a machine system and improve operation
safety and productivity, the research has the potential to impact a wide range
of manufacturing processes other than bearings.