* 0218967
* NSF\CONACyT:    Spatially Resolved Characterization of Nano-Porous SiC Layers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* John Wolan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 08/31/2005
* USD 137,918.00

This grant provides funding for a research project whose goal is to advance the
understanding and knowledge to develop a new non-contact and non-destructive
characterization technique based on the effect of thermally stimulated
luminescence applicable for fast imaging of the full-size bulk silicon carbide
(SiC) wafers and epitaxial films. The results acquired by this new technique
will be correlated with other spatially resolved analytical tools, including
photoluminescence mapping, scanning acoustic microscopy, atomic force microscopy
and scanning electron microscopy. The objective of the research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the role of nano-porous buffer layers between the
SiC substrate and the epitaxial films as a means to upgrading of the material
quality by reducing concentration of defects in the SiC films and improvement of
operational parameters of devices. The understanding and knowledge acquired will
provide guidance to overcome the technical barriers that have hindered the
widespread application of SiC-based devices for high-power/high-frequency and
optoelectronic applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, when completed,
will directly benefit SiC wafer and device manufacturers. The results should
promote the industry-wide adoption of this new metrology applicable eventually
for in-line process control. One of the major SiC wafers and epi-layers
producers, Sterling Semiconductors has expressed a deep interest in this type of
the metrology and offered in-kind support to the university group with pre-
characterized 2" and 3" diameter research-grade SiC wafers. It is anticipated
that the project will provide U.S. companies with more cost-effective quality
characterization processes while simultaneously improving parameters of SiC
devices. The project is an integrated step towards the building a strong
research program on SiC technology at the University of South Florida. The
facilities available for the program include a chemical vapor deposition system
for epitaxial SiC growth and advanced state-of-the-art characterization
equipment located at the university clean room. It is believed that the program
will attract quality graduate students with diverse background. The program
provides a unique opportunity for the graduate students to meet and work with
experts from industry, and will have highly positive impact to engineering
education. The project is based on the international cooperation between
faculties of the University of South Florida (Tampa, Florida), National
Politechnic Institute (Mexico) and professionals in industry (Sterling
Semiconductors) possessing a complimentary expertise in SiC growth and
characterization. The results of the program will be published in referred
journals and presented at the major international conferences. Some of them will
be included to new graduate courses developed by university
faculties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;