* 0218088
* Long-Term Ecological Research at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest (LTER5)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2010
* Sherri Johnson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 10/31/2010
* USD 5,277,072.00

Harmon 0218088 The Andrews LTER program seeks to understand the long-term
dynamics of forest and river ecosystems of the Pacific Northwest. The Central
Question guiding Andrews LTER research is: How do land use, natural
disturbances, and climate change affect three key sets of ecosystem services:
carbon and nutrient dynamics, biodiversity, and hydrology? These ecosystem
services represent scientifically and socially important, tractable variables,
and their responses are posited to represent different classes of ecosystem
behavior at the landscape scale. Climate, land use, and natural disturbances are
the major drivers of change in the Pacific Northwest region. The approach used
to address this question will be multi-faceted involving retrospective analysis,
time series observations, experiments, and use of simulation models for
synthesis, extrapolation in time, and interpolation in space. The principal
spatial scale of inference for LTER studies is the Andrews Forest and adjacent
upper Blue River watershed, an area of 16,000 ha. Work associated with the LTER
will be coordinated with studies aimed at regional questions. The principal
temporal extent of proposed LTER studies spans the past 500 yr and to several
centuries projected into the future. This proposal represents the strategic plan
of activities designed to advance science for individual disciplines,
integration, and cross-site comparisons. Thus, the Andrews LTER is used as the
core of a larger set of integrated studies. Essential long-term studies will be
continued and others added to increase spatial and temporal overlap of scales.
The standard 5 LTER core activities will be addressed by work in seven component
areas: (1) climate, (2) hydrology, (3) disturbance, (4) ecophysiology, (5)
carbon and nutrient dynamics, (6) biodiversity, and (7) stream-forest
interactions. In this grant cycle, studies continue to examine the interaction
of the drivers of change and responding processes and taxa, but the conceptual
emphasis will be on temporal behavior, its causes, and its consequences for
ecosystem change. We will examine temporal behavior over time scales of days to
hundreds of years focusing on: (1) modulation, (2) temporal lags, (3) spatial
coherence, (4) path dependence, (5) hysteresis, and (6) alternative stable
states. Exploring these aspects of temporal behavior help to address the Central
Question by quantifying natural temporal variability and providing insights into
mechanisms that control processes. A major goal will be to test predictive rules
(i.e., hypotheses) regulating temporal behaviors. Another focus of synthesis
will be small watersheds, an important landscape unit providing opportunity for
integration of climatic, ecosystem, and hydrological processes as well as
knowledge of temporal and spatial scaling. The ultimate goal in this integration
is to create a spatially 3-dimensional (including subsurface and air flow)
understanding of the temporal dynamics of the 3 states of matter involved in
biogeochemical and hydrologic cycles within a watershed. Past experiments, long
term records of climate, stream flow, nutrient exports, and vegetation change,
as well as modeling will enhance this integration effort. By understanding this
key landscape unit, future broader-scale efforts will be strengthened. Andrews
science and scientists continue to advance understanding and management of
forests and streams of the Pacific Northwest through communication with
students, teachers, policy makers, land managers, and the general public.
Information management, an essential activity for both research and education,
emphasizes ease of use, increased accessibility, and portability of many forms
of information.