* 0218126
* US-India Workshop: Learning from the Indian Development Experience
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Roger Stough, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2004
* USD 34,000.00

0218126&lt;br/&gt;Thatchenkery&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel support for
a delegation of senior and junior scientists to the US-India Workshop: Learning
from the Indian Development Experience, Bangalore, November 2002. US PI Tojo
Thatchenkery, Department of Social &amp; Organizational Learning, George Mason
University (GMU) and Chiranjib Sen, School of Public Policy, Indian Institute of
Management (IIM), Bangalore are co-organizers of this workshop. This gathering
of scholars from a range of disciplines will focus on India's development
experience, particularly as related to the emerging Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) industry. The assumption is that the Indian
development model is different from other national development success stories
such as for Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong. The workshop will
contribute to fuller understanding of India's innovation-led development
(private sector) model and its applicability to other developing countries. The
workshop will foster Indo-US collaboration and create a collaborative program
between GMU and the IIM's School of Public Policy, which will study policy
implications of ICT for India's globalization efforts. The proceedings of the
workshop will be published. Funding for this workshop is provided jointly by the
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Social and
Economic Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;