* 0219762
* Physiology and Life History in a Tropical Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* David McLetchie, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 65,959.00

0219762&lt;br/&gt;McLetchie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differences in life history
traits (growth and reproductive rates) among individuals within a species can be
explained by the existence of tradeoffs that prevent natural selection from
optimizing all traits in all individuals. One phenomenon often responsible for
generating tradeoffs is resource limitation where resources can be allocated to
improve one trait, e.g. growth rate, or another trait, e.g. reproductive rate,
but not both. In plants, one major limiting resource can be fixed carbon, which
is produced by photosynthesis. Variation in photosynthesis can result in
differences in the fixed carbon budget, leading to variation in life history
traits among individuals. The goal of this project is to determine the
relationship between photosynthetic levels and trait variation among individual
plants. The study involves measuring photosynthesis and life histories of
individual plants in controlled and natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, linking different
fields/approaches often results in synergisms facilitating significant
scientific advances. The proposed project will train the principal investigator
to measure photosynthesis and interpret photosynthetic levels within the context
of life history tradeoffs. In plants, there are few reports on the relationship
between photosynthesis and life history, and understanding this relationship
will provide insight into how plants respond to the environment. The project
also allows for undergraduate student participation, thus enriching the
educational experience of current and future student participants in the PI's
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;