* 0219217
* Structural-Acoustic Analysis and Optimization of Novel Composite Sandwich Structures with Anisotropic Materials for Better Noise and Vibration Isolation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Tsu-Wei Chou, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2007
* USD 164,125.00

This project aims to develop novel sandwich structures to address the sound
transmission problem in various land and air vehicles such as automobiles,
airplanes, and helicopters. The research concept is motivated by the recent
findings of sandwich structures made of anisotropic materials with normal-to-
shear coupling to reduce sound transmission. The proposed research consists of
an integrated effort of micro-structural material modeling, structural-acoustic
analysis, and optimization of sandwich structures for minimum sound
transmission. The objectives of the project are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. To
develop a mathematical theory describing the static and dynamic behavior of
sandwich cores made of anisotropic materials, and to provide a foundation for
structural-acoustic analysis and optimization of sandwich
structures.&lt;br/&gt;2. To carry out an extensive investigation of the sound
isolation mechanism of flat and curved sandwich structures with anisotropic
cores, and a study of the effect of incident angle of the sound wave and
curvature of the structure on sound transmission.&lt;br/&gt;3. To conduct an
optimization study of sound transmission of sandwich structures with respect to
various material and geometric parameters, and to develop sandwich structures
with superior acoustic performance and guidelines for material selection and
manufacturing of such sandwich structures.&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, one of the
research foci in composites has been lightweight and high strength laminates
often with poor acoustic performance. The sound transmission problem identifies
the needs for new composite materials. The project is anticipated to develop a
body of new knowledge on the physical mechanism of sound transmission through
sandwich structures made of anisotropic materials, and new methods for modeling,
analyzing and optimizing anisotropic structures. The resulting technology of
this project will have a broad social impact, and will likely enhance the
ability of American industry to produce quieter aircraft, helicopters and
automobiles. Furthermore, this project will involve women and other under-
represented minorities, and encourage students from these groups to pursue a
career in engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;