* 0219701
* Magnetic Actuators for Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) of Rotating Machinery for Health Diagnostics and Prognostics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Daniel Inman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* mario rotea
* 01/31/2006
* USD 329,824.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A jet engine failure at 30,000 feet or a power
plant shutdown during peak operational hours can be costly from a human as well
as financial standpoint. Well-established procedures exist to monitor and
diagnosis fairly severe problems with rotating machinery but little progress has
been made in developing techniques to detect subtle changes in machine condition
for both improved diagnostics, and to develop prognostic procedures for
determining remaining service life. The proposed project uses a novel
application of Active Magnetic Bearings (AMBs) as actuators for applying a
variety of known force inputs to a spinning rotor in order to monitor and
evaluate response signals resulting from these inputs on-line. The proposed
procedure allows for multiple forms of force input signals to be applied to a
rotating structure. An important aspect of this approach is that the AMB(s) will
be used in mid-shaft locations in conjunction with conventional support
bearings. In this manner, the diagnostic/prognostic procedures are developed
here for use on any general rotating machine that can be designed or retrofitted
with a single AMB actuator and still be supported in the original mechanical
bearings. The ability to examine a variety of known inputs and resulting outputs
for condition monitoring in rotating machinery is unprecedented and the proposed
technique has broad implications for improving operational safety and reducing
maintenance costs in rotor-bearing systems in the aerospace, power generation,
and petrochemical industries. In addition, the very nature of the proposed
procedure will ultimately facilitate machinery self-diagnostics and prognostics
by allowing a method for self-testing.&lt;br/&gt;