* 0219809
* ITR: Tailor-Made: Design of e-Textile Architectures for Wearable Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Mark Jones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 427,163.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;0219809&lt;br/&gt;Thomas L. Martin&lt;br/&gt;Va Poly Inst.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable computing has the potential to allow access to
information anytime and anyplace. &lt;br/&gt;Three of the major goals of
wearable computing are to allow the user to go about a normal daily
&lt;br/&gt;routine while constantly wearing a device, to be invisible to those
around the user, and to be aware of the user.s actions and location. The purpose
of this research is to investigate the wearable computing uses of electronic
textiles (e-textiles), a novel hardware/software platform that has the potential
to solve many of the problems in achieving these goals, and to create a design
environment for e-textile-based wearable computing. &lt;br/&gt;E-textiles are
fabrics that have electronics and interconnections woven into them. The
&lt;br/&gt;electronics consist of general-purpose microprocessors, digital
signal processors, sensors, and &lt;br/&gt;actuators at regular intervals
throughout the fabric. E-textiles allow the creation of systems with a
&lt;br/&gt;physical flexibility and size that cannot be achieved with currently
available electronic &lt;br/&gt;manufacturing techniques. Components and
interconnections are a part of the fabric and thus are &lt;br/&gt;much less
visible and, more importantly, not susceptible to becoming tangled together or
snagged &lt;br/&gt;by the surroundings. Consequently, e-textiles can be worn in
everyday situations where currently &lt;br/&gt;available wearable computers
would hinder the user. E-textiles also have greater flexibility in
&lt;br/&gt;adapting to changes in the computational and sensing requirements of
an application for the &lt;br/&gt;purpose of managing power consumption and
context awareness. The number and location of &lt;br/&gt;sensor and processing
elements can be dynamically tailored to the current needs of the user and
&lt;br/&gt;application, rather than being fixed at design time.