* 0219104
* ITR: A Portable Laboratory for High-Resolution Three-Dimensional Digital Imaging of Craniodental Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Theodore Cole, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 08/31/2003
* USD 144,990.00

The project aims to establish a portable laboratory for high-resolution, three-
dimensional digital imaging of craniodental morphology in primates and other
mammals. This objective is designed to help meet a long-range goal of better
understanding organismal diversity and the mechanisms and processes of
evolution. The laboratory will use state-of-the-art, automated moire fringe
projection to acquire three-dimensional "digital specimens" that are accurate to
microscopic tolerances. In addition to being very accurate, the laboratory will
be easily portable, making it ideal for remote use in museums. The laboratory
will be used for data acquisition in a multifaceted research program that uses
morphometrics, phylogenetics, the study of growth and development, and
biomechanics to understand how mammals evolve and adapt to their environments.
The project's major applications include research that is specifically focused
on the skull and dentition, because of their important roles in the adaptations
of all mammalian radiations. Three current, large-scale research projects will
use the laboratory: 1) an evolutionary study of skull form and function in
extant and fossil strepsirrhine primates; 2) theoretical and functional
morphology of the teeth in primates and other small mammals; and 3) development,
function, and evolution of evergrowing teeth in extant and fossil rodents. In
addition, there is a series of smaller research projects (with collaborators at
other universities) that will use the laboratory. All of these projects are
focused on the same goal of better understanding mammalian diversity and also
involve studies of craniodental (as well as soft tissue) form in primates and
other groups of mammals. Each project will require the development of new and
innovative quantitative methods, increasing the breadth of evolutionary
questions that can be asked and hypotheses that can be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a number of significant impacts on
research in physical anthropology, mammalogy, and vertebrate paleontology: 1)
the laboratory significantly advances the development of a large-scale research
program that is dedicated to better understanding the patterns and processes of
evolution and adaptation in primates and other mammals; 2) the major
applications of the project should lead to new discoveries of the biological
roles of craniodental structures in the interactions between mammals and their
environments; 3) the archiving of digital specimens helps to advance the goal of
"museums without walls", where morphological specimens can be made freely and
easily available to students and senior researchers throughout the worldwide
scientific community; and 4) establishment of the laboratory contributes
significantly to the interface between research and education, increasing the
use of virtual-reality technology for undergraduate and professional education,
including use of the Internet and the World Wide Web. More importantly, the
laboratory should provide increased research opportunities for undergraduate and
professional students in an urban university where there are significant
enrollments of minorities who are currently underrepresented in the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;