* 0219782
* Collaborative Research:   INSTANT, International Nusantara STratification ANd Transport Program
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Arnold Gordon, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,159,929.00

0219782/0220382 Gordon/Sprintall

The Indonesian Throughflow (ITF) links two oceans and in so doing provides a
pathway for modifying the stratification within each of these oceans as well as
sea-air fluxes that impact on such climate phenomena as ENSO and the Asian
Monsoon. While a number of measurement programs have recently been undertaken in
the Indonesian region, a serious shortcoming is their lack of temporal
coherence: the data cover different time periods and depths in the different
passages of the complex pathways linking the Pacific and Indian Oceans. This has
lead to ambiguity of the mean and variable nature of the ITF, and of the
transformation of the thermohaline and transport profiles within the interior
seas. The INSTANT program, involving contributions of 6 countries (USA, France,
Netherlands, Australia, Indonesia, Japan), will finally measure in a coordinated
fashion the ITF in the key throughflow passages (Makassar Strait, Lifamatola
Passage, Lombok Strait, Ombai Strait and Timor Passage) simultaneously. The
measurements span a 3 year period beginning in August 2003. The INSTANT
objectives are: 1) To determine the full depth velocity and property structure
of the Throughflow and its associated heat and freshwater flux; 2) To resolve
the annual, seasonal, and intraseasonal characteristics of the ITF transport and
property flux; 3) To investigate the storage and modification of the ITF waters
within the internal Indonesian seas, from their Pacific source characteristics
to the Indonesian Throughflow water exported into the Indian Ocean; and 4) To
contribute to the design of a cost-effective, long-term monitoring strategy for
the ITF. The intellectual merit and broader impact of INSTANT is clear: a
quantitative view of the ITF will be gained and this will establish the basis
for a long term "proxy" monitoring system, as required to capture the low
frequency ITF variability. The ITF waters are known to play an integral part in
the global thermohaline circulation and in the inter-basin transfer of climate
signals and their anomalies. The benefit to the broader oceanographic community
will be to finally allow the ITF to be faithfully simulated within ocean and
climate models. In addition, INSTANT will involve education for a graduate
student, and will offer research opportunities and training to undergraduates in
both Indonesia and the US.

