* 0219399
* ITR: Virtual Environment Technology and Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* James Blascovich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 499,978.00

This project examines the use of immersive virtual environment technology for
eyewitness identification of criminal suspects. This technology allows
individuals to enter and move about three-dimensional digital "worlds" in real-
time, observing and interacting with the environment and virtual others within
it. The rapid development of immersive virtual environment technology and
increased sophistication in three-dimensional digital imaging of people promises
a new age for determining accuracy of eyewitness identification of criminal
suspects. This is important societally as the general accuracy of eyewitness
identification of criminal suspects using older technologies (e.g., police
lineups, mug shots) has been questioned in the research literature as well as in
the judicial system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of the project
are threefold. First, the investigators will determine the validity of using
digital representations of humans within immersive virtual environments for
person recognition. Second, they will determine differences between traditional
and immersive virtual police lineups in terms of eyewitness identification
accuracy focusing on the increased contextual realism described above. Finally,
the investigators will use immersive virtual environment technology to develop
quantitative indexes of fairness of such lineups based on the similarity of
suspects to foils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immersive virtual environment technology
allows easier recreation of the same environmental conditions under which an
eyewitness viewed criminal activity involving suspects. Replicating such
conditions is not easily accomplished using older technologies. Hence, using
immersive virtual environment technology, witnesses can be asked to identify
suspects and foils at the same distance, viewing angle, lighting, weather (e.g.,
rain, fog) as was the case during their observation of the criminal activity.
Furthermore, this technology makes it easier to match foils to suspects in terms
of organismic variables (e.g., height, weight, hair style, coloring), clothing,
and movements thereby eliminating potential sources of bias. This technology
also allows the quantitative assessment of how well suspects and foils are
matched as opposed to pure subjective assessment using older
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;