* 0219004
* ITR:   PDE Based Nonlinear Algorithms for Processing Multi-Scale AudioSignals
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jack Xin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 452,536.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0219004&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xin,
Jack&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas, Austin&lt;br/&gt;Program: ITR
Small Awards&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR: Partial Differential Equation Based
Nonlinear Algorithms for Processing Multi-Scale Audio
Signals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to develop nonlinear
partial differential equation models and algorithms for processing multi-scale
audio signals. Nonlinearities are present in human auditory pathways, most
notably in active basilar membranes (BM) of cochleas and peripheral auditory
neurons. Our approach is to model the nonlinearities by combining first
principles (Newton's Laws) in cochlear mechanics with experimental measurements
of acoustic responses, at either the active BM level or the psycho-acoustic
level. This is achieved by enlarging the class of partial differential equations
(PDEs) derived from cochlear mechanical principles and neural phenomenology,
then optimizing solutions towards the given set of target data. The first phase
of research is to develop accurate, robust and fast numerical methods and
algorithms for solving model PDEs. These PDEs are nonlinear, nonlocal and
dispersive. Mathematical analysis will also be performed on the well-posedness
of the PDEs, as well as existence and approximation of multi-tone solutions. The
second phase is to select the optimal parameters and functional forms for these
PDEs to further approximate the given data set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carrying
out the project will generate accurate first principle based algorithms to
enhance the evaluation of available experimental data on human audition, and
strengthen our understanding of the computational role of human auditory
systems. The results will have broad impact on digital hearing aid design,
modeling of hearing loss, and audio compression. The project shall directly
contribute to amplifying human sensory abilities, enhancing the performance of
human beings, especially the hearing-impaired, in using audio information with
ease and for more tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: June 26, 2002&lt;br/&gt;