* 0219902
* ITR:   Guarding Quasi-Invariants:   Generalizing Specialization for System Software Security & Reliability
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

This project will develop concepts and techniques to improve the security and
reliability of system software by detecting and managing invisible links in the
code. Invisible links are dependencies among program components that are
difficult to find by looking at the code alone. A common source of invisible
links is the optimization process that removes "unnecessary" code due to some
system invariants. Software reuse and evolution may invalidate these invariants,
break invisible links, and cause crashes such as the Ariane 501 rocket. Further,
malicious attacks such as TOCTTOU (time-of-check to time-of-use) often exploit
invisible links.

Our approach combines three techniques that have not been brought together
previously. First is a software abstraction with support for flexible
correctness criteria definitions, called Transactional Activity Model, which
will demark code boundaries that contain invisible links. Second is the use of
wrappers to implement the enforcement of correctness criteria on top of
production software, for example, concurrency control around the Unix file
system for TOCTTOU. Third, program specialization techniques, in particular, the
guarding of quasi-invariants, can make invisible links visible and generate the
code to maintain the integrity of these links (e.g., making sure the file has
not been replaced by the attacker). This combination offers the promise to
reveal invisible links and therefore manage those dependencies explicitly.