* 0219463
* ITR:   Solutions for Exchange and Utilization of Geotechnical Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

CMS-0219463&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jean-Pierre Bardet&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University
of Southern California&lt;br/&gt;Title: "ITR SOLUTIONS FOR EXCHANGE AND
UTILIZATION &lt;br/&gt;OF GEOTECHNICAL INFORMATION"&lt;br/&gt;Geotechnical
information describes the characteristics of upper soil deposits (typically down
to a 50 m depth) on which rest most of our civil infrastructure (e.g.,
buildings, roads, bridges, airports, harbors, and factories). Each year, a large
amount of geotechnical information is generated with great efforts and expense
during the conduct of projects, including those sponsored by the National
Science Foundation (NSF), and many other local, state, and federal agencies. The
data and results of these projects are usually published as hardcopy reports,
without digital data. In addition, the steps in data collection and processing
are documented with conventional methods, making it often difficult even
impossible to scrutinize, revise and apply data. An NSF workshop, held at the
University of Southern California (USC) in 1998, clearly established a unanimous
consensus among researchers and practitioners for a better exchange of
geotechnical information. Nowadays Information Technologies (IT) unleashes new
powerful opportunities for collecting, exchanging, and utilizing geotechnical
information, which should be explored for the sake of our civil
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capitalizing on the benefits from recent
experiences gained during several IT projects carried out at USC since 1998, our
research creates ITR methods for resolving major issues associated with the
collection, exchange and utilization of geotechnical information. The research
integrates different IT methods to produce a comprehensive and complete
description and utilization of geotechnical information starting from the data
generation in the laboratory and field to its end usage by engineers and
planners involved in civil infrastructure systems. The specific objectives of
the research are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Define versatile data structures based on the
knowledge of domain experts on selected geotechnical information.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Define metadata by geotechnical domain experts describing the processes
generating geotechnical information, including development of automated metadata
collection for facilitating user input.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop data mining tools
for geotechnical information, and creating QA/QC algorithms integrating data and
metadata. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is concerned with the development
of IT methods for rendering geotechnical information usable to those involved
with planning, designing, building, and maintaining our civil infrastructure
systems. The tools and methods developed during the research will be tested in
the realistic work environments of five research collaborators, namely the
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), the Los Angeles Department
of Water and Power (LADWP), the California Geological Survey (CGS), the Bureau
of Research in Geology and Mines (BRGM) in France, and Kobe University in Japan.
It is anticipated that the IT concepts developed in this research will
contribute to pave the way to the creation of a virtual repository of
geotechnical information to be operated in the future by a consortium of local,
state and federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will benefit the
public in many ways. It will disseminate geotechnical information to the
students, researchers and practitioners. It will organize geotechnical
information, and improve its archival and retrieval for local, state and federal
agencies, universities, and companies. It will generate an information platform
for the development of large-scale geographic information systems of natural
hazards such as liquefaction-induced lateral spreads during earthquakes. It will
promote education and research in engineering, and stimulate data exchange and
collaboration among researchers and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;