* 0219892
* ITR:   Cooperative Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Hesham El Gamal, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2006
* USD 411,985.00

We are in the midst of a new wireless revolution, brought on by&lt;br/&gt;the
adoption of wireless networks for consumer, military,&lt;br/&gt;scientific and
other applications. Wireless networks are a&lt;br/&gt;collection of terminals,
or nodes, that are capable of&lt;br/&gt;transmitting and receiving information
to nearby nodes using&lt;br/&gt;wireless access methods. The harsh
characteristics of the wireless channel provide the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
challenge for communication between wireless network&lt;br/&gt;nodes. The key to
reliable communication over wireless links is the&lt;br/&gt;exploitation of
diversity, i.e., observation of the same&lt;br/&gt;information through different
fading conditions. While it is&lt;br/&gt;possible to harness diversity by
transmitting the same signal at&lt;br/&gt;different times or frequencies, the
implied redundancy is costly&lt;br/&gt;from a bandwidth perspective. It has been
shown, however, that&lt;br/&gt;introducing additional antennas at the source
and/or&lt;br/&gt;destination enables diversity gain without compromise
in&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth efficiency. Wireless network nodes may or may not be
equipped with multiple&lt;br/&gt;antennas. How then, can they ensure reliable
and&lt;br/&gt;efficient communication over the fading wireless channel? In this
research, we investigate&lt;br/&gt;novel strategies by which
nodes&lt;br/&gt;transmit and receive cooperatively,
allowing&lt;br/&gt;exploitation of spatial diversity gain that would otherwise
be&lt;br/&gt;unavailable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of structure in ``ad-
hoc'' wireless networks is&lt;br/&gt;advantageous from the viewpoint of
flexibility,&lt;br/&gt;re-configurability, and low management cost. The same
lack of&lt;br/&gt;structure, however, makes the implementation of
cooperative&lt;br/&gt;strategies challenging. It may be difficult, for example,
to know&lt;br/&gt;which of the helper nodes have correctly received the message.
In&lt;br/&gt;fact, it may be difficult to know which, if any, of the nodes
can&lt;br/&gt;be enlisted as helpers. In this research, we solve these
problems&lt;br/&gt;through the combination of distributed cooperative
coding&lt;br/&gt;strategies, clever protocols, and sophisticated
signal&lt;br/&gt;processing techniques. The PIs are leveraging their respective
expertise in&lt;br/&gt;space-time coding and blind signal processing to
devise&lt;br/&gt;practical strategies for cooperative communication
in&lt;br/&gt;wireless networks. In addition, this research investigates
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental limits on the capacity of cooperative
wireless&lt;br/&gt;networks through a study of information-theoretic
bounds.&lt;br/&gt;