* 0219649
* ITR:  Semantic Association Identification and Knowledge Discovery for National Security Applications (IDM Program)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Budak Arpinar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2005
* USD 212,000.00

Role of information technology (IT) is recognized to be a critical component in
the effort of improving national security, including homeland defense.
Applications of importance to national security, such as aviation security, pose
significant challenges to current information technology and provide excellent
source for further research in developing next generation IT solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, there is significant advance in applying
techniques from database and information systems, knowledge representation, AI,
information retrieval including text categorization, lexical and language
analysis and others in developing a new generation of semantic technologies.
Semantic technologies help in associating meaning of data and in more
meaningfully organizing data, in meaningfully correlating data, as well as in
converting data into information for more effective decision making and in
finding information that contextually relevant to users' needs. They help with
syntactic and representational as well as semantic interoperability. This
general area of research is also getting renewed attention now that there is
considerable excitement in the vision of the Semantic Web, characterized as the
next phase of the Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from several of our past and
continuing research projects have led to the development a semantic technology
called Semantic Content Organization and Retrieval Engine (SCORE). Using SCORE's
ability to quickly create ontology-driven agents without programming, it has
been possible to (a) quickly create and maintain large knowledge bases (such as
over one million entities and relationships per domain) base from multiple semi
structured and structured sources of knowledge in largely (but not fully)
automated ways, and (b) ability to create semantic (domain specific) metadata
from unstructured (text), semi structured and structured sources of static and
dynamic (e.g., query driven) content. This technology has also been
commercialized and is being used in aviation security and intelligence
applications. While specifics of these applications cannot be discussed due to
government and agency regulations, and many technologically possible
capabilities have yet to pass through policy considerations, we imagine a
prototype application of homeland security interest that help in identifying and
screening a passenger with respect to security risk to develop requirements for
relevant IT research. Two important challenges posed by such an application
include (a) rapid identification of semantic associations involving entities
(such as a passenger or a group of passengers on a flight), and (b) knowledge
discovery that identify semantic associations of interest (such as those that
may pose a risk).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to research new techniques
and improving effectiveness of techniques to identify semantic associations and
knowledge discovery by exploiting a large knowledge base. Specific objectives
include (a) ontology driven lazy semantic metadata extraction (i.e., annotation)
to complement traditional active metadata extraction techniques, and (c) formal
modeling and high-performance computation of semantic association discovery
including ontology-based contextual processing and relevancy ranking of
interesting relationships. Our approach involves bootstrapping earlier research
on semantic metadata extraction, multi-ontology query processing and other tools
from on-going InfoQuilt project so that we can create knowledge bases and
metadata from publicly available sources to enable meaningful evaluation of the
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;