* 0219919
* Biogeochemical Cycling and Authigenic Mineral Formation in Suboxic Tropical Mobile Mud Belts
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 798,516.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0219919&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coastal mud
wave at Sinnamary, French Guiana and the clinoform muds in the Gulf of Papua are
systems wherein massive suboxic diagenesis takes place and represent sites that
effectively remineralize terrestrial and marine organic matter. Two scientists
from the State University of New York at Stony Brook plan to continue their
research efforts in these tropical mobile mud belts to refine their
interpretations of the biogeochemical processes at these sites, determine the
interaction between the mobile mud belts and surrounding sedimentary
environments, complete laboratory experiments on authigenesis and microbial
metabolic activity and develop comparative models of these two regions. In
French Guiana, the PIs hope to assess the properties of sedimentary material
which becomes entrained into the suboxic mobile zone during wave migration and
mangrove erosion. In the Gulf of Papua, this team of scientists will sample
across the shelf from the mangrove fringe to the foreset region at 60m water
depth during the NW Monsoon and SE Trade Period. The goals of the project as
this site are the following: (1) quantify and model cycling rates, reaction
pathways, reactive material source, sedimentary storage of biogenic debris and
nutrient remineralization in the top 1-3m; (2) determine relative role of
unsteady versus steady sedimentation processes in maintaining the biogeochemical
properties across the region: (3) characterize the associations and interactions
of benthic biological communities with particular biogeochemical/physical
regimes; and (4) obtain sedimentary authigenic mineral suites and biogenic trace
records for environmental reconstruction. The team of scientists will
collaborate with scientists from the University of Washington whom will be
looking at the sediment dynamics of the Gulf of Papua, as well as Australian
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;