* 0219681
* ITR/SF&amp;IT:  Fast Multipole Translation Algorithms for Solution of the 3D Helmholtz Equation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Isaak Mayergoyz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 650,000.00

This proposal concerns new improvements that have the potential to achieve
significant speed-up for the fast multipole method (FMM) for use in solving the
Helmholtz and other problems used to model phenomena encountered in
electromagnetics, acoustics, biology etc. Solving larger problems holds promise
for better design on the one hand, and elucidation of new physics/biology on the
other. Discretizations of the partial differential equations arising from these
equations yield large systems of equations for which both direct and iterative
solution techniques are expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction by
Rokhlin &amp; Greengard of the FMM generated tremendous interest in the
scientific computing community, as it demonstrated a way to generate structure
and achieve fast solution of equations without relying on the discretization.
Despite its promise, the algorithm has not achieved widespread implementation
for many practically important problems that could use the promised speedups.
Some researchers have reported that the approximate integrals both make
implementation difficult, and in practice they have been shown to introduce
stability problems. We have recently derived exact expressions for the
translation and rotation of multipole solutions of the Helmholtz equation, which
enable fast computation via simple recursions. Further we have obtained very
promising results on the properties of the translation operators that enable
creation of very tight error bounds. Our translations have the same asymptotic
complexity as the standard integral expressions, but with much smaller
coefficients. We have also found that the translation operator can be decomposed
into the product of sparse recurrence matrices and this can be the basis for a
T(p2) algorithm, which we propose to pursue. Based on these expressions, we will
develop software for solution of different problems using the FMM. To be useful
in pushing ahead the information technology revolution our software will be well
documented and published in accessible peer reviewed forums. Such availability
will act to improve adoption by large numbers of practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;