* 0219734
* State-Time Approach for Analysis and Simulation of Complex Multicomponent Systems Using Future Massively Parallel Computing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Kurt Anderson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2007
* USD 234,920.00

Kurt S. Anderson&lt;br/&gt;Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal
No. 0219734&lt;br/&gt;State-Time Approach for Analysis and Simulation of Complex
Multicomponent Systems Using Future Massively Parallel Computing
Resources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objectives of this work are to
research state-time methods for performing analysis, simulation, and
optimization of complex dynamic systems. The goal is to produce dynamic systems
analysis formulations which will be able to more effectively and fully exploit
anticipated massively parallel computing resources (i.e. &gt; 106 processors).
The proposed space-time formulation permits the treatment of time within the
equations of motion as a generalized coordinate. This permits the problem of
performing the computer simulation, and associated analysis to be parallelized
over both space and time, resulting in a far greater level of coarse grain
parallelization with an associated decrease in simulation turnaround time. This
significant increase arises from the fact that the most advanced of today's
parallel dynamics analysis algorithms are sequential in time. Thus
parallelization over the domain of the system using currently promoted methods
is only beneficial when using a surprisingly limited number of processors, even
if many are available. Parallelizing over both space and time results in a
drastic increase in the number of coarse grain calculations that may be
distributed over the available processors. By forming the equations and solving
them in the proposed state-time manner, the level of required sequential
calculation relative that which may be performed in parallel is reduced by a
factor approximately equal to the number of temporal integration steps (often
&gt; 105) which would have been performed using current approaches. The proposed
method, if successful, will allow the use of more detailed models, for more
complex systems, with results obtained at a small fraction of the time required
using current formulations.&lt;br/&gt;