* 0219326
* ITR:    Collaborative Research:   Solving PDEs Using Low Separation-Rank Representations and Optimal Quadratures for Expontials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Lucas Monzon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

This project develops time-domain solvers for wave propagation
problems&lt;br/&gt;in two and three dimensions, with fundamentally improved
properties,&lt;br/&gt;namely, significantly reduced sampling requirements and,
at the same time,&lt;br/&gt;significantly higher accuracy. Such solvers would
allow modeling of linear and, eventually, nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;wave propagation
in domains that are thousands of characteristic wavelengths&lt;br/&gt;in size,
with interfaces and variable coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;This approach would also
provide improved bases for solving&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear advection-diffusion
problems. The solvers are built upon two&lt;br/&gt;new techniques, namely,
optimal quadratures to represent bandlimited functions, and a numerical
generalization of separation of variables to accelerate applying higher-
dimensional operators. Each&lt;br/&gt;technique contains the potential to
significantly advance computational&lt;br/&gt;science across a wide range of
applications. Together they provide a&lt;br/&gt;new paradigm that efficiently
organizes the information contained in&lt;br/&gt;operators governing physical
phenomena. This project develops these techniques&lt;br/&gt;further, and
develops multiresolution representations for operators and&lt;br/&gt;functions,
based on the optimal quadratures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any computational
modeling of natural phenomena requires discretization&lt;br/&gt;of the
underlying mathematical equations. This project addresses questions
of&lt;br/&gt;optimality and efficiency of such discretizations, and of
organization&lt;br/&gt;o information for two important modeling areas, wave
propagation and&lt;br/&gt;geophysical fluid dynamics. This research aims to
generate a much wider use of&lt;br/&gt;efficient techniques for representing
information in scientific modeling, and to&lt;br/&gt;increase the speed and
accuracy of simulations by up to two orders of magnitude,&lt;br/&gt;with
foreseeable benefits to such areas as seismology, remote
sensing,&lt;br/&gt;acoustics, optics, geophysical fluid dynamics, and quantum
chemistry. It would&lt;br/&gt;reduce the computational cost of obtaining high
accuracy, which is necessary to&lt;br/&gt;describe phenomena that are highly
sensitive to changes in physical&lt;br/&gt;parameters, and that often cause
technological bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;This Collaborative Research is led by the
Department of Applied&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics at the University of Colorado at
Boulder, and includes the Department of&lt;br/&gt;Meteorology at the University
of Maryland at College Park. It will fund&lt;br/&gt;one research associate, two
visiting scientists from UMD and Ohio&lt;br/&gt;University, and one graduate
student in a diverse research group that includes a&lt;br/&gt;research
associate, two postdoctoral researchers, a graduate student, and
four&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;