* 0219822
* ITR: Power Efficient Multimedia Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Goodman, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

The large number and diversity of quality of service (QoS) measures present a
significant challenge to the design and operation of multimedia wireless
communications systems. Each information source (data, audio, video) has its own
metrics of signal quality and the network has an aggregate measure of capacity
for each source (for example, Erlangs of telephone traffic and data throughput).
In addition to signal quality and network capacity, the battery life of a
portable terminal has a major effect on the value of mobile information services
to consumers. Existing knowledge of quality optimization is generally confined
to studies of individual sources. In the 1990s, a significant body of knowledge
was created on radio resource management for cellular telephone communications.
More recently, the research community has turned its attention to wireless data
and video. Each study focuses on one or two quality measures for one type of
information: for example, power and distortion for video; power and throughput
for data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a more comprehensive view by
considering the collection of QoS measures to be a point in a multidimensional
space. Given a system design and a set of operating conditions, the achievable
points constitute a feasibility volume, with optimum points on the surface.
Within this formulation, we study simultaneous transmission of data and video by
analyzing projections of the volume onto various combinations of QoS dimensions
including: &lt;br/&gt;video distortion;&lt;br/&gt;data throughput for each
source;&lt;br/&gt;data utility for each source;&lt;br/&gt;total power
dissipation (signal processing power and transmission power) in a
terminal;&lt;br/&gt;number of simultaneous video transmissions at a base
station;&lt;br/&gt;aggregate base station throughput;&lt;br/&gt;aggregate base
station utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis is on power efficient
communications and the results provide guidance on joint adaptation of the
following properties of terminals that transmit signals to the same base
station: transmission power and rate in data terminals and transmission power,
compression, and channel coding in video terminals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;