* 0219859
* Theory and Practice of Point Line Kinematics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Kwun-Lon Ting, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 01/31/2006
* USD 249,409.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a theory on point-line
kinematics and its applications on the analysis, characterization, synthesis,
and control of point-line motion. A point-line operator based on geometry and
Clifford algebra will be developed to express a point-line transformation.
Subsequently, this transformation will allow a point-line to be considered as an
independent rigid element having a completely specified motion without invoking
rigid body transformation. Based on a principle similar to the point-line
operator, the theory will be extended to include line displacement and rigid
body motion, in which parameters responsible for causing incompletely specified
motion can be removed or added as needed. Issues on the synthesis for finite and
infinitesimal point-line motions will be investigated. The results will be
applied to enhance the design capability of spatial mechanisms and manipulators.
The project will also explore for the first time the full configuration space
concerning the tool path generation in five-axis numerical control machining for
interference avoidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results will
lead to the first point-line kinematics theory comparable to the well-developed
rigid body kinematics theory. In addition, it will lead to a unified kinematics
theory for lines, point-lines, and rigid bodies. It allows one to understand and
treat a point-line motion by viewing the point-line as an integrated rigid
element in a way similar to that of points or rigid bodies. It will lead to a
mathematical language such that the characteristics of point-line motions can be
rigorously articulated. It will serve as a catalyst and foundation for
advancements in kinematics, robotics, computer-aided geometric design, and
manufacturing technology. Because many tool operations such as numerical control
machining, drilling, screwing, riveting, cutting, probing, insertion, and
electric wire discharge machining are basically point-line operations, the
project's results will enhance the capability of making improvements on the
motion synthesis, control, and quality of these operations. It is also
recognized that because of the fundamental nature of the subject, the impact may
extend to other aspects of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;