* 0219315
* ITR:   Integrating Intrusion Detection with Intelligent Visualization and Interaction Strategies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert St. Amant, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2006
* USD 415,099.00

The overall objective of this project is to develop new intrusion detection
techniques by integrating intrusion detection with visualization and intelligent
interaction strategies. The resulting system allows a user to easily monitor an
underlying intrusion detection system (IDS), intercede if it fails to detect
potential attacks, identify and address attacks, and update the IDS with attack
profiles so that future occurrences will be properly reported. The expected
contributions of this project include (1) interactive intrusion detection
algorithms that capitalize on human knowledge and judgment, (2) visualization
and interaction techniques that support rapid, accurate, and effective
monitoring of potential attacks, and (3) semi-automated tools for constructing
and evaluating attack profiles to extend the capabilities of an intrusion
detection system.

Research in this project offers the potential for significant advances in our
understanding of how to detect and prevent network intrusions. We expect to make
important breakthroughs on a number of fronts, including (1) new methods to
automatically identify sophisticated intrusion attempts, (2) new techniques that
harness a human observer's unique analysis talents to augment and extend an
automated IDS's ability to respond to new or unexpected attacks, and (3) new
approaches that allow automated detection algorithms to continually improve by
learning from their users. Moreover, the multidisciplinary approach we are using
offers the significant benefit of making the problem-solving processes of
intrusion detection accessible and available to non-experts. Interactive systems
that incorporate visualization and some degree of intelligent assistance can be
very appealing to students and even casual computer users, providing a platform
for exploration and further learning about the topic. Due to growing interest in
the area of intrusion and appropriate countermeasures, the impact of this work
will be broadly felt. The research will lead to improved techniques for
intrusion detection, and thus to significantly enhanced computer and network
security.