* 0219699
* ITR:  Algorithms and Software for Knowledge Acquisition  from Heterogeneous Distributed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Drena Dobbs, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2006
* USD 223,749.00

Development of high throughput data acquisition technologies together with
advances in computing, and communications have resulted in an explosive growth
in the number, size, and diversity of potentially useful information sources.
However, the massive size, heterogeneity, autonomy, and distributed nature of
the data repositories present significant hurdles in extracting knowledge from
this data. This research seeks to overcome these hurdles through the design,
analysis, and implementation of:&lt;br/&gt;a) Efficient distributed and
cumulative learning algorithms with provable performance guarantees (relative to
their centralized or batch counterparts) for knowledge acquisition from
distributed data sources;&lt;br/&gt;b) Customizable information extraction
agents that can effectively exploit domain or context-specific ontologies
supplied by the users to extract the information needed for learning (e.g.,
statistics) from distributed data sources despite differences in query
capabilities, interfaces, ontologies, and access restrictions to facilitate
analysis of heterogeneous distributed data from different
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;c) INDUS - a test-bed for knowledge acquisition from
heterogeneous distributed data in computational molecular biology (e.g.,
characterization of protein sequence-structure-function relationships using
diverse sources of biological data).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting
algorithms and software can accelerate, potentially by an order of magnitude,
the rate of scientific&lt;br/&gt;