* 0219185
* The Analysis of Material from Archaic Cerros de Trincheras Sites in Chihuahua, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Robert Hard, Mexico-North Research Network, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 99,452.00

With NSF funding, Robert Hard at the University of Texas at San Antonio and John
Roney of the Bureau of Land Management have been exploring why hunters and
gatherers began to farm in the Southwest. The shift to farming is perhaps one of
the most important historical developments to humankind as agriculture is the
economic basis of virtually all civilizations, past and present. In 1997 Hard
and Roney began archaeological excavations at a dramatic hilltop settlement in
northwest Chihuahua, Mexico about 125 miles southwest of El Paso, Texas. On this
hill, three thousand years ago, Native Americans constructed over 500 terraces
overlooking the surrounding desert grasslands and the Rio Casas Grandes. This
site and a series of associated settlements have proven to be the largest, early
settled farming communities in Northwest Mexico and the American Southwest and
pushes the age of settled farming for the region back 1,500 years. The terraced
site of Cerro Juanaquena has revealed numerous artifacts including spear points,
pipes, food grinding implements, and house remains. Hard and Roney are examining
these materials to consider the causes and consequences of these precocious
settlements. They argue that the terraces were built, not as agricultural
features, but to form flat living space so they could live atop this highly
defensible hill and repeal potential raiders. The current NSF funding will be
used to complete the laboratory analyses of the artifacts so a book and other
publications may be completed. Hard and Roney's work has already resulted in
numerous scientific publications including an article in Science. National
newspapers, including the Washington Post, New York Times, and Los Angeles
Times, as well as broadcasts and publications in Canada, Mexico, and Europe have
reported on their work. Hard and Roney have given 18 public presentations in
Washington D.C., Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona and another 20 presentations at
international, national, and regional scientific meetings.