* 0219211
* ITR:    Mesoscopic Modeling and Simulation:    A Novel Approach to Monte Carlo Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 446,750.00

Proposal # 0219211 PI: Markos A. Katsoulakis Institution: University of
Massachusetts Amherst Title: ITR: Mesoscopic Modeling and Simulation: A Novel
Approach to Monte Carlo

ABSTRACT

This project is concerned with a novel framework for Monte Carlo simulations
based on recently developed coarse-grained stochastic mesoscopic models.
Mesoscopic models are stochastic partial differential equations which are
rigorously derived as asymptotic limits from microscopic Monte Carlo (MC)
algorithms by means of techniques from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics.
Although such models describe the mesoscopic scales, which are much larger than
the underlying molecular scales, they still include detailed microscopic
information on particle interactions and dynamics and can systematically model
anisotropies and multiple micromechanisms. Another attractive feature of
mesoscopic models is the inclusion of random fluctuations derived directly from
the underlying master equation and yielding important nucleation and pattern
formation and selection mechanisms. Finally, formal and rigorous asymptotics
using Large Deviation and WKB expansions as well as preliminary numerical
simulations indicate that the MC algorithms and the corresponding stochastic
mesoscopic models produce essentially identical results for such delicate
quantities as nucleation rates and phase transitions. The main research
objectives of this proposal are: (a) to develop non-equilibrium coarse-grained
MC algorithms by numerically solving the stochastic mesoscopic equations using
highly efficient spectral-based methods and carry out detailed benchmarkings
against conventional MC, and (b) to apply the proposed computational tools to
applications arising in pattern formation in advanced materials and molecular
separation in nanoporous films.

Because of their fundamental nature and their versatility in describing complex
out-of-equilibrium interactions between atoms and molecules, molecular dynamics
simulations and Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms have become preeminent computational
tools for science and engineering research. With the advent of enhanced
computing capabilities, these methods can provide unprecedented insights into
numerous problems ranging from physicochemical and biological processes to
biomaterials, drug design, pattern recognition, and image processing. Despite
their widespread use and the substantial progress in related computational
methods, molecular algorithms are limited to short length and time scales.
Hence, they are capable of simulating only a relatively small number of atoms or
molecules for quite short time periods. On the other hand, device sizes and
morphological features observed in experiments often involve much larger spatial
and/or temporal scales. A major obstacle in meeting this multiscale modeling
challenge is the lack of a rigorous mathematical and computational framework
providing a direct link from the atomistic scale to the complex mesoscopic and
macroscopic phenomena that are the result of the microscopic interactions. In
this direction, our work focuses on developing novel stochastic models and
algorithms capable of describing much larger length and time scales than
conventional MC simulations while still incorporating microscopic details. We
intend to apply the computational methods to provide new insights into two
engineering problems, which are currently intractable with conventional MC
techniques: (1) the study of self-organizing micromechanisms and their role in
pattern formation in advanced materials, and (2) the transport and separation of
molecules in nanoporous films and membranes.

