* 0219953
* Terrorism and Corporate Crisis Management:  The Strategic  Effect of the September 11 Attacks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Louise Comfort, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2004
* USD 339,997.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade
Center were an attack on corporate America. Of the almost 3,000 persons killed,
most were employees of private corporations and most of the direct economic
losses were sustained by the private sector. Corporate America is in the midst
of a strategic change as the issues of crisis preparedness, physical sand
information security and continuity of operations have become central and
immediate in the days and months following the terrorist attacks. Private sector
businesses have come to realize that their very survival may depend on their
preparedness to mitigate the consequences of and respond to extreme events. The
lack of a firm conceptual and experiential basis for business crisis management
decision-making and planning raises the potential for relatively unproductive
and wasteful decisions and resource allocations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to conduct the necessary research to better
understand the impacts of extreme events and to communicate the results in a
manner that contributes to the ability of businesses to prepare for and recover
from extreme events. The following research based products are proposed to meet
this objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A methodology for quantifying the
organizational and economic impacts of extreme events on
businesses.&lt;br/&gt;2. A framework for evaluating corporate preparedness for
these extreme events.&lt;br/&gt;3. A definition of the common body of knowledge
for executive level crisis managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is unique in its focus on individual businesses and the consequences resulting
form terrorist acts. Previous research efforts have addressed larger levels of
aggregation such as impacts on regional economies resulting from natural hazard
events and have typically address the impacts of individual disasters. The
methodology for quantifying organizational and economic impacts will utilize the
limited empirical results obtained in prior studies. The complex inter-
organizational coordination among private sector businesses and between
businesses and the government and non-government organization resulting from the
September 11th attacks will be investigated and incorporated into the research
products. The evolution of these relationships that include a level of
uniqueness for terrorists attacks will be valuable to business crisis managers
as they prepare for potential future extreme events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team comprised of faculty and students from The George Washington
University and the University of Pittsburgh has the experience and credibility
to complete the research and report its result with the proposed two year
research schedule and proposed budget. This experience and credibility will
enable the research team to know where to go for the required data and
information and will provide the initial personal contacts necessary for access.
The research will build on the results of a prior NSF supported evaluation of
the inter-organizational response to the September 11 attacks and a current
Sloan Foundation grant that is developing the requirements for the response to a
mass casualty event in a metropolitan area. &lt;br/&gt;