* 0219235
* Valuing Mobile Computing
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Ernst Berndt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2008
* USD 145,000.00

Since the introduction of the IBM PC in 1981, "personal" computers have
undergone rapid technological innovation in terms of performance, storage,
communication capability, and portability. While significant effort has been
directed at quantifying the price-performance relationship in PC's, surprisingly
little attention has been paid to portability. This attribute is evidently
highly valued by users: sales of mobile computers (laptops and palmtops) account
for one third of total PC sales and are increasing rapidly, despite very
substantial price premiums over desktop models with comparable performance.
Using hedonics and other econometric techniques, this project evaluates the
economic benefits to users arising from improved performance and rapid diffusion
of mobile computers, through examination of the price, welfare, and demand
implications of the emergence of portability as a "new good" in the PC market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the data collection phase of the
project. An existing large database of PC computer prices and characteristics
will be extended and updated. This effort will include gathering data on sales
volumes by model, as well as on prices and characteristics of "new" devices such
as palmtops and PDAs, which have not been tracked in the past. Data for earlier
years will be "back-filled" to increase the frequency of observations to
quarterly or monthly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly falling prices and
continuing technological innovation will continue to drive the diffusion of
mobile devices into many areas of economic and social interaction. This work
will provide insights into the economic consequences of this important trend,
particularly those related to consumer welfare, tradeoffs between portability
and performance, and complementarity/substitutability of fixed and mobile
computers. As government statistical agencies continue to develop procedures for
tracking price changes and technological progress in computing-intensive
sectors, this work will also make contributions to the vigorous debate on
evaluating the contribution of IT to growth and productivity. &lt;br/&gt;