* 0219196
* ITR: Co-constructing Scientific Understanding by Integrating the Social and Cognitive Mechanisms of Learning Through Shared, Active Representations in Interdisciplinary Context
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Eva Erdosne Toth, Allegheny-Singer Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2006
* USD 356,051.00

EIA-0219196&lt;br/&gt;Eva Toth&lt;br/&gt;Allegheny-Singer Research
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "ITR: Co-constucting scientific
understanding by integrating the social and the cognitive mechanisms of learning
through shared, active representatives in interdisciplinary
context."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project involves the development and
testing of an effective instructional methodology for software-supported,
shared, active knowledge construction that is portable to a variety of science
courses at different levels of student experience. The research focuses on the
interface of cognition, collaboration and representational guidance and draws
attention to issues that are universal in all interdisciplinary, scientific
inquiry settings centered on enhancing understandingof technologically and
methodologically sound ways to reach underrepresented groups and perform cross-
cultural, collaborative problem solving activities over distances. Using
software tools developed under separate funding, the project involves a rigorous
experimental study of the mechanisms of cognitive change that are embedded in
the social circumstances of learning. With the participation of high school
teachers, college students and high school students, the project will contribute
to understanding of (a)the function of peer audience to foster learning, (b)the
most effective methods of technological support for communication between local
and distal peers and (c) congnitively-guided pedagogies that are effective in
enriching the learning experiences of students in various technological and
instructional setting and in underrepresented regions and cultures. The project
is geographically located in an urban setting with a large minority and under-
represented population and involves college students, high school teachers, high
school students and international collaboration. The outcome of the project will
be a practical approach for effective pedagogies to elicit active learning in
complex, interdisciplinary and technology driven environments that are expected
to prevail in the 21st century.