* 0219053
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Accurate Representations of Signals in a Coarse-Grained Environment
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Truong-Thao Nguyen, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ashwani K. Kapila
* 07/31/2006
* USD 192,489.00

The aim is to provide a better mathematical framework and alternative design
methodologies for coarse quantization of signals in a highly oversampled
setting. The central themes is "sigma-delta quantization" in analog-to-digital
conversion of audio signals and its counterpart "error-diffusion" in digital
halftoning of images. In both cases, a given target analog signal is represented
by a judiciously chosen one-bit (or few-bit) sequence which approximates the
signal in a suitable low-pass subspace. A wide range of different schemes exist
for this purpose, each corresponding to a different implementation and
approximation order. As our primary mathematical objective, we expect to better
understand the law of error decay of the existing schemes as well as to improve
on these by new designs. On the algorithmic side, we aim to extend this analysis
to settings with computational and other implementational constraints.

The fact that digital signals and data sets can be processed, stored and
retrieved with great precision and speed places high demands of accuracy on the
conversion process from and to the analog world. However, the devices used in
the translation process (such as in the case of analog-to-digital and digital-
to-analog conversion circuits in audio applications, and printers in image
reproduction) are of necessity analog devices, which have physical limitations
that, at first sight, conflict with those accuracy demands. To cope with this
problem, engineers have empirically developed special signal processing
techniques leading to alternative signal and number representations that are
quite different from standard decimal or binary representations. Typical
techniques take advantage of the highly accurate performance of the analog
devices in sampling very densely in time or space to compensate for the lack of
amplitude precision of those devices. Interestingly, while these empirical
schemes have proved efficient and have been used in consumer products for a long
time, the corresponding framework of signal processing has little mathematical
support. We aim to study these schemes in more detail, with the goals of
improving the mathematical theory as well as proposing variants that outperform
those used presently, and to identify a wider range of applications.