* 0219078
* ITR: Novel Imaging Devices for Motion Estimation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Joshua Gluckman, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 259,706.00

Novel Imaging Devices for Motion Estimation Abstract

Advances in both imaging sensors and the processing of image data will provide
the ability to create accurate and detailed models of the world. The numerous
applications of such a capability have driven a considerable amount of research
into the problem of extracting structure and motion from image data. While
progress has been made most of the research to date has concentrated on the use
of conventional camera technology. The proposed research aims to explore novel
ways to obtain image data. Optics will be used to manipulate the field of view
of a conventional lens such that the estimation of motion and structure is
accurate and robust. The first step of this research is to study the mapping
from scene rays to image pixels to determine what type of mapping is optimal.
Next, mirrors, lenses, and other optical devices will be used to build sensors
that realize these mappings. To take advantage of these new sensors, novel
computational techniques will also be developed. This research will result in a
set of new imaging systems for three dimensional modeling and will be useful to
scientists and engineers in a variety of fields including digital imaging,
computer graphics, human-computer interaction, and robotics.