* 0219979
* ITR: Constructive Visualization: Understanding Spatial Relationships Through Interaction
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Peter Schroder, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2005
* USD 412,000.00

Complex spatial structures permeate the environment of the future. Nanoscale
molecular machines allow sophisticated methods of computing and integrating data
with environments. Human-scale industrial designs provide transportation
solutions with greater control and efficiency. Architectural forms, growing in
both complexity and inter-connectivity, define our experience in the ever-
expanding city. While many advances have been made in visualizing these shapes
in three dimensions, designers have yet to leverage the power of Information
Technology in the early stages of creation. Initial ideas are still mostly
constructed with two-dimensional paper sketches or simple physical tools, such
as the molecular modeling kits commonly used in organic chemistry. Digital
representations in contrast are mutable, dynamic, and re-configurable at a
lowest level of the computer. These are difficult for humans to manipulate
effectively with contemporary 2D interfaces. Thus designers, engineers, artists
and architects must choose either a traditional, pre-Information Technology
environment, where they can freely play with simple building blocks, or a
digital space where complex elements can be composed only after exhaustive data
transformations, strict planning and foresight, and the occasional trick. The
work proposed here bridges this divide by creating tools that facilitate (1) the
construction of 3D models with the speed of pencil sketches; (2) physical
intuition of tangible models; (3) fluid representation of digital data
structures; and (4) active&lt;br/&gt;response of algorithmic
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the work will have immediate
application in the fields of architecture, industrial design, and molecular
chemistry. Because the research team treats these separate problems within a
common framework the results will be broadly applicable to many diverse
problems, fundamentally altering the human ability to create structures in
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;