* 0219123
* Collaborative Research: A Joint NU-UIUC Project for the Development of New Integrated Tools for Predicting, Monitoring and Controlling Ground Movements due to Excavations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2011
* Youssef Hashash, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2011
* USD 2,153,505.00

CMS-0219123&lt;br/&gt;PI: Richard J. Finno&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Collaborative: A joint NU-UIUC Project for
Development of New Integrated Tools for Predicting, Monitoring and Controlling
Ground Movements due to
Excavations"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased
urbanization, population density and traffic congestion in major urban centers
in the US has lead to a greater demand for underground space. Current homeland
security concerns have prompted consideration of use of underground space for
placement and protection of critical and sensitive infrastructure along urban
corridors. With new development, and increasingly more redevelopment within the
urban areas, there is a clear need to efficiently and safely develop underground
space. A major concern when placing deep excavations in urban environments is
the impact of construction-related ground movements on adjacent buildings and
utilities. The ground movements cause structures supported by the affected
ground to deform and possibly sustain damage. It is critically important to
predict and control the magnitude and distribution of the ground movements that
result from creating the underground space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research project aims to develop new, integrated tools for
predicting, monitoring, and controlling ground movements associated with
excavations in urban areas. The project is a joint venture between Northwestern
University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore and develop new technologies that
offer substantial promise for greatly enhancing the construction control process
and attendant mitigation of ground deformations including: (1) field
instrumentation and sensors with wireless communication capabilities, (2) data
storage and display, including the display of construction progress and ground
and building movements in a virtual reality environment, and, (3) intelligent,
self-updating numerical models to simulate the excavation and support process
and to compute anticipated ground and structure movements. These new
technologies and improvements will be field tested in real time during
excavation projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has strong educational
and industry outreach components in addition to its research components. A group
of contractors and engineering firms that have national practices will provide
access to ongoing excavation projects and participate in the project advisory
board. Faculty and their students from primarily undergraduate institutions will
participate in the project. &lt;br/&gt;