* 0219314
* ITR:    Collaborative Research:    Solving PDEs Using Low Separation-Rank Representations and Optimal Quadratures for Exponentials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Ferdinand Baer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 60,924.00

This project develops time-domain solvers for wave propagation
problems&lt;br/&gt;in two and three dimensions, with fundamentally improved
properties,&lt;br/&gt;namely, significantly reduced sampling requirements and,
at the same&lt;br/&gt;time, significantly higher accuracy. Such solvers would
allow modeling&lt;br/&gt;of linear and, eventually, nonlinear wave propagation
in domains that&lt;br/&gt;are thousands of characteristic wavelengths in size,
with interfaces and&lt;br/&gt;variable coefficients. This approach would also
provide improved bases&lt;br/&gt;for solving nonlinear advection-diffusion
problems. The solvers are&lt;br/&gt;built upon two new techniques, namely,
optimal quadratures to represent&lt;br/&gt;bandlimited functions, and a
numerical generalization of separation of&lt;br/&gt;variables to accelerate
applying higher-dimensional operators. Each&lt;br/&gt;technique contains the
potential to significantly advance computational&lt;br/&gt;science across a wide
range of applications. Together they provide a&lt;br/&gt;new paradigm that
efficiently organizes the information contained in&lt;br/&gt;operators governing
physical phenomena. This project develops these&lt;br/&gt;techniques further,
and develops multiresolution representations for&lt;br/&gt;operators and
functions, based on the optimal quadratures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any
computational modeling of natural phenomena requires discretization&lt;br/&gt;of
the underlying mathematical equations. This project
addresses&lt;br/&gt;questions of optimality and efficiency of such
discretizations, and of&lt;br/&gt;organization of information for two important
modeling areas, wave&lt;br/&gt;propagation and geophysical fluid dynamics. This
research aims to&lt;br/&gt;generate a much wider use of efficient techniques for
representing&lt;br/&gt;information in scientific modeling, and to increase the
speed and&lt;br/&gt;accuracy of simulations by up to two orders of magnitude,
with&lt;br/&gt;foreseeable benefits to such areas as seismology, remote
sensing,&lt;br/&gt;acoustics, optics, geophysical fluid dynamics, and quantum
chemistry. It&lt;br/&gt;would reduce the computational cost of obtaining high
accuracy, which is&lt;br/&gt;necessary to describe phenomena that are highly
sensitive to changes in&lt;br/&gt;physical parameters, and that often cause
technological bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;This Collaborative Research is led by the
Department of Applied&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics at the University of Colorado at
Boulder, and includes the&lt;br/&gt;Department of Meteorology at the University
of Maryland at College&lt;br/&gt;Park. It will fund one research associate, two
visiting scientists from&lt;br/&gt;UMD and Ohio University, and one graduate
student in a diverse research&lt;br/&gt;group that includes a research
associate, two postdoctoral researchers,&lt;br/&gt;a graduate student, and four
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;