* 0219075
* ITR:  Development of an enhanced computer-assisted analysis system for earth science investigation of laminated sediments and tree rings
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jonathan Overpeck, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 436,480.00

0219075&lt;br/&gt;Overpeck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural archives with year-by-
year resolution (isannual resolution proxieslo), such as tree-rings, varved
sediments, corals, mollusks, and speleothems, are becoming increasingly critical
for understanding the nature of past environmental variability, and how it may
change in the future. The most obvious use of these archives is in understanding
the patterns and causes of natural interannual to century-scale climate
variability, and how humans may be altering this variability. They are also
central, however, to an increasingly broad range of Earth Science applications,
including documenting paleoseismicity, calibrating the radiocarbon time scale,
investigating hydrologic variability, and understanding paleoecosystem dynamics.
Their capability to provide the absolute time scale needed to understand these
dynamics on many societally-relevant time scales is particularly important. At
present, extracting information from these sources is extraordinarily labor-
intensive, resulting in undesirable limitations on temporal resolution and
replication that result in excessive uncertainties concerning the environmental
signals of interest. This applies even when sophisticated detectors are used to
make basic measurements, since great care must be taken in stringing series of
measurements together into very long time series whilst retaining all
information that might turn out to be useful later in the analysis. Existing
image-analysis software alone cannot solve this problem. The labor-intensive
analysis that these records require has created a strong incentive to develop
instrumentation that can be used to process samples more efficiently, and with
more interpretive power than is available from off-the- shelf image processing
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Information Technology Research Small Grants
Program (ITR) award will support the development of software for automated
counting of annually laminated climate change proxies (tree rings and varves).
The developments are based on a prototype computer-assisted dendrochronology
workstation and associated control and image analysis software (TREES v. 1) that
was previously funded to co-PI Schowengerdt by NSF's Anthropology program
(BCS-9601867). This award will support the creation of TREES v.2, a Linux-based
PC version of TREES v.1, which was written exclusively for the SUN platform, and
VARVES v.1, also Linux-based software designed to automate counting of laminated
lake and marine sediments. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;