* 0219800
* Computer and Mathematics Scholar Support Alliance
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* David Seppala-Holtzman, St Joseph's College Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 406,265.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;St. Joseph's College provides a strong
academic education rooted in a liberal arts tradition. The CSEMS program will
supplement existing scholarships to encourage and support thirty eligible
students, with demonstrated financial need, enabling them to complete degrees
and enter the high technology workforce as qualified
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the CSEMS goals, we
are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Increasing the number of well-educated and skilled employees
in technical areas of national need by:&lt;br/&gt;Actively recruiting students,
especially women and other under-represented groups for programs in Mathematics
and Computer Sciences;&lt;br/&gt;Providing breadth and depth in a quality degree
program;&lt;br/&gt;Maintaining and upgrading computer facilities and library
resources;&lt;br/&gt;Creating a database of alumni, for a Speakers Bureau at
recruitment events;&lt;br/&gt;Attracting younger competent students through high
school Programming Competitions and class visitations.&lt;br/&gt;2. Improving
educational opportunities for students in these disciplines
by:&lt;br/&gt;Promoting opportunities for students to engage in activities and
research which enhance their understanding;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding courses with an
"Honors" component;&lt;br/&gt;Involving our majors as volunteer tutors and
mentors in the Math Clinic to assist disadvantaged high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;3. Increasing retention of students to degree achievement
by:&lt;br/&gt;Providing additional scholarships of one-third tuition for
qualified students, particularly underrepresented minorities and
women;&lt;br/&gt;Formalizing our assessment and mentoring programs.&lt;br/&gt;4.
Improving student support at institutions of higher learning
by:&lt;br/&gt;Providing role models and individual mentors for students,
particularly underrepresented minorities and women;&lt;br/&gt;Assessing the
needs of the supported student, the effectiveness of the curriculum, and the
requirements of the high tech workplace;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding peer tutoring in
our Math Lab;&lt;br/&gt;Extending career and placement services to provide a
database of industrial contacts;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing assistance to students
applying to graduate programs;&lt;br/&gt;Strengthening "networking"
opportunities to enhance interaction between current students and successful
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;5. Strengthening partnerships between institutions of
higher learning and the local high technology industry by:&lt;br/&gt;Extending
internship programs and seeking additional partnerships with local business and
industries;&lt;br/&gt;Promoting our BA/BS + MS program with Polytechnic
University;&lt;br/&gt;Involving more faculty in education-industry collaboration
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment from incoming and existing student
populations are through personal invitations and current strategies
(publications, TV, school visitations). Transfer students are recruited through
cooperation with the local community college, business and
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSEMS Selection and CSEMS Retention
Committees select students, encourage them to achieve and assure that they are
qualified to enter the workforce. Both committees are by the PI and include the
Co-PI's and appropriate representatives. One Co-PI is responsible for assessment
and outcomes evaluation of CSEMS students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSEMS scholars
receive approximately one-third of their tuition at St. Joseph's College, where
they receive personal attention in small classes, in a supportive learning
environment. Internships and opportunities to contribute to their community
reinforce classroom theory with practical experience, and to motivate them to
complete their degrees.