* 0219422
* ITR:  High Fidelity Simulation for Heterogeneous Civil and Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Kwang-Chun Park, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2006
* USD 495,317.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High Fidelity Simulation for
Heterogeneous Civil&lt;br/&gt;and Mechanical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a
three-year research program to develop and evaluate methods for high fidelity
modeling and simulation of strongly heterogeneous coupled systems of importance
in Civil and Mechanical Engineering. These systems are characterized by
interacting components of widely different mechanical characteristics. The
approach relies on multilevel decomposition, into subsystems, interface
localization and regularization. The proposed research is based on two
innovative concepts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) An interface localization method
designed to link heterogeneous models of system components while maintaining
consistency and energy conservation between nonmatching discretizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) A regularization approach that preserves the full
accuracy of the interactions transmitted across the interfaces for a wide
spectrum of coupled problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be driven
by and evaluated on two application examples that exhibit widely different
physical scales:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) A dam under seismic excitation,
accounting for fluid-structure interaction with bulk cavitation as well as
interaction with highly heterogeneous soil strata.&lt;br/&gt;(2) A wide-band
MEMS frequency-sensor device consisting of a resonator mounted on a layered
silicon substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques for model-based simulation of
physically homogeneous components have experienced great advances over the past
three decades. Difficulties occur when interfacing such models. These
difficulties can be traced to physical, modeling or computational method
mismatches. For example, a degrading interface or a protective foam layer can
produce highly inaccurate results in the prediction of inter-component fluxes
and forces. The approach taken in this research aims to take maximum advantage
of existing models and methods for the isolated subsystems, while developing
interaction techniques that address those difficulties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of this research will have application to other
fields of science and technology that deal with the interaction of strongly
heterogeneous models. These include aircraft and marine engineering, electronic
packaging and the design of advanced materials. Computational multiphysics is
expected to be a key component of ongoing US industry efforts to boost
productivity through information technology by faster exploration of designs and
concepts, and eventually optimization integrated with CADM. However, the
complexity inherent in multiphysics simulations necessarily requires the
collaboration of experts in the underlying disciplines. This can lead to
difficulties and costly retrofits when models originally develop to address the
individual problems are interfaced. The research aims at facilitating, through
modularity and reuse, the timely incorporation of advances in modeling and
interfacing techniques in simulation.&lt;br/&gt;