* 0219195
* NSF/CONACyT:    Bi-National Effort on Distributed Manufacturing Supervisory Control Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Frank Lewis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2006
* USD 96,978.00

This NSF/CONACyT grant provides funding for the University of Texas at Arlington
(UTA) to work with the Centro de Investigaciones y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN
Unidad Guadalajara (CINVESTAV) and the Universidad Autonoma de Ciudad Juarez
(UACJ) to carry out collaborative research in Flexible Manufacturing Systems
(FMS) control and implementation of novel Discrete Event (DE) Supervisory
Controllers over the internet. By combining current results and developing new
results by joint research, this research will develop an integrated approach to
FMS design, decision-making, and on-line supervisory DE
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two goals in this NSF/CONACyT research:
1) Structure and performance of DE supervisory controllers for manufacturing
systems using UTA's patented matrix-based discrete event controller as a tool to
perform high-level design of supervisory controllers for manufacturing systems
and improve dispatching, routing, and part release; study bottlenecks and
optimal dynamic rebalancing of jobs to alleviate bottlenecks; design, and study
the performance and complexity of, distributed decentralized supervisory
controllers for multiple networked cellular manufacturing workcells; and 2)
improve academic and broader impact goals by offering a summer course at UTA for
formal training on the analysis and design of DE controllers for undergraduate
and graduate students from USA and Mexico; involve local high school students in
course projects on actual manufacturing and robotic systems; jointly co-advise
Mexican Ph.D. students, including visits to UTA for research and development;
design and develop an internet-based supervisory control system for
manufacturing workcells; and set up a distance-learning program over the
internet to train Mexican students to program workcells. Also, the research will
work on industrial partner chemical flowline implementation by designing a
chemical processing flowline for aircraft parts for an industrial partner,
designing a DE supervisory controller for part routing and resource assignment,
and simulate various strategies for part routing and resource assignment. The
automated, dynamically controlled chemical flow line is a new concept in
aircraft manufacturing that has the potential to gain significant market share
in a new industry.