* 0219243
* ITR:  Physics-Based Modeling of Plastic Flow that Couples Atomistics of Unit Processes with Macroscopic Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* John Bassani, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 417,000.00

This is a grant funded in response to a (small) proposal submitted to the
Information Technology Research (ITR) Initiative. The research will be done in
collaboration with groups at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and
Oxford University (England).

Three-dimensional simulations are increasingly providing a powerful information-
based approach to both material processing and the design and manufacturing of
components that support a wide range of technologies. The objective of this
research, which focuses on phenomena that involve large plastic deformations of
metallic materials, is to develop a physics-based methodology for accurate
modeling. At the overall system level, i.e., microstructural in the case of
materials processing or components under complex loading, both Lagrangian and
Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) finite element implementations are the
computational basis of most software. However, unique unit processes that arise
at atomic and molecular scales often control critical phenomena, and this is
where many models are significantly deficient. In particular, nearly all
inelastic simulation codes are limited to a narrow class of crystalline
materials, namely those that are close-packed which primarily includes face-
centered-cubic (fcc) materials. There is a challenge to develop accurate models
for a broader range of engineering materials and to adapt these models into
current large-scale finite element, hydrodynamic, and dislocation dynamics
codes. The focus of this research is on the development of multiscale models and
algorithms for the accurate and verifiable simulation of the deformation
behavior of metallic materials possessing complex - non-planar - dislocation
core structures.

The research focuses on the relationship between the three-dimensional atomic
configurations of defects, their mobility, and macroscopic plastic flow. The
multiscale methodologies to be developed will be applicable to many areas,
including problems in nanotechnology. The principal goals are: (1) to develop a
rigorous methodology to link theories at scales ranging from electronic and
atomic through mesoscale and macroscopic; (2) to develop physically-based
continuum constitutive relations that account for complex phenmonea arising from
non-planar dislocation cores; and, (3) to explore the effects of such defects on
critical phenomena such as strain localization and fracture. We will consider a
range of technologically important materials from different crystal classes and
under conditions that arise in both material processing and in components
subjected to mechanical loading.

The algorithms to be developed will be ready for installation into large-scale
finite element codes, e.g., Abaqus, both for polycrystals in nanoscale regimes
and macroscopic components. Although the structure of the constitutive relations
will be significantly different from those currently in use, implementation in
massively parallel codes will be straightforward. %%% This is a grant funded in
response to a (small) proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research
(ITR) Initiative. The research will be done in collaboration with groups at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and Oxford University (England).

The research focuses on the relationship between the three-dimensional atomic
configurations of defects, their mobility, and macroscopic plastic flow in
metallic materials. The multiscale methodologies to be developed will be
applicable to many areas, including problems in nanotechnology. The principal
goals are: (1) to develop a rigorous methodology to link theories at scales
ranging from electronic and atomic through mesoscale and macroscopic; (2) to
develop physically-based continuum constitutive relations that account for
complex phenmonea arising from non-planar dislocation cores; and, (3) to explore
the effects of such defects on critical phenomena such as strain localization
and fracture. We will consider a range of technologically important materials
from different crystal classes and under conditions that arise in both material
processing and in components subjected to mechanical loading. ***

