* 0219531
* ITR:   Design of Novel Receiver Algorithms for OFDM Incorporating Realistic Indoor Channel Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Volakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2006
* USD 412,000.00

The explosive demand for communication services, fueled by the&lt;br/&gt;rapid
growth in the areas of mobile communications and the&lt;br/&gt;Internet, has
generated and will continue to generate immense&lt;br/&gt;research efforts in
the area of wideband wired/wireless&lt;br/&gt;communications. To accommodate the
demanding future applications,&lt;br/&gt;systems must be designed to perform
joint equalization, detection,&lt;br/&gt;decoding and estimation of the unknown
and possibly time varying&lt;br/&gt;channel parameters, while maintaining
reasonable complexity (and&lt;br/&gt;low cost). Motivated by these requirements,
and using an OFDM&lt;br/&gt;indoor wireless system as a design example, two main
directions&lt;br/&gt;are investigated in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the first direction, receiver algorithms are designed for&lt;br/&gt;iterative,
joint equalization, detection and decoding, that&lt;br/&gt;address the critical
issues mentioned above. The investigation&lt;br/&gt;starts by identifying a
powerful model that encompasses all the&lt;br/&gt;salient features of the OFDM
transmission system. Data detection&lt;br/&gt;in OFDM is then stated as a
problem of two-dimensional (2D) data&lt;br/&gt;detection in the presence of
localized, 2D intersymbol&lt;br/&gt;interference, non-linear distortion, and
unknown and time varying&lt;br/&gt;parameters. We then identify fast, joint data
detection and&lt;br/&gt;channel estimation schemes which are utilized as
building blocks&lt;br/&gt;for powerful adaptive iterative detection receivers.
Unlike the&lt;br/&gt;entire iterative receiver, these sub-blocks are optimal in
a&lt;br/&gt;precisely defined sense, and can be implemented with&lt;br/&gt;less-
than-exponential complexity with respect to the data
sequence&lt;br/&gt;length.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second direction is the
development of a unified framework for&lt;br/&gt;the analysis of the transient
and steady-state behavior of&lt;br/&gt;adaptive iterative algorithms. In the
proposed study, the receiver&lt;br/&gt;is assumed to have no explicit knowledge
about the channel&lt;br/&gt;parameters, other than their statistical
description. The minimum&lt;br/&gt;signal-to-noise ratio required for
convergence to error-free&lt;br/&gt;transmission, and the optimal allocation of
power in pilot and&lt;br/&gt;coded symbols, are some of the issues that are
investigated for a&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of adaptive iterative receiver
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;Regarding propagation modeling for the indoor
environment, the&lt;br/&gt;approach followed herein is a direct divergence from
the classical&lt;br/&gt;approaches that include either measurements, or
the&lt;br/&gt;well-established ray-tracing techniques. In particular, ultra-
fast&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for the numerical solution of the
electromagnetic&lt;br/&gt;problem are developed. These algorithms result in
almost exact&lt;br/&gt;solutions that can be evaluated with complexity
comparable to the&lt;br/&gt;less accurate ray-tracing techniques.