* 0219278
* ITR: High Speed Internet Access in Buildings using Heating and Ventilation Ducts
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Daniel Stancil, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 295,322.00

0219278&lt;br/&gt;Stancil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-speed internet access in
buildings (residential, office, and commercial) is one of the most important
challenges that next generation wireless networks face today. Further, modern
buildings have complex communications infrastructures that may include
provisions for building controls, alarms, wired and wireless telephones, high-
speed data services, and wireless LANs. At present, these services are provided
with separate wired/wireless systems for each service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
alternative approach to providing the communications infrastructure in buildings
is to recognize that every building is already equipped with a microwave
distribution system: the heating and ventilation (HVAC) ducts. These ducts are
designed to carry air to and from all parts of the building, but can also
function as hollow metal waveguides for microwave signals. Combining the HVAC
with communications to form a single integrated system could lead to a new
paradigm in smart building infrastructure. If widely adopted, the impact of this
research could be very far-reaching, potentially impacting the design and
construction of every major new building constructed throughout the developed
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the most common duct sizes and communication
frequencies, the ducts behave as multimode waveguides. The possibility of using
multimode waveguides for microwave communications was first suggested more than
50 years ago, although the detailed channel characteristics have not been fully
investigated. The goals of this proposal are to gain an understanding of mode
scattering and conversion at common duct components such as bends, tees, and
wyes, and to investigate how the multimode nature of the channel can be used to
increase the capacity of the channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the
mode conversion and scattering, a multiple-antenna structure will be constructed
that is capable of exciting specific modes or combinations of modes. The mode
content upon passing through a component under study will be determined by
scanning the near-field mode profile at the open exit end of the duct. The
possibility of increasing the capacity of the duct will be investigated by
constructing a pair of multiple antenna arrays for use as input and output and
output couplers. Multiple-input/multiple-output multipath channel techniques
will be used to demonstrate realization of two independent channels in the same
frequency band.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate students will be fully
supported by this research. The topic provides a novel context for mastering
concepts in microwave measurements, wireless channel models, channel capacity,
and network architecture. Undergraduates will also be involved in the research
for project credit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the research will be
presented at major international wireless conferences, and detailed papers will
be submitted to archival journals to further disseminate the results. These
presentations and papers also offer significant opportunities for the graduate
students to hone their presentation and
writing&lt;br/&gt;skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, results from the
research will be used as examples and case studies in the introductory graduate
Wireless Communications course offered each year. This course typically enrolls
50-60 students.&lt;br/&gt;