* 0219328
* ITR:  Simulating Extended Time and Length Scales using Parallel Kinetic Monte Carlo and Parallel Accelerated Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Jacques Amar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research (ITR) initiative. The research will be done in collaboration with Los
Alamos National Laboratory.

A long-standing obstacle to the understanding of condensed phase systems is that
many important processes occur on a time-scale that is not easily accessible
with conventional simulation methods. For example, molecular dynamics is
generally limited to nanoseconds because of the small time-step required for the
integration of the equations of motion. However, relevant processes that are
activated, i.e., infrequent events, often take place on a time-scale of
microseconds or even longer. Examples include the evolution of the surface
morphology during crystal or film growth, the diffusion of point defects in
solids, and the migration of grain boundaries during plastic strain.

Recently, a variety of accelerated dynamics techniques, including hyperdynamics,
parallel replica dynamics, and temperature-accelerated dynamics have been
proposed in order to speed up the simulation of infrequent events in molecular
dynamics. In particular, temperature-accelerated dynamics has been quite
successful in extending the time-scales for simulations since it allows
realistic simulations oflow-temperature processes over time-scales as long as
seconds and even hours. However, due to the fact that the computational work
required scales as the square or even as the cube of the number of atoms N, this
technique can only be applied to extremely small systems. As a result, realistic
simulations of materials over both extended time and extended length scales have
not been possible.

The research here will use parallel computations in order to extend accelerated
dynamics so that both large system sizes and long time-scales can be simulated
simultaneously. The development of such a capability to simulate both mesoscopic
systems sizes and long time-scales should present a major breakthrough in our
ability to carry out realistic atomic simulations.

In parallel with this effort, sparse-computational algorithms will be developed
in order to reduce the exponent corresponding to the dependence of the
computational work on the system size in accelerated dynamics. The development
of such algorithms is based on the realization that eliminating non-local moves
or groups of non-local moves from the force calculations involved in these
methods during the search for saddle-points should significantly reduce the
dependence of the computational work required on the cluster size N. Parallel
replica dynamics will also be used in both techniques to extend the time-scales
of the simulations.

As a first specific application of spatially parallel accelerated dynamics we
will focus on simulations of metal-on-metal epitaxial growth at low temperature
using temperature-accelerated dynamics. This is a problem of great interest due
to the observation of a variety of unexplained phenomena including nanoscale
facetting and strain-induced mound regularization at low tempertures. The
methods developed here should be applicable to a much broader range of systems
as well. %%% This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information
Technology Research (ITR) initiative. The research will be done in collaboration
with Los Alamos National Laboratory.

A long-standing obstacle to the understanding of condensed phase systems is that
many important processes occur on a time-scale that is not easily accessible
with conventional simulation methods. For example, molecular dynamics is
generally limited to nanoseconds because of the small time-step required for the
integration of the equations of motion. However, relevant processes that are
activated, i.e., infrequent events, often take place on a time-scale of
microseconds or even longer. Examples include the evolution of the surface
morphology during crystal or film growth, the diffusion of point defects in
solids, and the migration of grain boundaries during plastic strain.

Recently, a variety of accelerated dynamics techniques, including hyperdynamics,
parallel replica dynamics, and temperature-accelerated dynamics have been
proposed in order to speed up the simulation of infrequent events in molecular
dynamics. In particular, temperature-accelerated dynamics has been quite
successful in extending the time-scales for simulations since it allows
realistic simulations oflow-temperature processes over time-scales as long as
seconds and even hours. However, due to the fact that the computational work
required scales as the square or even as the cube of the number of atoms N, this
technique can only be applied to extremely small systems. As a result, realistic
simulations of materials over both extended time and extended length scales have
not been possible.

The research here will use parallel computations in order to extend accelerated
dynamics so that both large system sizes and long time-scales can be simulated
simultaneously. The development of such a capability to simulate both mesoscopic
systems sizes and long time-scales should present a major breakthrough in our
ability to carry out realistic atomic simulations.

In parallel with this effort, sparse-computational algorithms will be developed
in order to reduce the exponent corresponding to the dependence of the
computational work on the system size in accelerated dynamics. The development
of such algorithms is based on the realization that eliminating non-local moves
or groups of non-local moves from the force calculations involved in these
methods during the search for saddle-points should significantly reduce the
dependence of the computational work required on the cluster size N. Parallel
replica dynamics will also be used in both techniques to extend the time-scales
of the simulations.

As a first specific application of spatially parallel accelerated dynamics we
will focus on simulations of metal-on-metal epitaxial growth at low temperature
using temperature-accelerated dynamics. This is a problem of great interest due
to the observation of a variety of unexplained phenomena including nanoscale
facetting and strain-induced mound regularization at low tempertures. The
methods developed here should be applicable to a much broader range of systems
as well. ***