* 0219069
* ITR (EAR): Electronic Library of Lithospheric Imagery from deeP Seismic Exploration (ELLIPSE)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Larry Brown, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2004
* USD 150,843.00

EAR-0219069 Larry D. Brown

The seismic reflection method, developed primarily by the oil exploration
industry, is arguably geophysics' most versatile and powerful tool for mapping
the earth's lithosphere. It has been increasingly applied over the past 25 years
to a wide variety of scientific problems associated with the earth's crust and
upper mantle by a diverse mixture of individual, institutional, national and
international programs. The results from these efforts have revolutionized, and
continue to advance, our understanding of the Earth's interior. Yet until now
there has been no central guide to the results of those efforts. A
comprehensive, global, electronic library of deep seismic reflection surveys
past and present is being developed in this project as a major new resource for
both research and teaching. This catalog, in the form of a GIS database with
user-friendly cartographic interface, will serve as an internet portal to a
metalibrary of deep reflection data that is derived from the physical libraries
that are now globally dispersed and heterogeneously maintained. A core component
of this metalibrary, and a proposed template for organizing comparable physical
collections worldwide, are the COCORP (US), INDEPTH (Tibet) and URSEIS (Russia)
datasets currently archived at Cornell. These datasets are not only of
considerable continuing scientific value in their own right; they typify the
range of data characteristics of the larger global collection. The catalog
includes expanded digital access to both raw and processed data in the Cornell
holdings, as well as supporting documentation, field photos, corollary datasets
and published interpretations. The facility greatly facilitates quantitative
syntheses, evaluation of seismic techniques, and planning of future seismic
geophysical experiments. Of special interest with respect to the latter is the
EARTHSCOPE initiative in the U.S., for which the COCORP dataset in particular is
a fundamental resource. Organized electronic publication will aid not only the
serious researcher but also the non-specialist who finds the final product
useful for synthesis with other data, the classroom instructor who needs an
easily comprehensive form of the results for the general student, or the earth
science student who simply wants to browse the earth's interior for inspiration.
This global catalog, along with the revamped Cornell holdings, is being
integrated with related programs in the U.S. and around the world.