* 0219155
* Develop An Evacuation Management Decision Support System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Michael Lindell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2006
* USD 409,210.00

Since the Galveston hurricane of 1900, improved systems for detection, warning,
and evacuation have decreased the loss of life from natural hazards in the
United States. Population growth in hazard prone areas is likely to reverse this
trend unless prompt and effective measures are taken. Hazard-resistant land use
and building construction practices could help to contain loss of life despite
population growth, but there are economic and political barriers to implementing
them. Improvements in the ability to evacuate threatened populations will thus
be needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses this need by
developing an Evacuation Management Decision Support System (EMDSS) to assist
public officials in monitoring a hazard's onset and determining when and where
to initiate evacuations. A large data base on warning/preparation times,
compliance/spontaneous evacuation rates, evacuation route utilization, and
evacuation costs for both risk area residents and transients (especially
business and tourist travelers), and economic impacts to business due to
evacuations will be constructed using multiple surveys. Data on warning and
preparation times, compliance and spontaneous evacuation rates, and evacuation
route utilization are sparse; data on evacuation costs (as opposed to losses
from disaster impact) are lacking in the literature. This database will feed the
EMDSS to provide public officials support in facing hazards, such as hurricanes
and help them balance the threat to public safety against evacuation costs under
time constraints and uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Valuable disciplinary
goals will be reached through the collection and analysis of data that advance
theoretical disaster research. In addition, the project will perform a major
interdisciplinary function by integrating social psychological theories with
those from transportation planning to develop an improved evacuation time
estimation model, and with theories from household and business economics to
develop an evacuation cost model. These perspectives will be integrated with
concepts from decision analysis and decision support systems to produce the
EMDSS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader social utility will result through
significant advances in technology to support evacuation decisions. This work
will add value to and leverage the hazard vulnerability analysis and evacuation
planning work performed by the Hazard Reduction &amp; Recovery Center for the
Texas Governor's Division of Emergency Management (DEM) for over twenty years.
This close relationship with an operational agency is unique among university-
based hazard/disaster research centers. The relationship between HRRC and DEM
provides an unparalleled opportunity for user input into software design and
accelerated technology transfer to state and local emergency managers. The
research will be coordinated with personnel from the Taiwanese National Science
and Technology Program for Hazard Mitigation (NAPHM), who are interested in
collaborating in the extending the EMDSS to evacuations from landslides and
inland flooding. The Hazard Reduction &amp; Recovery Center has a Memorandum of
Agreement with NAPHM that has promoted cooperative exchanges between the two
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, graduate students will benefit by their
involvement in survey development, data collection, and EMDSS development and
evaluation. A broader group of graduate students will benefit from inclusion of
this material in the investigators' environmental hazard management courses
(especially the one on disaster response planning) and in a future edition of
the textbook, Behavioral Foundations of Community Emergency Planning. The
project will employ members of under-represented groups, especially women and
students from developing countries &lt;br/&gt;