* 0219350
* ITR:    Cross-Cultural Patterns of Information Technology Adoption and Adaptation:   Lessons from Central Asia
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Beth Kolko, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 11/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This project will advance understanding of how information technology is
perceived, used, and reconfigured in diverse cultures in Central Asia. By
conducting an empirical investigation into the cultural factors that affect
information technology adoption, and articulating which of these elements are
most significant in determining the success rate of IT initiatives, the research
will provide a blueprint that can be used by programs delivering IT-related
programs in disparate settings. The research will focus on Central Asia because
of that region's unique combination of infrastructure and literacy combined with
relatively low exposure to Western culture and early stages of Internet
adoption. The project will draw on qualitative and quantitative methods, using
survey instruments, statistical analysis, coded interview data, and ethnographic
observation. Surveys will be developed based on previous research, and they will
be distributed at Internet access sites in Central Asia. Interviews will also be
conducted in Central Asia. The survey and interview data will be analyzed in an
effort to correlate usage habits with local cultural factors. As information
technology becomes increasingly important, effective implementation becomes even
more critical. This project will make a significant contribution to
understanding how culture affects technology adoption, thus advancing broad-
based approaches to bridging the digital divide.