* 0219607
* Application of Portfolio Theory and Sustainability Metrics to Civil Infrastrastructure Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Adjo Amekudzi-Kennedy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 01/31/2008
* USD 244,010.00

State and local governments invest approximately $150 billion annually in the
construction, improvement and rehabilitation of capital assets. In the past four
decades, several states have developed decision support systems to facilitate
the management of their physical infrastructures such as pavements, bridges and
public transit infrastructure. The primary objective of these infrastructure
management systems is to assist public works agencies with identifying the most
cost-effective investments for limited budgets. The infrastructure management
systems have been used primarily for a priori planning and less for posteriori
analyses either to validate existing models or assess the cumulative value of
investments. In 1999, the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
introduced a requirement for state and local government financial reporting
using full accrual-based accounting practices such as are used in private
industry. This approach covers all capital assets and long term liabilities
including civil infrastructure, and requires the depreciation of assets unless
two distinct criteria are met: 1. The government manages the infrastructure
assets using an asset management system; and 2. The government demonstrates that
the infrastructure assets are being preserved at, or above, a condition level
originally established. The GASB requirement reflects the growing importance of
managing civil infrastructure as assets.

In this research project, a focused body of knowledge and analytical tools for
portfolio asset management for civil infrastructure will be developed using
Portfolio Theory. Existing infrastructure management systems will be integrated
into more comprehensive asset management systems. Research results will be used
to design a prototype asset management system from independent infrastructure
management systems for highways, bridges and public transit facilities, to
demonstrate how one would comprehensively value these assets as a portfolio,
analyze tradeoffs for competing alternatives under uncertainty, and identify
superior alternatives based on the expected value of the portfolio.

The education plan will support practitioner needs for asset management as well.
Research results will be used to extend the curriculum in Civil and
Environmental Engineering at Georgia Tech to include quantitative theory and
tools for integrated asset management of civil infrastructure, and to develop a
short course on asset management for practitioners. Furthermore, it breaks new
ground by introducing the paradigm of portfolio asset management for managing
civil infrastructure and opens the way for subsequent applications of Portfolio
Theory to civil infrastructure management