* 0219690
* Optimized Structural Damage Identification through Multi-Scale Embedded Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Mohammed Zikry, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2006
* USD 310,000.00

Kara Peters (PI), North Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt;Mohammed Zikry (Co-
PI), North Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No.
0219690&lt;br/&gt;Optimized Structural Damage Identification through Multi-Scale
Embedded Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has as its major aim
the development of a unified sensing and fracture methodology that will be used
to identify damage at different physical scales in metallic structural systems.
New fabrication and processing techniques are used to embed multiplexed sensors
in metallic systems, such that material mismatch impedances and residual
stresses are minimized in both the sensors and the host structure. Displacement,
displacement gradient, and strain fields from these sensors are then filtered
and fused with recently developed three-dimensional constitutive and fracture
methodologies to predict failure initiation and growth in crystalline solids.
Failure modes and damage progression are categorized in terms of intergranular
and transgranular fracture. A three dimensional thermo-mechanistic physically-
based predictive framework is needed to understand interrelated effects, such as
embedded sensors in host metallic materials, interfacial thermal, stress and
strain gradients, and grain-boundary distributions and orientations on the
structural response at the global level. This results in effective life cycle
predictions that are based on physical material mechanisms, as opposed to
current estimates based on inadequate local strain-field distributions. The
coupling of sensor data fusion with the three dimensional predictive framework
provides insight and understanding of events that are difficult, if not
impossible, to experimentally study, such as subsurface damage and crack
nucleation in structural systems. The realization of these interrelated research
objectives could significantly improve engineering and scientific capabilities
for developing a new generation of in-situ damage identification and mitigation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;