* 0219737
* Alliance for the Production of African American Ph.D.s in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Roselyn Williams, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,801,943.00

The projects to be undertaken here have as their goal a substantial increase in
the number of African American Ph.D.s in mathematics, statistics and other
quantitatively based disciplines. Objectives
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Identifying of students at participating HBCUs
who have the potential to obtain an advanced degree in a mathematical science or
a field employing mathematical skills and
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Providing mentoring, nurturing and research
experiences for the students identified above throughout their undergraduate
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Building bridges between participating HBCUs and
majority institutions to provide a seamless transition to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects will be carried out by the Alliance
for the Production of African American Ph.D.s in the Mathematical Sciences, a
consortium of departments of mathematics, statistics and testing and measurement
at the three Iowa State Regents Universities and four Historically Black
Colleges and Universities: Alabama A&amp;M University, Benedict College, Florida
A&amp;M University and Jackson State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
project will involve the selection, mentoring and nurturing of eight
undergraduate Alliance Scholars at each of the four participating HBCUs. Each of
these students will be provided with two mentors: a mentor at the student's home
institution and an Iowa Regent mentor. These mentors will work together with the
student to develop an individualized course of study as well as a series of
research projects. Students will spend time at Iowa Regents Universities and
will normally be offered admission and support at an appropriate Ph.D. program
at one of these universities upon graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
project will be an eight-week Alliance Summer Institute to be held each summer
at either Iowa State University or the University of Iowa. Among the objectives
of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Providing information about the
variety of research areas and career paths available to students with
quantitative abilities and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Providing a cultural
and academic introduction to life and work at a large, majority
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Providing opportunities for interactions
between students and professors at minority serving institutions and their
counterparts at majority universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Providing exposure
to distinguished minority scholars and other longtime supporters of minority
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Providing opportunities to carry out research
projects, both alone and in groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-four students
will be selected for the Summer Institute each summer. They will be organized
into research teams consisting of three students, one faculty member and one
graduate student assistant. Faculty will be drawn from a pool of Alliance
faculty; graduate student assistants will be selected, where possible, from
among the twenty-seven underrepresented minority graduate students in the
University of Iowa Department of Mathematics. Preference will be given to
eligible Alliance Scholars; remaining positions will be filled by undergraduate
students who will most benefit from the sort of experience provided here.
Further information may be obtained by calling Phil Kutzko at 319-335-0758 or
sending him email at pkutzko@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu.&lt;br/&gt;