* 0219061
* ITR:    Development of Novel Computational Methods for Genome-Wide Discovery of Gene Function and Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Edward Marcotte, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2006
* USD 499,904.00

EIA-0219061&lt;br/&gt;Marcotte, Edward M&lt;br/&gt;University of
Texas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Development of novel computational methods for
genome-wide discovery of gene function and networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of the
roughly 40,000 genes encoded by the human genome, as with every other genome
sequenced to date, about half are completely uncharacterized and of unknown
function. There is a broad need for methods to discover the functions of these
thousands of uncharacterized genes, as well as how the gene products participate
in networks, pathways and systems in the cell. This project's goal is to develop
novel computational methods for discovering the functions of genes on a genome-
wide scale, and to discover how the genes are organized into systems and
pathways. Several novel methods are proposed capable of providing such
information. The essence of these methods, called "non-homology" methods, is
that they analyze contextual properties of genes-such as which organisms the
genes appear in, which genes can be found fused together, and other properties-
in addition to the sequences of the genes. Such contextual properties turn out
to provide a tremendous increase in the ability of computational methods to
discover gene function and gene networks. At the core of this proposal is a
novel graph-based method for associating genes together that operate in the same
cellular pathway, essentially resulting in a "functional map" of the genes. This
method is combined with a new computational method for finding specific physical
interaction partners for proteins in large sequence families, and with methods
to visualize the resultant complex gene networks. Application of these methods
should improve our understanding of the functions of the thousands of
uncharacterized genes in each sequenced genome.