* 0219547
* ITR: A Community-based Partnership for Integrated Research and Education (COPIRE)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Patrick Bobbie, Southern Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 422,479.00

EIA-0219547 Patrick O. Bobbie (Southern Polytechnic State University), Brian
Davis (Kennesaw Mountain High School), and Jennifer L. Uboh (South Cobb High
School) Institution: Southern Polytechnic State U.,

TITLE: ITR: A Community Based Partnership for Community-Based Education (COPIRE)

This ITR- and ITWF-funded project is a partnership between Southern Polytechnic
State University (SPSU) (a suburban technology-focused institution), Kennesaw
Mountain High (KMH) School (a new school with a magnet program) and South Cobb
High (SCH) School (an established school, also with a magnet program). The
project is driven by an overarching goal of establishing a community-based
partnership, which focuses on an integration of education, research, and
training in the design and development of embedded system simulations. The
motivation for the project stems from 1) the plausibility of extending embedded
system research/knowledge to high school students and 2) enhancing their
opportunities and chances in the field.

SPSU is involved in a Georgia statewide research initiative, Yamacraw, which is
focussed on embedded software development and the design of broadband (high-
speed) communications systems, devices, and chips. SPSU's partnership project is
designed to dovetail with Yamacraw to take advantage of the research resources
of Yamacraw and to train students early in the academic pipeline. SPSU is:

1. Partnering with KMH and SCH to select a cohort of both non-minority and
minority students - females and males - at the 11th and 12th grade levels and
SPSU undergraduates to be involved in various hands-on research projects. The
students are participating in the program for 7 weeks during the summer and once
a week when school is in session for 3 years; 2. Cstablishing a training,
mentoring, role modeling, and a management group, which involves Yamacraw
graduate students and the PIs, to support the program; and 3. Continually
assessing and measuring achievements along the 'pipeline' to ensure successful
transfer of students across its stages.

