* 0219098
* ITR:    Large Scale Continuum and Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Ultra-Fast Laser Machining
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 411,885.00

The proposal was submitted to the Chemical and Transport Systems Division in
response to the FY2002 Information Technology Research solicitation, described
in NSF Announcement. NSF 01-149, in the "Small" category. The proposal is for
development of a comprehensive set of numerical models and techniques for the
simulation of ultra-fast laser machining and to employ these techniques to
obtain a detailed understanding of the fundamental physics of ultra-fast laser
processing. In particular, the PIs propose to develop numerical multiscale
finite volume and molecular dynamics models of these processes and to implement
them on shared-memory parallel computers. Phenomenological issues to be
addressed include melting and ejection of molten droplets due to recoil pressure
and droplet redeposition. Large-scale simulation offers the possibility of
resolving a number of fundamental questions concerning mechanisms of the
ablation process in ultra-fast laser machining. The large-scale parallel
computing aspects of the research will broaden the capabilities of thermal
science researchers in this important information technology area. Other
technologies that may be impacted by the development of these computational
techniques include high speed microelectronics device simulation, microscale
energy generation, and in a variety of emerging bio- and non-technologies.
Educational impacts include expanded computational science expertise in graduate
students involved with advanced manufacturing sciences and the expansion of
content in upper level courses taught by the collaborating PIs. Funding is from
funds reserved for ITR-Small grants in the CTS Division as well as from the
Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;