* 0219229
* ITR:    Evaluating Phylogeny Reconstruction Algorithms with Digital Organisms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Eric Torng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2007
* USD 354,722.00

EIA-0219229&lt;br/&gt;Torng, Eric K&lt;br/&gt;Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Evaluating Phylogeny Reconstruction
Algorithms with Digital Organisms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study
methods of determining the historic relationship&lt;br/&gt;between species using
only knowledge of currently existing organisms, a technique called "phylogenetic
tree reconstruction". Many tree reconstruction algorithms are known, but it is
difficult to properly test them for the very&lt;br/&gt;reason that the
algorithms are useful -- the original trees are lost
to&lt;br/&gt;history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies proposed make use of a
new evaluation methodology based on an&lt;br/&gt;artificial evolving system
called Avida. In Avida, populations of digital&lt;br/&gt;organisms (self-
replicating computer programs) experience natural selection&lt;br/&gt;as they
compete for limited resources, and will evolve into new species&lt;br/&gt;often
with entirely new genes. The history of such a system can
be&lt;br/&gt;monitored, and hence a reconstruction from the final state can have
its&lt;br/&gt;accuracy measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity has
several broader impacts on society. It is a core&lt;br/&gt;activity in the
Center for Biological Modeling, a new interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research and
education center at Michigan State University. Undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students
including underrepresented minorities will be involved by
studying&lt;br/&gt;small, self-contained questions. Finally, enhanced
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;phylogeny reconstruction algorithms will improve our
ability to interpret&lt;br/&gt;the&lt;br/&gt;sequences of genes, aiding in drug
design and helping efforts to reconstruct&lt;br/&gt;an evolutionary "tree of
life".&lt;br/&gt;