* 0219484
* Long-term Degradation Mechanisms of Bond in Concrete Reinforced with Fiber Reinforced Polymers (FRP)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Thomas Boothby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2006
* USD 268,250.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-Term Degradation Mechanisms of Bond
in Concrete Reinforced with Fiber Reinforced
Polymers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thomas E. Boothby, The Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;Charles E. Bakis, The Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The repair of the nation's deteriorating
infrastructure requires the development and qualification of new materials. A
class of composite materials known as fiber reinforced polymers (FRP),
originally developed through basic research for use in the aerospace industry,
have been gaining acceptance over the last two decades as suitable materials for
reinforcement and repair of concrete structures, as well as for other
construction applications. These materials have the advantage of exceptional
strength-weight ratios and resistance to corrosion. However, the widespread
adoption of these materials to repair and reinforcement of bridges, buildings,
and other structures requires an understanding of the complex processes of
environmental degradation, so that the material can be designed and built to be
sufficiently durable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; FRP's applied to reinforcement for
concrete may be internal, such as reinforcing bars, or external, such as adhered
plates or sheets. The external reinforcement may be used to repair or strengthen
existing structures. In all cases, the ability of the material to bond to
concrete over the lifetime of the structure (50-100 years, typically), and under
continual environmental attack--due to acid rain, freeze-thaw, heat and
humidity, etc.--is critical to its success as a reinforcing material. The
proposed research will examine in detail the characteristics of bond between FRP
reinforcing, both external and internal, and concrete, and the process of
degradation of this bond due to age, long-term loading, and environmental
effects. The research will investigate small and intermediate scale specimens
aged in outdoor environments in temperate and tropical climates, and subjected
to accelerated environmental conditioning. The research will enable designers of
these materials to predict their durability with increased confidence.
&lt;br/&gt;