* 0219161
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research: Models for University-Industry Interaction and Entrepreneurship in Finland
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Richard Lester, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 25,650.00

0219161&lt;br/&gt;Lester&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Fraser Fleming and a
student from Duquesne University in a a collaboration with Seija Kulkki of the
Center for Knowledge and Innovation Research at the Helsinki School of Economics
in Helsinki, Finland. The project will focus on the impact of different external
and internal forces on the economic role of the universities, particularly the
technological universities and thus on the nature of industry-university
interactions. Implications for this dynamic relationship are to be found in many
aspects of business development and entrepreneurship in
Finland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many scholars have written about the
importance of research universities in the growth of agglomerations of high-
technology industry and of close ties between universities and industrial
organizations as a contributor to economic development, much remains to be
learned about the dynamics of the process. The main questions to be addressed by
the present study are how the universities are adapting to the chances in
external forces that affect them, how the missions of the universities are
changing in response to changing conditions in society with respect to
stimulating regional growth, and what organizational structures and processes
are used to help technology transfer and business incubation. The collection and
analysis of data will be done in conjunction with the group in Helsinki and
several junior researcher from the US group will participate in the
international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;