* 0219893
* ITR:    Printer Characterization and Signature-Embedding for Security and Forensic Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jan Allebach, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 410,000.00

Proposal Number CCR-0219893

Title: ITR: Printer Characterization and Signature-Embedding for Security and
Forensic Applications

Co-Principal Investigators: Jan P. Allebach, Edward J. Delp, and George T. Chiu

We propose to develop two strategies for printer identification. The first
strategy is passive. It involves characterizing the printer and finding
intrinsic features in the printed output that are characteristic of that
particular printer, model, or manufacturer's products. We call this the
intrinsic signature. Developing the intrinsic signature requires an
understanding and modeling of the printer mechanism, and the development of
image analysis tools that are used for printer characterization during the
signature development phase, and then later, for the actual detection of the
signature in printed pages with arbitrary content.

The intrinsic signature is detected by scanning the printed pages with a high
resolution drum scanner, and applying low-level image analysis routines to
extract features. These features are processed with a soft classifier to yield
likelihoods at each level of a decision tree that the document was printed with
a device belonging to each particular class. At the highest level of the
decision tree, likelihoods are provided for which of the two possible dominant
printing technologies: electrophotography (commonly referred to as a laser
printer) and inkjet was used. At the next level,likelihoods are generated for
the candidate printer manufacturers, and so on. As we proceed down through the
tree, we generate liklihoods regarding information that is more and more
specific to the particular printer in question.

The second strategy is active. Here we embed an extrinsic signature in every
printed page. This signature is generated by modulating the process parameters
in the printer mechanism to encode identifying information, such as the printer
serial number and date of printing, in every printed page. To detect the
extrinsic signature, we again scan the printed pages, and process them using
image analysis techniques; but in this case, our goal is to decode the signature
to extract the information embedded in it. Development of the methodology for
extrinsic signature embedding will build directly on our work with intrinsic
signatures. We will use our knowledge of the printer mechanism models and the
results of the printer characterization to determine the printer process
parameters that can be modulated to encode the desired identifying information.
The modulation of these parameters will require modification to the actual
printer mechanism.

A distinguishing feature of the proposed effort will be the development of an
undergraduate project course that will be associated with the research. In this
course, students will learn about printing technologies and the application of
electrical and mechanical engineering theory from their core courses to analysis
and modeling of printing systems. They will also learn about image processing
and decision theory; and they will see how all these tools can be applied to the
solution of practical real-world problems.