* 0219126
* Collaborative Research:  Low Power CMOS Circuits and Systems for Next Generation Wireless Information Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Heinrich Foltz, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2006
* USD 124,398.00

Foltz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a rapidly growing trend toward embedding
wireless capability into a&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of information technology
products; recently in the form of&lt;br/&gt;single chip transceivers, and in the
future perhaps integrated on-chip with&lt;br/&gt;the main product function.
These devices must have low power consumption to&lt;br/&gt;satisfy battery
conservation and thermal considerations. Good receiver&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity and
signal handling are also essential in a crowded radio&lt;br/&gt;frequency (RF)
spectrum; however, this requirement conflicts with low power&lt;br/&gt;circuit
design. The PI proposes to develop low power CMOS circuits that
improve&lt;br/&gt;the trade-off between power consumption and RF performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current CMOS low noise amplifiers (LNA) have noise figures
as low as 0.8 dB,&lt;br/&gt;input intercept points up to +18dBm, and power as
low as 1.5 mW; however,&lt;br/&gt;these specifications cannot be obtained
simultaneously. Likewise, CMOS&lt;br/&gt;mixers can meet demanding CDMA
communications standards for linearity and&lt;br/&gt;noise figure, but only at
high power cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these problems the PI proposes
a number of strategies for (a) reducing&lt;br/&gt;power consumption for a given
level of performance, and (b) allowing a&lt;br/&gt;dynamic trade-off of power
versus RF performance. These strategies include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) reuse of
amplifier stages at two different frequencies through
reflex&lt;br/&gt;arrangements, thus reducing the number of high performance,
high current&lt;br/&gt;stages required in receivers, (2) dynamically controlled
positive feedback&lt;br/&gt;and bias in LNA stages, to allow power, signal
handling, and noise figure to&lt;br/&gt;be traded off based on signal strength
and interference, and (3) integration&lt;br/&gt;of charge pumps into individual
drain supplies, to optimize the voltage for&lt;br/&gt;RF-critical stages while
allowing the non-critical portions of a CMOS chip&lt;br/&gt;to operate at low
voltage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful implementation will lead to improved
range and life for wireless&lt;br/&gt;sensors, more reliable communications
under adverse interference conditions,&lt;br/&gt;and ultimately to wider
application of information technology in industry&lt;br/&gt;and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;