* 0219850
* ITR: Observing, Tracking and Modeling Social Multiagent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Tucker Balch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2006
* USD 470,153.00

Tracking social agents that have a variety of mental states is quite different
from and more challenging than tracking more predictable systems, say aircraft
or ships. While multi-target tracking systems typically use physics-based models
to track maneuvering vehicles, this work centers on developing probabilistic
models of behavior and mental state to address the effects of interactions
between agents. This work has practical applications in many areas including,
for example: monitoring crowds of people, analyzing urban traffic patterns, and
understanding robot and human team behavior. Additionally, this work should
accelerate progress in experimental behavioral ecology, especially in the study
of social insect systems. For this reason the investigation will initially be
conducted in collaboration with biologists in the context of tracking and
analyzing the behavior of captive live ant colonies. This research will yield
novel, probabilistic algorithms for sensor-based identification, tracking, and
modeling of the behavior of social multiagent systems. A tight coupling between
tracking and modeling is critical, especially when the observed system is
composed of many agents. The focus is on using models of behavior to improve the
accuracy of sensor-based tracking, and on using improved tracking to learn
better models.