* 0219200
* ITR: Spatially Programmable Equipment: A New Design Paradigm for Semiconductor Manufacturing Enabled by Information Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Gary Rubloff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2005
* USD 499,247.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this small Information Technology
Research (ITR) project is to develop a new paradigm for semiconductor
manufacturing equipment - flexible equipment design enabled by information
technology. The current paradigm of fixed equipment design limits performance of
equipment in a rapidly changing technology environment, where tradeoffs must be
made between product performance and manufacturing efficiency. The concept is
based on procedures where process conditions can be spatially programmed to (1)
decouple manufacturing constraints (e.g., uniformity across large wafers) from
product performance (e.g., material quality); (2) reduce experimentation time by
enabling parallel, combinatorial experiments on each wafer; and (3) provide the
basis for a flexible, extendible equipment technology. Work has already begun on
an experimental test bed (chemical vapor deposition in a manufacturing cluster
tool) using a physically based simulation of the prototype system. This project
is for developing the IT infrastructure required to link object-oriented
simulation and model reduction methodologies to web-accessible experimental data
archives and physical property databases to techniques for real-time control of
parallel and multiplexed sensor/actuator
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has the potential to fundamentally change the design paradigm of a major
industry - semiconductor-manufacturing equipment - to one that directly exploits
a broad spectrum of information technology. Integration of research and
education are planned on a number of fronts: (1) the project provides an
opportunity for interdisciplinary teaming (e.g., between engineers and computer
scientists and between materials engineers and systems engineers) in the
classroom, (2) using spatially programmable equipment design as the project
focus in a materials/systems project course at the graduate level, and (3)
developing simulation-based learning software for technicians and engineers in
industry. &lt;br/&gt;