* 0219836
* Modification of Carbon Nanotubes with Boron Carbide Nanolumps for Nanocomposite
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* J. G. Wen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2005
* USD 286,212.00

0219836 Wen Abstract

A new approach to enhance load transfer from polymer matrix to carbon nanotubes
by modifying multiwalled carbon nanotubes will be developed under an SGER award.
The approach is based on the modification of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNT)
by growing boron carbide nanolumps on nanotubes. Boron carbide is a covalent
bonding compound, so the bonding between boron carbide and carbon nanotube is
expected to be covalent too. In addition to this strong bonding, boron carbide
nanolumps can be also bonded to inner layers of MWNTs through covalent bonding.
Thus, the load transfer from a matrix to carbon nanotubes can be dramatically
increased since usually only the outermost layer of MWNTs contributes to
carrying load. This is because the interaction between cylindrical graphene
sheets is through relatively weak van der Waals bonding. Therefore, MWNTs with
boron carbide nanolumps are expected to be the ideal reinforcing fillers.

This project will start from the synthesis of MWNTs with boron carbide nanolumps
on a large scale. Secondly, the mechanical properties of the dispersed and
aligned nanotube/polymer composite will be measured in order to understand the
influence of boron carbide nanolumps. Finally, a direct observation of load
transfer using transmission electron microscopy by applying in-situ tensile
stress on a microtomed slice of the nanotube/polymer composite will be carried
out. This test will utilize a specially fabricated in-situ tensile loading
holder. This project will present a unique opportunity for carbon nanotube
applications in light-weight super-strength materials.