* 0219805
* ITR: Protocol Synthesis and Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2006
* USD 286,982.00

Projects of national importance critically depend on supercomputers, such as the
ASCI White supercomputer deployed at Lawrence Livermore Laboratories.
Supercomputers such as these are comprised of thousands of microprocessors that
share terabytes of main memory. In order to bring down the cost of these `shared
memory' supercomputers and to ensure their error-free operation during long-
running simulations, their design and verification complexity must be
significantly reduced. A significant amount of this complexity exists in the
concurrent protocols that allow the microprocessors to reliably share memory.
The investigators study how to automatically synthesize these protocols from
higher level descriptions that are easier (and hence quicker) to verify correct.
This research involves a formal understanding of high performance protocols in
use this area, the creation of a guided synthesis procedure that allows
designers to quickly explore the space of protocols and select one that meets
the performance goals, and then mathematically prove the correctness of the high
level protocol as well as its translation to a detailed hardware-level protocol
description. Design and verification tools that the industry can adopt are being
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distributed shared memory (DSM) is a
dominant organizational paradigm for multiprocessor machines. DSM machines are
used as desktop computers, supercomputers such as the 512-node ASCI White of
Lawrence Livermore, and in future sold as single-chip multiprocessor components.
The high verification complexity of DSM machines is known to delay the shipping
dates of microprocessors and parallel processing software. This complexity stems
from a host of DSM protocol design issues, such as: (i) aggressive latency
hiding through out-of-order processing, implying the use of complex weak memory
consistency models; (ii) complex protocol actions that require buffer
reservation and deadlock avoidance. This research involves a formal
understanding of weak memory models (captured as a theorem-prover library), and
high performance protocols in use this area. It develops guided synthesis
procedures that allow designers to quickly explore a wide spectrum of protocols.
Once a high-level protocol meeting estimated performance goals is selected,
model checking is employed to verify conformance against the chosen weak memory
model. A mathematically proven (using theorem proving) translation procedure is
then applied to obtain a detailed protocol description. This description is
analyzed for performance and iterated till convergence. Examples drawn from
industrial multiprocessors are used to illustrate our new methods. Design and
verification tools that the industry can adopt are being
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;