* 0219903
* ITR:  Development of a Novel Short-Data-Record Adaptive Filtering Framework for Rapidly Changing Communications Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Stella Batalama, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

PIs: S. N. Batalama and D. A. Pados

PROJECT ABSTRACT

The effectiveness of a receiver designed for a rapidly changing multiple access
communications environment depends on the following design attributes: (i) low
computational complexity, (ii) multiple-access-interference resistance, and
(iii) system adaptivity with superior performance under limited (short) data
support. Adaptive short-data-record designs appear as the natural next step for
a matured discipline that has extensively addressed the first two, (i) and (ii),
design objectives in ideal setups (perfectly known or asymptotically estimated
statistical properties). System adaptivity based on short data records is
necessary for the development of practical adaptive receivers that exhibit
superior signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) or bit-error-rate (BER)
performance when they operate in rapidly changing communications environments
that limit substantially the input data support that is available for adaptation
and redesign.

A novel line of research is identified and pursued in this project that lies in
a multidisciplinary intersection of Estimation Theory, Communications Theory,
and Mean-Square optimum linear filtering. Consider an arbitrary input signal
vector space and a given information bearing signal vector to be recovered in
the presence of multiuser or other forms of heavy interference. A key for the
successful solution to the problem of adaptive receiver design under short data
records is to employ receiver estimators with varying bias/variance
characteristics and to control effectively these characteristics in a data-
centric manner. In this project, the investigators develop a short-data-record
adaptive filtering framework that involves (i) the tools for the generation of a
sequence of filter estimators with varying bias/variance tradeoff, as well as
(ii) the tools for selecting the most appropriate estimator in the sequence for
a given input data record. The Auxiliary-Vector (AV) filtering means developed
by the investigators during the past few years as a state-of-the-art practical
engineering solution to the problem of short-data-record adaptive filtering is
used as a benchmark case-study. The theoretical and practical implications of
such a research framework are far reaching. Biased estimators and algorithms
that offer full control over the bias/variance balance are rarely reported in
the literature, if any in a communications applicable context. While the target
applications of this work are all critical communications problems, the
pertinent theoretical developments may touch many aspects of multidisciplinary
engineering that are hampered by the ``curse of dimensionality'' and could
benefit from adaptive filtering and/or adaptive system optimization through
limited input data.