* 0220966
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene Climatic and Ecologic History of the Northern Great Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Cathy Whitlock, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,500.00

The objectives of this doctoral dissertation research project are to reconstruct
the climate, vegetation, and fire history in the northern Great Basin from an
examination of fossil pollen and charcoal records contained in lake-sediment
cores. The Great Basin is a region of diverse topography, vegetation, and
climate, and as such it provides an excellent opportunity to study the response
of ecosystems to a wide array of environmental changes in the past. By focusing
on three lake sites at different elevations, this study will (1) elucidate the
response of vegetation and fire regimes to changes in effective moisture,
temperature, and other bioclimatic variables; (2) reconstruct the biogeographic
history of important conifer species growing at different elevations; and (3)
apply modern pollen-climate relations in western North America to identify the
magnitude of past climate and vegetation changes. Past changes in vegetation
will be determined by changes in the relative and absolute abundances of pollen
types in stratigraphic records. The presence of plant macrofossils in the cores
will help confirm species identifications in cases where the pollen cannot.
Variations in past fire activity will be inferred from changes in the rates of
macroscopic charcoal accumulation in contiguous samples. Interpretation of the
fossil pollen data in terms of past climate and vegetation will be based on the
quantitative relationship between modern pollen data and present-day climate
information. The chronology of environmental changes will be developed from a
series of radiocarbon dates and lead-210 dates, as well as the age of known
tephra layers. The products of this study will be a better understanding of
Holocene forest development at different elevations in the northern Great Basin,
and information on the role of fire and climate in the ecological
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will contribute to a
better understanding of (1) the effects of global climate change, past and
present, on regional vegetation patterns and fire regimes in the Great Basin;
(2) modern pollen-climate relations and their use in the reconstruction of past
climates; and (3) the environmental controls on human activities in the northern
Great Basin during the Holocene. Since 1988, the western U.S. has experienced a
number of large, stand-replacing fires. In the year 2000 over 8 million acres
burned in the U.S., and in the first six months of 2002 there have been ~2.5
million acres consumed by wildland fires. Many of these fires may be
attributable to anomalously dry conditions throughout the west. Heightened fire
activity is predicted in models of future climate change, and the best analogue
for these conditions may be past periods when the climate was warmer- and drier-
than-present. By understanding the linkages between climate, vegetation, and
fire in the past, recent fire events can be placed within a context of natural
variations occurring on decadal-to-millennial time scales. Information on the
natural range of variability will help land-use managers in the United States
develop strategies that consider forest sensitivity to climate change and
disturbance regimes. The use of modern pollen and climate analogues will improve
our ability to reconstruct past climate conditions from fossil pollen records.
Pollen data are the primary terrestrial database used to reconstruct past
climate, so this refinement is an important contribution to paleoclimatology and
geography. Finally, this study will contribute to archeology by providing an
environmental backdrop for cultural changes in the Great Basin. Periods of
drought, for example, seem to be associated with changes in subsistence patterns
in this region. This research will help to clarify these relationships. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;