* 0220877
* WORKSHOP:  Model-Data Integration and Network Design for Biogeochemical Research:  An NCAR-CSU Summer School
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* David Schimel, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2003
* USD 24,988.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global biogeochemical research must increasingly
address the problems of "detection" or quantification of changing fluxes to the
atmosphere, and "attribution" or explanation of those fluxes in terms of
specific mechanisms. Today, neither our measurement nor analysis capabilities
are sufficient to meet the twin challenges of biogeochemical detection and
attribution with sufficient accuracy and resolution. We propose a summer school
to advance both analysis techniques (inverse and assimilation modeling) and
observing system design. The Summer School will involves lectures from a broad
and distinguished group of scientists on the biogeochemical cycles, current and
planned measurement capability, process and data analytical modeling, and new
approaches in applied math. It will have as its centerpiece a hands-on
simulation exercise. Estimates of global terrestrial and oceanic fluxes will be
produced from existing data and models, combined to produce flux fields with
reasonable time-space variability. They will be distributed in a global
simulated atmosphere using an atmospheric transport model, run at the maximum
achievable resolution to produce a 4-D data set of concentrations. The
participants will form competing teams to reconstruct surface fluxes. Each team
will choose a measurement strategy and obtain data corresponding to that
strategy by querying a referee. Each measurement will have a price and each team
will have an identical budget in dollars to fund its observing program. Each
team will have access to the same models. An adjoint carbon model is being
developed at NCAR using the NASA DAO model in assimilation mode. The model will
be available for the participants to use in network design, and to demonstrate
concepts and application of data assimilation in biogeochemistry. The teams may
choose any strategy they wish to estimate the real fluxes. The conclusions from
the workshop will be summarized in a report and a series of articles on 1)
design of the exercise and implications for observing system design, 2) a review
of data assimilation approaches for biogeochemical cycle research, 3)
possibilities for use of the simulation exercise in education. In the year
following the workshop, we will make the psuedodata bases and analysis tools
available and improve them to better meet the research needs of the
biogeochemical research community.&lt;br/&gt;