* 0220716
* Scholarship Program in Computer Science and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Martin Sternstein, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 09/30/2009
* USD 213,000.00

During the first year, the project team plans to award scholarships to twelve
first year students who are enrolled in a mathematics or a computer science
major. The scholarships are renewed each year for up to a total of four years.
During the second year of the project, an additional six scholarships are
awarded to sophomore majors students to support and encourage them to change
their majors to math or computer science. These scholarships are renewed for a
total of three years. The ` awards are renewed as long as students make
satisfactory academic progress and remain within the major.

The primary goal of this scholarship program is to increase the number of and
the retention of majors in computer science, computer information systems and
mathematics. Because our curricula provide a solid theoretical and practical
foundation for careers in these fields, increasing the number of majors will
have the effect of increasing the number of skilled and knowledgeable workers
qualified for many high-tech jobs. A secondary, but equally important, goal is
to increase the number of women and minority majors. This is especially
important in computing where women and minorities are traditionally under
represented. To meet these goals, the project team is enhancing existing student
support systems and extend existing research and project opportunities to
provide training and job experiences.

Ithaca College has extensive recruiting programs through the admissions office
and the Higher Educational Opportunity Program (HEOP). The latter program
specifically targets minority recruiting. Both of these programs provide
additional support for new initiatives such as this scholarship program. Faculty
members are traveling to selected high schools to inform faculty and staff about
these scholarships. The project team is providing printed and on-line materials
to prospective students, and is encouraging prospective students to communicate
directly with mathematics and computer science faculty. The selection of
students for the program is made by a team that is composed of two faculty from
mathematics, two faculty from computer science and one academic advisor staff
member from the student Adacemic Advising office . Students Academic
qualifications data are provided by the admissions office, and financial need
data are provided by the financial aid office. Combining the requested
scholarships with college funds and other federal funds, we aim to meet 100% of
financial need while minimizing loans.

Support for matriculated students to remain in a mathematics or computer science
major is provided through many venues. Upper level students serve as teaching
and lab assistants in open labs during evening and weekend hours and in walk-in
help rooms. Courses are available to provide academic prerequisites for students
who are lacking some specific skills. Additional opportunities for faculty and
upper-level student mentoring especially for women and minorities have been
established. Real-world experiences are provided within courses and by providing
the students with relevant work experiences, e.g., as assistants in courses and
computer laboratories. The project team plans to establish a networking program
between recent graduates and current undergraduates to provide regular
communication channels to support mentoring. Processes are in place to aid and
ensure that students effectively use the services provided by career planning
function at Ithaca College.