* 0220106
* ITR:   A Completely Integrated Processor-Memory-Interconnect Architecture for Data Intensive Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jean-Luc Gaudiot, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

A new, completely-integrated processor-memory-interconnect (CI-
PMI)&lt;br/&gt;architecture model suitable for a range of data-
intensive&lt;br/&gt;applications is proposed. Compared to the existing
processor-in-memory&lt;br/&gt;(PIM) architectures, the proposed CI-PMI approach
integrates more&lt;br/&gt;completely the processing, memory, and interconnect.
This is achieved&lt;br/&gt;by starting with the classical architecture of high
capacity memory,&lt;br/&gt;namely, a binary tree of decoders with memory modules
as leaves, laid&lt;br/&gt;out as an H-tree. In the proposed model, copies of one
or more types&lt;br/&gt;of application-specific computing elements are added at
different&lt;br/&gt;levels of the memory decoder tree, desired functionality
added to the&lt;br/&gt;memory decoders to augment their role as interconnects as
well as to&lt;br/&gt;support desired computation, and, if necessary, additional
interconnects&lt;br/&gt;added between the application-specific processors, the
memory modules,&lt;br/&gt;and the decoders. The proposed architecture will be
developed and&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated for a data-intensive application, namely
motion estimation&lt;br/&gt;for MPEG encoding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of the proposed research will be used to augment one&lt;br/&gt;advanced class,
to be taught at USC as well as UCI. The class will&lt;br/&gt;take a top-down
view of advanced processor-in-memory architectures&lt;br/&gt;including those
developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
advance the state of the art in computer&lt;br/&gt;architecture, VLSI, and VLSI
CAD, leading to faster and cheaper designs&lt;br/&gt;for day to day computation
and information retrieval, exchange,
and&lt;br/&gt;management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;