* 0220237
* Race, Ethnicity and Science:  The Case of Lung Function
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Lundy Braun, Brown University
* Fellowship
* Keith R. Benson
* 08/31/2003
* USD 44,310.00

SES 0220237 -- Race, Ethnicity, and Science: The Case of Lung Function Lundy
Braun, Brown University

This award is for a professional development fellowship designed to enable the
principal investigator (Lundy Braun) to acquire advanced background training in
science and technology studies in order to study the practices by which
biomedicine produces, naturalizes, and legitimizes notions of racial and ethnic
difference. The training takes place with Evelynn Hammonds, historian of science
in the Science, Technology, and Science Department at MIT. Elements of the
training program include learning the methods and modes of analysis of
historical Research through coursework; directed reading; and participation in
relevant workshops, colloquia, and activities of the newly established Center
for the Study of Diversity in Science, Technology, and Medicine at MIT. The
research activities focus on several issues: i) how the technology of lung
function testing has been deployed to produce knowledge about race and ethnicity
from the mid-19th century to the present; ii) the ways in which notions of
difference became embedded in the practices of pulmonary and occupational
medicine and why they have remained invisible to practitioners; iii) the
relationship between popular and scientific theories of race and ethnicity; and
iv) the socio-political consequences of the knowledge produced.

This research has several interrelated components. The first involves an
examination of the explanations provided in the primary scientific literature
for observed racial and ethnic differences in lung function. The second part of
the project involves mapping the circulation of ideas on racial difference in
lung anatomy, capacity, and disease in scientific disciplines -- physical
anthropology, medicine, statistics, and epidemiology -- and popular culture,
through an analysis of the scientific literature, conference proceedings,
textbooks, popular journals, and newspapers. The third part examines
contemporary understandings of the meaning of racial difference in lung function
and the implications of those understandings in the medical subspecialties of
occupational and pulmonary medicine through interviews with researchers,
clinicians, and trade unionists.

The research is to be presented at the annual meeting of the Society for the
Social Studies of Science and should lead to several papers published in
academic journals. Braun also plans to develop a course on race and science to
be offered at Brown University for undergraduate students on her return. She
intends to integrate science studies approaches into her teaching of basic
science to lay people.