* 0220183
* ITR:  Unifying Software Frameworks for Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Vaidy Sunderam, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

An architectural framework for distributed computing is proposed, with a view to
unifying multiple resource sharing models. Farm computing, private virtual
machines, computational grids, and peer to peer technologies are examples of
di.erent paradigms that have evolved to support di.erent application domains.
However, despite their common underlying theme of sharing resources across
computer networks, systems implementing these technologies tend to preclude
interoperability and, in some cases, require substantial middleware to
orchestrate resource aggregation. This project adopts a provider-centric view of
resource sharing, emphasizes lightweight software infrastructures that maintain
minimal state, and facilitates straightforward interfacing to current and
emerging distributed computing standards. Through a reconfigurable, component-
based approach, the proposed framework will attempt to provide support for
multiple distributed computing paradigms in a unified setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provider perspective adopted in this project envisions
resource owners hosting a software backplane onto which owners, clients, or
third-party resellers may load components or component suites that deliver value
added services. Complete control over usage, security, and protection of
resources is retained by the owner. Components may implement primitive functions
such as message transport or mathematical transforms, or may be aggregated to
emulate concurrent computing environments, or may ofer portal interfaces to
complex backend application services. Providers of primitive resources or
components may publish their availability using either standard mechanisms,
framework-supplied schemes, or private directories; clients discover, lookup,
and use these services&lt;br/&gt;subject to usage and security
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the conduct of this project, fundamental
issues concerning commonalities and dualities in distributed systems, secure
resource sharing, and software reconfiguration will be explored, and will likely
contribute new and useful findings to the field. Owing to its strong pragmatic
bias, the project is also likely to have broad impact by suggesting schemes to
realize effective distributed computing systems, and by evolving prototype
paradigmatic software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;