* 0220742
* Advancing Science in Central-South Texas - ASICST
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Richard Whipple, Southwest Texas Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Southwest Texas Junior College (SWTJC) serves a vast rural region encompassing
eleven counties (16,812 square miles) and is home to 215,000 residents. The vast
majority of residents are Hispanic reflecting the College's 78% Hispanic student
population. Located in the extreme southwest corner of the state of Texas, the
area is characterized by high poverty, high illiteracy, low educational
attainment, high unemployment, is the poorest in the state and one of the
poorest in the nation. Southwest Texas Junior College is a comprehensive open-
door institution that provides quality Associate Degree and Certificate programs
with campuses located in Crystal City, Del Rio, Eagle Pass and Uvalde, Texas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a Scholarship program to be awarded
to students in the discipline areas of Computer Science, Engineering and
Mathematics. Thirty scholarships are awarded each year at $1,515 per semester (
$3,030 per year). Award recipients are selected on the basis of low-income
guidelines, a submitted application, interview and written statement and
assessment of career goals. A campus ASICST Scholarship Committee selects
qualified students for awards. Awarded students must maintain a 3.0 GPA and
continue in a Computer Science, Engineering or Mathematics career path until
graduation to remain eligible for continued assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to encourage and enable academically talented,
financially disadvantaged persons to enter the high technology workforce
following completion of an associate, baccalaureate, or graduate degree in
Computer Science, Engineering or Mathematics. The project uses a combination of
expanded scholarship opportunities, a rigorous recruitment plan, mentor-designed
workshops, industry involvement, career placement and student support structures
delivering services such as academic enrichment, advising, tutoring, mentoring
and career exploration. The specific objectives are to; 1) decrease the
attrition rate for students between the first and second years, with 90% (27) of
spring semester scholarship recipients returning to school the following fall
semester; 2) eighty percent (24) of scholarship awardees complete an Associate
Degree program; and 3) 75% (18) transfer to a four-year institution to continue
their studies. Scholarships are renewable for two years at Southwest Texas
Junior College and two years at a four-year institution of their choice to
complete a Baccalaureate Degree in Computer Science, Engineering or
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;