* 0220976
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Visualizing Mechanistic Controls of North American Climate Variability Through Cartographic Animation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Patrick Bartlein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 9,445.00

Extreme climate variations, such as droughts and floods, have broad social and
economic consequences for agriculture and water resources. A major challenge to
climate researchers, however, are to effectively formulate and present
depictions of climate change. The objectives of this doctoral dissertation
research project are to develop a conceptual model of the controls of North
American climate on multiple spatial and temporal scales and to illustrate this
model using animated cartographic methods. Specifically, this project is
designed to provide a general process-based description of daily and month-to-
month variations of atmospheric circulation that contribute to surface climate
anomalies such as drought. This study will also describe the influence that such
phenomena like El Nino have on year-to-year variations of North American
climate. Data for this project are provided through the National Center for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR) 50-year Reanalysis Project. These data sources, which contain
meteorological fields, many not directly observable, can be used for analyzing
the spatial and temporal variability of the climate system. The long-term
averages of each variable provide information about the broad-scale climate
variations through the seasonal cycle. Composite-anomaly patterns show
relationships between large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns and surface
climate responses. Cartographic animations using these data incorporate time
progression into analyses of climate variability, thus providing an opportunity
to visualize the build-up and demise of anomalous events such as droughts and
floods.

Results from this project will provide a greater understanding of the processes
involved in climate variability in North America and how those processes vary
through time and space. This research will show the surface and atmospheric
climate processes that control extreme events like drought in the modern climate
record in order to help understand what has driven past climate change. The
project also will provide tools for predicting the impact of drought in future
climates. The process-based approach taken in this project will contribute to
understanding of the mechanisms and feedbacks that cause climate variability on
multiple spatial scales (e.g., regional to continental) and temporal scales
(e.g., daily to yearly). In addition, this research will enhance the field of
cartography through the application of animations for both data exploration and
communication of results. Animations created from this research will be made
available via the internet to researchers, educators and the general public for
use as teaching and resource tools. Such products provide a link between
research in the lab and learning in the classroom. In K-12 education, for
example, teachers will be able to use the web-based materials created for this
project to help develop their own student-centered learning activities. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.