* 0220944
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Sub-Grid Spatial and Temporal Variability on Modeled Evaporation Fluxes in Arctic Coastal Plain Ecosystems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Allen Hope, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 7,750.00

Evaporation is a key link between the surface energy, carbon and water balances
of Arctic tundra ecosystems. Because of the sensitivity of Arctic ecosystems to
future change, understanding the links between changes in the surface energy,
carbon and water balances are important for predicting the impacts of climate
change on the global water, energy and carbon cycles. Given that the evaporation
process is acutely non-linear, using time and space averaged inputs in
evaporation models may potentially lead to significant errors. It is
hypothesized that heterogeneity associated with permafrost dynamics, soil
moisture, vegetation (vascular/non-vascular) and the occurrence of free water
bodies (lakes) leads to large uncertainties in model estimates of evaporation
where time and area averaged inputs are used. This doctoral dissertation
research project will investigate the significance of sub-grid spatial and
temporal heterogeneity on modeled evaporation estimates at scales ranging from
landscape (1 km2) to regions (100 km2) in Arctic Coastal Plain ecosystems. The
significance of these effects will be examined within the framework of the
BIOME-BGC model adapted to Arctic ecosystems. BIOME-BGC is a widely used
ecophysiological process model designed to compute water, carbon and nutrient
fluxes at a variety of scales. Data for model inputs, calibration, and
validation will be derived from a combination of eddy flux tower, eddy flux
aircraft, field, and satellite remotely sensed data. A field based, high
resolution, geographic information system map will be developed at each eddy
flux tower locations for improving representations of vegetation and soil
moisture in model estimates of evaporative fluxes. While improving our
understandings of the controls over the evaporation process in Arctic coastal
plain ecosystems, this research provides the foundation for adapting a regional
model of the energy, carbon, and water cycles to Arctic ecosystems.

Arctic ecosystems are of particular importance to global climate change studies
due to their sensitivity to temperature change and potential positive feedbacks
that may amplify warming across the globe. This study seeks to integrate and
synthesize knowledge of evaporation (a key component of the climate system) at
multiple scales in order to improve model predictions in Arctic ecosystems.
Additionally, this research is expected to increase our knowledge of the complex
interactions among the atmosphere, soils, biota, and permafrost in Arctic
ecosystems. Finally, results from this study may be used as a basis for
developing and implementing a complete carbon, water, and nitrogen model for
improving our understanding of the affects of climate change in Arctic tundra
regions. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.