* 0220726
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Libby Holt, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project is establishing a new scholarship for Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars. Recipients are being chosen from
candidates majoring or planning to major in Computer Science, Engineering
Technology, or Mathematics (CSEM). Scholarships are available to students in
both Associate of Science and Associate of Arts programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the program are to:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Annually provide scholarships to 30 academically talented, financially
disadvantaged CSEM students, including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;2. Provide support to CSEM scholars, enabling a minimum of 70%
of the recipients to maintain or exceed a 2.5 grade point average and persist
until associate degree achievement.&lt;br/&gt;3. Provide job placement
assistance to 100% of the project participants who complete requirements and
desire employment in CSEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;4. Provide transfer assistance
to 100% of students who complete program requirements and desire to enroll in a
four-year institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program build upons existing
recruitment, support and career placement activities at the college and
integrates new programs to provide a complete infrastructure. Candidates are
being recruited through existing college recruitment efforts as well as the
College Board Tutoring Partnership, a program providing college readiness tutors
to local high schools, and the Jacksonville Urban Systemic Initiative. In
addition to existing student support programs present on the four campuses and
three centers of the College, each scholar is paired with a faculty mentor to
assist the scholar and provide guidance. The College also has a CSEM counselor
who is responsible for coordinating all support services college-wide for the
scholarship recipients. The counselor works closely with the mentors and assures
all support services are fully accessed by the scholars. In the area of career
services, the scholars have access to all existing career services. Industry
partners provide internship activities and mentoring to students wishing to seek
employment upon graduation with an A.S. degree. An innovative support structure
is being established built upon existing programs and partnerships improving the
success of students in these demanding disciplines.