* 0220408
* Intent and Consequence: Forestry Institutions and Community Management in Indonesia
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 1,525.00

This dissertation research project will investigate how and why good intentions
of forest co-management initiatives in Indonesia lead to unintended
consequences. It will examine the institutional culture of and relationships
between organizations involved in co-management, and map how these initiatives
provide an arena to strengthen, negotiate and contest claims to forest resources
at the local level. The Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) and
its co-management initiative in East Kalimantan will be the focal points through
which these issues are examined. The study seeks to understand the process of
knowledge production about forests and forest dependent communities in
Indonesia, as well as the consequences of that knowledge for forest dependent
communities. Research objectives are as follows: (1) to document the processes
of and identify the factors that affect selecting, implementing and reporting
research on forest co-management in Indonesia by CIFOR; (2) to trace the types
and flows of information between CIFOR and other actors at local, regional and
national levels; (3) to examine how local level actors negotiate and contest
rights and claims to forest resources and determine how CIFOR's co-management
initiative affects these contestations and negotiations; (4) to compare the
consequences of CIFOR's intervention with the initiative's intentions; and (5)
to contribute to a broader theoretical understanding of the culture and
political economy of institutions that produce knowledge about forests and
forest dependent people. Meeting these objectives requires an ethnographic focus
on how knowledge is produced, used and transformed. Over a 12-month period,
multi-sited research will be conducted in Indonesia, employing the following
methods: participant observation, semi-structured and open-ended interviews, and
content analysis of documents. Using this set of methods will allow
triangulation of interview, observational and documentary data collected from
multiple sources, as well as the analysis of the continuities and disjunctures
between data sources. On a logistical level, collaborating with CIFOR provides
the necessary access to conduct this study successfully.&lt;br/&gt;This study
will contribute to theoretical debates concerned the culture and political
economy of knowledge producing institutions, and the effects of that knowledge
at global, national and local levels. Investigating the institutional culture of
a forestry institution fills a major gap in the literature on development and
environmental institutions. It also contributes to the science studies
literature by investigating the nexus of science and management, and moving from
the laboratory sciences, which has been most examined, to the field sciences and
their application, which has been least studied. While most studies of forestry
institution interventions at the village level limit their scope to village
level dynamics, this study integrates an understanding of an intervention at the
village level with an investigation of the institutional culture that gave rise
to it, as well as analyzes the interplay between village and institutional
realities. In doing so, it interrogates the assumed boundaries between western
knowledge and its non-western subjects and between experts and those ostensibly
in need of expertise.&lt;br/&gt;