* 0220499
* PAthways to Careers in MAthematics and Computer Science (PACMACS) Bridge Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Agnes Rash, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 08/31/2007
* USD 288,500.00

The primary objective of the PAthways to Careers in MAthematics and Computer
Science (PACMACS) Bridge program at Saint Joseph's University (SJU) is to train
and educate academically talented but financially disadvantaged minority
students for careers in mathematics and computer science by providing them with
an excellent, comprehensive, undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SJU
presently runs PACMACS, an innovative outreach program, for bright minority high
school students from Philadelphia public and charter high schools. High school
seniors (and exceptional juniors) in PACMACS attend up to 4 college classes at
SJU (in mathematics and computer science), and receive college and career
guidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PACMACS Bridge program is designed to help
those students make the transition to full-time college once they are enrolled
at SJU after graduating from high school. The PACMACS Bridge program is a
comprehensive package of financial, academic and social support offer to
undergraduates in the mathematics and computer science department at SJU.
Students obtain financial support through the University Financial Aid Office
and NSF CSEMS funding. Six to 10 eligible students will be identified and
awarded CSEMS scholarships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Academic support programs
include faculty mentors, upper level undergraduate student mentors, supervised
study sessions, tutoring services and individualized attention in the small
classes available at SJU. Social support programs include seminars on college
life, peer support groups and panel discussions on cultural diversity to assist
the students in the cultural adjustment to an urban, predominantly Caucasian
Catholic University.