* 0220495
* US-Pakistan Workshop:  High Salinity Plants, Karachi, Pakistan, November 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Darrell Weber, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

0220495&lt;br/&gt;Weber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a U.S.-Pakistan Workshop on High Salinity Plants to be held in Karachi, Pakistan
in November 2002. The organizers are Dr. Darrell Weber, Department of Biology
and Range Science, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah and Dr. M. Ajmal Khan,
Department of Biology, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan. &lt;br/&gt;The
workshop theme is "High salt tolerant plant ecosystems and their use in
restoration of highly saline soils" and the focus will be on the restoration of
highly saline soils. The subjects include: collection and characterization of
halophytes for use in restoration of highly saline soils, molecular biology of
halophytes and identification of their salt tolerant genes, critical factors
involved in the establishment of halophytes on highly saline soils, mechanisms
of salt tolerance for halophytes, factors involved in maintaining natural
halophyte populations, factors involved in maintaining restored halophyte
populations, and development of cash crop halophytes. The subjects covered focus
on the restoration of highly saline soils, the mechanism of salt tolerance would
have value in determining what type of plant is selected for restoration. The
workshop is designed to involve a presentation by a U.S. or Pakistan scientist
on each specific research area. Information on how to prepare a joint proposal
will be presented. The proceedings will have information on restoration of
highly saline soils, selected areas of high priority research, as well as a
literature guide for the cooperative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is being held in conjunction with the 8th national
meeting of the Pakistan Botanical Society. The workshop objectives are
consistent with the interests and priorities of the Pakistan Government. It will
include U.S. scientists who are active in the field of plant physiology and
ecological studies. The U.S. participants include four junior scientists. The
results of the workshop will include identifying joint research that would
benefit the United States, Pakistan and other countries that have high salinity,
especially those that have intensive irrigation systems.&lt;br/&gt;