* 0220721
* Creating Access and Opportunity for Engineering and Technology Students in Southeastern Massachusetts
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Anthony Ucci, Bristol Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project is strengthening the completion and graduation rate of students who
are non-traditional majors in engineering and technology. Students are being
selected on academic merit and financial need criteria. The purpose of the
program is to close the financial assistance gap, increase time on task, and
support graduation for the associate degree for selected scholars within two
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broadly representative Scholarship Committee is
being formed; composed of faculty, administrative staff including the Director
of Financial Aid, and industrial partners. Applications require a personal
statement of educational and career goals and at least one letter of
recommendation. This program aims to sustain award recipients to completion by
providing intensive supportive services including small classes and a learning
community approach, goal-based developmental advising, a college success
seminar, a new student orientation, and internships. Other support services
include tutoring and writing centers. The scholarship program enables the
college to provide supplementary support for tutoring and monthly scholar
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industrial partners provide mentoring and
cooperative education opportunities. The Department of Engineering and
Engineering Technology offers an associate degree in both career and transfer
programs and is currently implementing an NSF Advanced Technological Education
project, which establishes a new automated manufacturing curriculum and
laboratory (also referred to as computer-integrated manufacturing or CIM
program). This program is recruiting and enrolling two cohorts of non-
traditional students for engineering and technology. Program scholars in this
project are being drawn from this ATE project as well as from other engineering
programs at the college.