* 0220770
* Scholarships for Information Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Nasser Hedayat, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Despite recent economic downturns, the demand for skilled information technology
(IT) professionals in the United States and in Central Florida remains
significant. Community colleges play significant roles in the success of
students (especially underrepresented populations) who pursue high skill, high
wage technical degrees and careers such as those in IT-related areas. Valencia
CC's project provides educational opportunities to low-income, academically
talented students through scholarships and support services that promote full-
time enrollment and degree achievement in six Associate in Science degree
programs related to computer technology and engineering technology: Computer
Engineering Technology (CET), Computer Information Technology (CIT), Computer
Programming and Analysis (CP&A), Database Technology (DBT), E-Business
Technology (EBT), and Electronics Engineering Technology (EET). Project
objectives include increasing the number of full-time students, establishing
higher retention rates, and establishing higher placement rates. Valencia CC
awards 30 scholarships each year to full-time students pursuing the targeted
degree programs, for a total of 120 scholarships over the four-year grant
period. Student must meet all CSEMS eligibility requirements and are recruited
through extensive existing recruitment strategies. Valencia's IT and EET
programs are nationally recognized for being well defined, current, and rigorous
in content, with curriculum that is relevant and responsive to the needs of the
business community. High academic performance is encouraged through supplemental
advisement services. A small portion of the project funds are allocated to
management costs and support programs and services designed to enhance student
learning, confidence, performance, retention, and placement. The student support
services strategies include student advisement and mentoring by faculty and
industry representatives, recruitment and retention activities, and the
availability of industry-based internships for scholarship recipients.
Internships not only supplement classroom-based learning experiences; they
provide students with networking opportunities critical to finding eventual
employment after graduation.

Marketing to students is targeted at: (1) current Valencia students in the
targeted programs who have at least 25 percent of their coursework remaining;
(2) high school seniors and recent high school graduates who are or were
enrolled in dual enrollment programs related to the targeted programs; (3) high
school seniors and recent high school graduates who are or were enrolled in
schools with high minority student populations; (4) female high school seniors
and recent high school graduates who have or had an interest in IT or EET
programs. The likelihood of success in achieving the objectives of this project
are increased by the fact that Valencia will be able to implement the project
rapidly by building upon existing academic and support services.