* 0220692
* "Collaborative Proposal:  Gas Flux Under Hurricane Winds"
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Craig McNeil, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2005
* USD 308,631.00

Gas Flux under Hurricane Winds&lt;br/&gt;Eric D'Asaro UW&lt;br/&gt;Craig McNeil
URI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The air-sea fluxes of O2 and N2 will be measured at
wind speeds of 30 ms-1 or greater using a newly developed polarographic oxygen
sensor and an improved total gas tension sensor mounted on neutrally buoyant
floats and air-deployed into the path of hurricanes. These data will be used to
extend the gas flux parameterizations to higher wind speeds. This is important
because the flux of CO2 between the atmosphere and the ocean across the air-sea
interface is a major term in global carbon budgets. The gas flux
parameterizations now used to compute this flux are highly uncertain at high
wind speeds. The floats will make profiles of O, N, temperature and salinity
before and after the storm, accurately following the 3-dimensional motions of
water parcels within the surface mixed layer. Gas fluxes will be inferred using
4 different methods; each method is sensitive to different errors and thus the
use of many methods will provide a check against each other. The existing gas
tension sensors will be modified to increase the area of the gas exchange
membrane in order to increase their response time and support the methods of
suing covariance fluxes and flux profiles from changes in gas content. Detailed
modeling of bubble-induced gas fluxes from both measurements and Large Eddy
Simulations will be used to understand mechanisms of gas flux at high wind
speed. Float deployments will be made as part of the ONR-funded CBLAST field
experiments in 2003 and 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;