* 0220400
* An Autonomous Oceanographic Sensor Array
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Malcolm Stokes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2004
* USD 148,501.00

P.I. Stokes, Malcolm (Scripps Inst. of Oceanography) Proposal #:
0220400&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to construct a robust, inexpensive
sensor array for use in marine and terrestrial environments. This system will
utilize a combination of standard technologies that will enable easy deployment
of densely populated sensor arrays, (up to 96 sensors, on 8 cables in a single
logging unit) in high-energy environments. An important advantage of the
proposed network of sensors is that it can be built at low cost thus increasing
the likelihood that this instrumentation will be widely used. Another advantage
is that, the time-division multiplexing technology developed for the prototype
will be easily adaptable to other transducers (i.e. salinity, light intensity).
A prototype array constructed to measure pressure and temperature was deployed
off Scripps Pier and showed the utility of the design for studies requiring
high-resolution monitoring of environmental conditions over spatial scales of
100 to 1000 m.&lt;br/&gt; This proposal requests funding for the development of
two autonomous instrument packages based on the prototype technology. These new
generation arrays will significantly extend the capabilities of the prototype by
incorporating a more robust cabling scheme; utilizing surface mount circuitry
for miniaturization of individual sensor modules; and adding an autonomous data-
logging microcontroller for long-term, underwater deployments. One instrument
package would include 96 pressure sensors (arranged as 12 individual transducers
on 8 cable elements) and the other would include 96 precision thermistors. Each
microcontroller could be programmed to record data from any combination of
pressure, temperature, or other environmental sensors in a modular fashion. The
PIs propose to test the instruments as part of currently funded projects that
would benefit from higher resolution sampling. &lt;br/&gt;