* 0220309
* Enhancement of Experimental Imaging Capabilities for Advanced Study of Shear Band Growth and Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Amy Rechenmacher, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2004
* USD 87,214.00

CMS-0220309 PI: Amy Rechenmacher Institution: Johns Hopkins University Title:
"Enhancement of Experimental Imaging Capabilities for Advanced Study of Shear
Band Growth and Evolution"

Abstract:

An experimental investigation is currently underway, involving plane strain
testing and digital image analysis of shear bands. The objective is to
comprehensively evaluate the nature of the relationship between deposition void
ratio and critical state line (CSL) for sands. The study has been motivated by
results of recent research in which experimental quantification of localized
deformations (shear bands), and thus critical states, in dilative sands has
indicated that CSL position in void ratio-effective stress space may not be
unique, but rather dependent on deposition void ratio. Since critical state
concepts and the CSL are widely used in geotechnical analysis and design, the
impact of these findings is potentially significant. The ultimate goal is to
derive from the results a quantitative description of the relationship between
deposition void ratio and CSL, and to develop recommendations for incorporating
the findings into current analysis procedures for liquefaction potential and
constitutive models that utilize the CSL in its current unique form.

Experiments are being conducted in an advanced plane strain testing apparatus.
The apparatus is configured to promote unconstrained formation of shear bands
and to permit the localization process to be analyzed photographically. The
technique of Digital Image Correlation (DIC) is used to measure directly
localized displacements in sand specimens to a high level of accuracy. The
incorporation of a higher resolution digital camera than in previous studies,
combined with the synchronization of image acquisition with data acquisition and
control, will enable more accurate quantification of shear band deformations,
including displacement patterns associated with shear band formation. The highly
developed photographic capabilities also will enable quantitative study of
deformation mechanisms associated with other localized displacement phenomenon,
such as temporary shear bands.

The configuration of the biaxial testing apparatus as described above offers one
of the only currently available experimental methods to quantify the evolution
of localized displacements in soils. Unfortunately, however, in its current
configuration only one plane of the shear band is visualized, yielding question
as to the validity of the displacement quantification, in spite of its high
accuracy. In addition, the potential occurrence of out-of-plane volumetric
exchange within the shear band cannot be addressed.

This study aims to overcome the stated limitations of the current experimental
system by incorporating modifications to allow imaging through both plane strain
walls, while keeping in tact the out-of-plane force measurement capabilities.
The modifications consist of the addition of a second digital camera, and load
wall redesign to accommodate imaging. These modifications shall affect several
system improvements. First, quantification of local displacements on two planes
through the depth of the shear band will enable confirmation of locally derived
critical state void ratios. Second, the real-time comparison among displacement
fields at both ends of the shear band and transducer measurements currently
available at midpoint of the specimen depth will provide the opportunity to make
more reliable observations about deformation uniformity through the depth of the
shear band. Measurements of local deformations to such a level of detail should
contribute significantly to the understanding of granular soil behavior.