* 0220876
* CSEMS: Scholarships in Computer, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* David McAvity, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2008
* USD 343,748.00

This project provides up to four years of scholarship support to 25 talented,
low-income undergraduates pursuing bachelor degrees in mathematics or computer
science along with a carefully crafted program of enriched student support
activities. Special consideration is given to recruiting women, ethnic and
racial minorities, and persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project also includes a strong collaboration with South Puget Sound Community
College (SPSCC), a neighboring two-year institution from which many of our
students transfer.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative elements include integrated
recruitment activities, cross-institution advising and student support services,
and transfer agreements. Integrated into this project is the scholarship award
process, which ensures that successful students at SPSCC are given priority for
CSEMS scholarships at Evergreen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a clear
and effective management plan and collaboration with an existing Evergreen
student services program, Keep Enhancing Yourself (KEY), which has proven highly
effective in retaining and graduating low-income students. An Individual Action
Plan has been developed with each student and monitored regularly. Additional
student support activities include faculty advising, career planning support,
internships and work study opportunities on and off campus, and workshops on
various subjects known to be relevant to student success. A required biweekly
Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics seminar is the vehicle for
structuring many of these activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of
the project is a three-day summer institute for CSEMS students, relevant faculty
and staff, and industry partners. Partnerships with industry and state, federal
government agencies and MESA (Math, Engineering and Science Achievement)
Program, are also part of the project through advisory board participation,
involvement in the seminar and summer institute, in some cases, internships and
field placements.&lt;br/&gt;