* 0220236
* Controlled Crystallization in Novel Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Richard Register, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 314,000.00

This award will investigate the ability of block copolymers to direct polymer
crystallization. Diblock and triblock copolymers with defect-free crystallizable
blocks will test the prediction of an equilibrium degree of chain folding in
crystalline-amorphous block copolymers, which contrasts sharply with the
kinetically-induced chain folding typically exhibited by homopolymers. Control
of crystallite thickness through crystalline and amorphous block lengths or the
addition of a nonvolatile diluent will yield materials with narrow and tunable
melting ranges. Diluted triblocks having crystallizable endblocks will represent
a new type of thermoplastic elastomer gel with low modulus and good dimensional
stability-desirable candidates for large-deformation actuators. In the second
aspect of this work, novel block copolymers synthesized by combining ring-
opening metathesis and anionic polymerizations will address the long-standing
issue of cocrystallization between linear and short-branched polyethylenes.
These polymers will contain blocks of linear polyethylene, PE, and
poly(ethylene-co-butene), PEB, separated by an amorphous block of variable
length. When this "linker" run is short, the polymers are essentially PE-PEB
diblocks, which are expected to show an interesting crystal heterogeneity. When
the linker run is of medium length (long enough to microphase-separate from the
other blocks), then the PE and PEB blocks are tethered to amorphous domains,
favoring PE/PEB cocrystallization. Finally, when the linker run is the majority
component, the mixed PE + PEB chains will be segregated within discrete
microdomains, where they will crystallize only at deep undercoolings and with
extensive cocrystallization. This provides a route to the preparation of PE/PEB
cocrystals for systematic examination of their structure and properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization of polymers has a profound impact on their
properties, and underpins many of their applications. At size scales ranging
from nanometers to microns, a typical polymer's crystalline structure depends
strongly upon details of method used to crystallize it. In this work, we propose
to robustly control the crystallization process, and hence the structure,
through molecular features built into the polymers-the so-called "block
architecture"-during synthesis. The proposed work will provide an integrated
research and educational experience for two graduate students and approximately
six undergraduates, who will be able to disseminate results from their work both
internally and externally. The PI and the graduate students will continue their
active work in support of K-6 science education in Mercer County, both through
the development of new educational materials and through teacher
training.&lt;br/&gt;