* 0220631
* Scholarships for Academic Recruiting  and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* robert marcus, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 374,423.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 0220631&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mahmoud Abd-
allah&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Central State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Scholarships for Academic Recruiting and
Retention&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, called "Scholarships for
Academic Recruiting and Retention (SARR)", provides scholarships to increase
recruitment and retention, and graduation rates for computer science,
engineering and mathematics students. The key elements of the project are: 1) a
scholarship awards program; 2) intensified recruitment of community college
students; 3) a broader base of student research and design experiences both on
campus and in off campus internships; 4) a set of support services to help
scholarship recipients succeed academically and facilitate the next steps toward
achieving their career goals. The program initially accommodates 25 science,
engineering and mathematics scholars in the first year and 28 scholars for each
of the last three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSU has a number of existing
activities and resources that provide a sound foundation for the proposed
program. These include a comprehensive tutoring program, a supplemental
instruction program, a first- web-based course applicability system that allows
community college students to quickly assess course equivalencies and academic
ranking for CSU programs, and a learning communities program that facilitates
student collaborative study to improve academic performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSU has established standards for the scholarship awards
to provide entry to students who are just beginning to realize their potential,
while strongly motivating them to push for and to sustain higher levels of
academic achievement. SARR provides a network of support services for the
scholarship recipients to assist them in overcoming any problems that might
impede their progress, and to smooth the way to meet their academic and career
objectives. The core of the support network is the assignment of faculty mentors
to scholarship recipients. These mentors are charged with tracking and reporting
on the progress of their students throughout their undergraduate residence, and
for five years beyond. Mentors also counsel students on academic and aptitude
matters, and guide them in maximizing their educational experiences and career
opportunities. Other elements of the support network provide assistance in
finding other sources of financial support if needed, facilitate student
participation in internship opportunities, provide entry level career placement
assistance, and provide graduate/professional school entry guidance and
assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;