* 0220218
* Electromagnetic Modeling of Cylindrical Waveguide-Based Deielctric Resonator Amplifier Arrays for Spatial Power Combiners
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Ahmed Kishk, University of Mississippi
* Continuing grant
* eric johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 232,000.00

This proposal addresses two areas of critical emerging technology in the
microwave and millimeter wave regions. The first area is the fundamental
characteristics of dielectric resonator antennas and finite antenna arrays
operating in a cylindrical waveguide environment. The study and analysis of
single dielectric resonator antenna element show the advantages of this new
antenna type at millimeter wave frequencies in comparison with traditionally
used microstrip and patch printed antennas. This new radiator is expected to be
an excellent element in antenna arrays used in many critical applications. This
part of the project focuses on the development of new analytical and numerical
tools for full-wave analysis of antenna radiation characteristics and on the
investigation of performance of dielectric radiators as elements in waveguide-
based antenna arrays. Based on the understanding of dielectric resonator antenna
performance in cylindrical waveguides, the second part of the project addresses
the issue of modeling a fully integrated cylindrical waveguide-based spatial
power combining amplifier array. A cylindrical spatial power combining
architecture, which utilizes an array of dielectric resonators, is proposed. In
this system, dielectric resonator antennas play a critical role, which is
justified by their radiation characteristics and high power handling
capabilities. Our goal here is to develop an integrated modeling scheme for the
full-wave analysis of a complete waveguide-based spatial power combining system,
including the interaction of passive (dielectric resonator and hard-horn
antennas) elements and active (amplifier) circuits. The newly proposed system
will allow to operate in dual and circular polarization regimes. A high level
educational component is considered here by training two graduate students
during the course of this project that merge the basic research with high level
practical applications. In order to broaden the scope of benefits, a new course
will be developed to involve and expose more graduate students to this area. The
course will be developed based on the study of dielectric resonator antennas in
an array environment and the use of hard surfaces as an artificial magnetic
surface.