* 0220762
* A computer science and mathematics scholarship program in predominantly minority and female program.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Connie Yu, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 439,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to encourage low-income, academically
talented students to&lt;br/&gt;major in computer science and mathematics and to
assist them in being successful in the&lt;br/&gt;completion of their academic
program. Through innovative community building&lt;br/&gt;activities, the
scholarship program is having a significant impact on the entire cohort
of&lt;br/&gt;students enrolled in Computer Science and Mathematics programs at
NJCU. This cohort of &lt;br/&gt;students are predominately female and
disadvantaged minorities. New Jersey City &lt;br/&gt;University is designated as
a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) and a Minority Institution, &lt;br/&gt;with
a Hispanic enrollment of 30% and a total minority enrollment of 62%. The Program
&lt;br/&gt;consists of four components: (1)recruitment of talented, low-income
students into &lt;br/&gt;Computer Science, Pre-Engineering and Mathematics
majors; (2) targeted academic &lt;br/&gt;support initiatives, in addition to
existing student support services; (3) structured &lt;br/&gt;scholarship
community activities; and, (4) internships and cooperative education work
&lt;br/&gt;experiences. The overall goals of the Project are the increase in
enrollment, retention and &lt;br/&gt;graduation rates of high-ability, low-
income students in Computer Science, &lt;br/&gt;Pre-Engineering and Mathematics
baccalaureate degree programs. These goals and &lt;br/&gt;objectives are being
accomplished through existing programs, services and resources, &lt;br/&gt;as
well as through the addition of new academic support initiatives, and
scholarship &lt;br/&gt;community activities. This initiative represents a
congruence between NJCU's mission &lt;br/&gt;and the goals and purposes of the
National Science Foundation's Computer Science, &lt;br/&gt;Engineering and
Mathematics Scholarship Program. The Project enables the creation &lt;br/&gt;of
a sustainable system for academics, student services and career planning
supports &lt;br/&gt;for our diverse student population, thereby increasing the
technological capacity of our &lt;br/&gt;nation's youth, and strengtheing and
diversifying of our nation's workforce.