* 0220230
* Collaborative Research:  ITR:  Automatic Analysis of Spontaneous Facial Expressions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mark Frank, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2004
* USD 211,972.00

Automatic Analysis of Spontaneous Facial
Expressions&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
computer systems for automatic analysis of spontaneous facial expressions, with
a focus on the scientific study of the role of facial expressions in deception.
A state-of-the-art digital video database of spontaneous facial expressions will
be developed. This database will be hand-coded by behavioral scientist experts
on facial expressions. This database will be used to develop an array of
software tools for automatic analysis of facial expressions from video
sequences. These tools will be developed by machine perception scientists in
close collaboration with behavioral scientists and will be evaluated and refined
for application to the scientific study of facial
expressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The machine perception community is in
critical need for standard video databases to train and evaluate systems for
automatic recognition of facial expressions. This project will provide one such
database and thus could potentially accelerate research in this field. Automated
recognition systems would have a tremendous impact on basic research by making
facial expression measurement more accessible as a behavioral measure, providing
data on the dynamics of facial behavior at resolutions that was previously
unavailable. Such systems would also lay the foundations for computers that can
understand this critical aspect of human communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;