* 0220748
* New Directions in Understanding Ethics and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Deborah Johnson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2005
* USD 215,590.00

This endeavor examines the implications of recent work in Science and Technology
Studies (STS) for understanding the connection between ethics and technology. It
involves integration of insights from two fields of research that have
significantly evolved in the last two decades: &lt;br/&gt;Social studies of
technology; and&lt;br/&gt;Applied and practical ethics related to
technology.&lt;br/&gt;STS theories of technology provide a rich foundation for
understanding the connection between ethics and technology insofar as they
reveal the intimate connections between technology and society, and especially
the social shaping of technology. STS scholars have rejected the idea that
technologies simply appear and then have social impacts. They now favor more
complex, co-creation models of technology and society. However, many ethicists
continue to use a model of technology arriving intact and then having impacts,
i.e., threatening particular social values or raising ethical issues. When the
seamless connection between technology and society is better understood, many
new and promising directions for research on ethics and technology become
apparent. &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop, articulate, illustrate, and
disseminate a theoretical account (or accounts) of the connection between ethics
and technology, an account that incorporates and builds on STS social
shaping/co-creation theories. The major task of the project will be to draw out
the implications of STS theory for ethics. Three directions will serve as
starting places for this endeavor. STS theory suggests that technology should be
understood to be not just material objects but material objects together with
social institutions, social practices, and human relationships. In this view,
ethical and value issues may be present at any point in the life cycle of a
technology, from design, to manufacture, to marketing and distribution, to
adoption and use. Second, a good deal of STS literature addresses the values
embodied in the design of material objects and this has enormous implications
for understanding the possibility of moral values being 'in' material objects.
Third, understanding the connection between ethics and technology opens up the
possibility of better understanding the role of human agency in technology-
mediated activities and consequently the accountability of humans for such
activities. &lt;br/&gt;The project is philosophical and theoretical in nature,
not empirical. While the research to be done will draw on empirical studies of
technology, the methodology of the project is conceptual, thematic, and
analytical. The investigator is a philosopher who has worked both in STS and in
the field of applied/ practical ethics, especially ethical issues in computer
technology. Two post-doctoral research associates, one post-doc with a
background in STS and one with a background in ethics are involved. Each will be
trained to understand the other field so that both can assist in the development
of the theoretical account and work on an individual project.&lt;br/&gt;