* 0220011
* ITR:  Optimization of Reconfigurable Architectures for  Efficient Implementation of Particle Filters
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2006
* USD 371,806.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0220011&lt;br/&gt;Djuric, Petar&lt;br/&gt;SUNY @ Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization of Reconfigurable Architectures for
Efficient Implementation of &lt;br/&gt;Particle Filters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years particle filters have attracted great attention in several research
communities. These filters are used in problems where time-varying signals must
be processed in real time and the objective is to estimate various unknowns of
the signals and to detect events described by the signals. The standard
solutions of such problems in many applications are based on the
&lt;br/&gt;Kalman or extended Kalman filters. In situations when the problems
are highly nonlinear or the noise that distorts the signals is non-Gaussian, the
Kalman filters provide solutions that may be far from optimal. &lt;br/&gt;A
major drawback of the particle filters is that their implementation is
computationally very intensive. They are, however, inherently parallelizable,
and special hardware can be built for their implementation that can meet the
stringent requirements of real-time processing. In this research,
&lt;br/&gt;reconfigurable and physically feasible VLSI architectures for
particle filters are developed. In the development of these architectures, many
important problems are researched. The most critical of them is the balancing of
hardware and software, which itself is tightly related to other important
issues. They include reductions of computational complexities by transformations
and &lt;br/&gt;approximations, investigation of the degree of parallelism
implemented in the filter, investigation of various interconnection mechanisms,
random communication schemes, hardware optimization, and design of low power
VLSI processors. This effort also includes building of reconfigurable hardware
so that it is suitable for different types of particle filters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;