* 0220036
* Miniaturized MEMS Based Fiber Optic Distributed Health monitoring System for Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Farhad Ansari, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 265,000.00

PI Name and Institution: Farhad Ansari, University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0220036&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
Miniaturized MEMS Based Fiber Optic Distributed Health monitoring System for
Civil Structures &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed research is
to develop capability for application of large numbers of sensors in a very
compact and portable manner in civil structures. This will be accomplished by
condensing all the hardware components of the sensor system, which includes
optical interferometer, and microprocessor modules into a single miniaturized
unit. The micro fabrication methodologies will be employed for development of
the Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), which will include wave-guides, and
micro mechanical optical switches and rotating micro mirrors. This system will
drive a series of distributed optical fiber sensors designed for sensing of
structural perturbations within a large sensing range. Conversion of the bulky
system into the miniaturized MEMS device will allow for mass production of MEMS-
sensor modules for integration within structures as needed. The sensory system
will provide monitoring capabilities for excessive strains, cracks,
delaminations, deflections, uneven load distributions, thermal shocks, impact
loads, and corrosion. The outcomes of this research will have a tremendous
impact on safety, maintenance, and efficient operation of the public works
infrastructure systems that include myriads of facilities such as buildings,
bridges, dams, tunnels, seaports, highways, pipelines, railroads, and power
generation stations. This research will provide new educational opportunities
for civil engineering students, as they will learn to develop and work with
modern tools to solve problems of great importance for the nation's public works
infrastructure. Students involved in this project will benefit greatly by
exposure to different research areas of engineering, particularly sensor
technology, MEMS, structural testing, and industrial packaging of micro
devices.&lt;br/&gt;