* 0220840
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematical Scholarships: Transition to Meaningful Employment Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Christopher Papadopoulos, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2008
* USD 399,509.00

The project supports 33 talented, academically qualified, students with
financial need, many from traditionally under-represented groups, during their
beginning, core coursework in the targeted disciplines (Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics). The program offers scholarships for students and
provide an extensive set of academic support services and educational
opportunities, including tutoring and inviting speakers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary Objectives&lt;br/&gt;1. To allow such students who
major in Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics to complete the first
half of their undergraduate education in four semesters by reducing the need for
outside employment during the school year.&lt;br/&gt;2. To increase the number
of such students who choose to attend the university as freshmen.&lt;br/&gt;3.
To increase the proportion of such students who go on to complete their degrees
in a timely fashion.&lt;br/&gt;Methods&lt;br/&gt;1. $3000 scholarships annually
for two years.&lt;br/&gt;2. Visits to local high schools to recruit prospective
scholarship recipients.&lt;br/&gt;3. Peer mentoring, faculty advising, and
extramural speakers.&lt;br/&gt;4. Tutoring and other academic
services.&lt;br/&gt;Impact&lt;br/&gt;These scholarships benefit students both
financially and academically. The scholarships are equivalent to about 75% of
annual in-state tuition at the university. Students on scholarship are able to
work at least 12 fewer hours per week, giving them more time to devote to their
studies. Students funded by this program are required to earn 58 credit hours,
compared with the current average of about 48 credit hours. By the end of the
scholarship period, the successful student is better able to find employment at
higher wages and to find work that reinforces their recently acquired academic
skills. The program benefits the university by making it more attractive to the
pool of talented low income students in the surrounding community. It meshes
well with the current Pre-College Academy, which attracts about 100 students
annually for training in the Natural Sciences, by providing funds for these
students to continue their education at the university. The presence of students
in this scholarship program enhances the academic climate at the university.
&lt;br/&gt;