* 0220859
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Frank Vahid, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project is establishing a CSEMS Scholars Program for academically talented,
low-income undergraduate students in the fields of computer science,
engineering, and mathematics. The intent is to encourage such students to enroll
in these disciplines, and then to provide them with a comprehensive plan of
scholarship, academic, and professional support throughout their undergraduate
years, to improve their retention and graduation rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
engineering at UC Riverside, much of the attrition occurs in the first two
years. Family financial pressure and the subsequent need for students to work
part-time are seen as primary contributing factors in this attrition. Thus, the
core of the UCR CSEMS program is scholarship assistance to the targeted student
cohorts. Twenty $2,500 freshman scholarships and twenty $2,500
sophomore/transfer student scholarships are awarded annually for each of four
years, to academically talented but economically disadvantaged undergraduates
majoring in the named fields. The primary goal of the program is to demonstrate
that reduction of financial concern on the part of the students can result in a
significant improvement in their retention statistics, and thereby their
graduation rates. Only the freshman, sophomore, and transfer students who have
been selected as CSEMS Scholars receive scholarships. However, the project
intends to continue financial support to these students through junior/senior
year summer internships at companies, or undergraduate research positions with
faculty members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the financial component,
this program is accompanied by an extensive support infrastructure of academic
assistance and advising, career placement services, and faculty and professional
mentoring throughout the students' academic years. During the annual recruitment
activities of the College, the College of Engineering distributes brochures and
provides other information that explains the CSEMS Scholars Program to potential
UCR applicants. Selection of program participants is made by an Oversight
Committee that includes faculty members as well as staff members from the campus
Financial Aid Office and the offices of other support services. The Oversight
Committee is responsible for general supervision of the program. Day-to-day
operations, however, including student tracking and data analysis, is
administered by the College Office of Special Programs with the active
collaboration of the College Office of Student Affairs. Students receiving the
NSF scholarship support are designated as UCR-COE/NSF Scholars. As they continue
into the later phases of the program, they are designated as UCR- COE/Advanced
Scholars. Together, the group is referred to as the UCR-COE Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;