* 0220288
* Expansion and Operation of the GULFNET Geodetic Reference Network Along the Northern Coast of the Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Roy Dokka, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 263,573.00

In 1997, Louisiana State University began construction of GULFNET, a geodetic
system&lt;br/&gt;consisting of continually operating reference stations and
episodic campaign targets.&lt;br/&gt;Originally built to support high precision
measurement of subsidence and lateral normal&lt;br/&gt;fault related strain, the
system was also designed to support geodetic-quality&lt;br/&gt;positioning. This
system currently consists of four continuously operating stations and
24&lt;br/&gt;episodic campaign targets and is supported by contracts with the
National Science&lt;br/&gt;Foundation (NSF-EAR 9725330) and the Louisiana Board
of Regents. The continuously&lt;br/&gt;operating stations will soon become
certified by the National Geodetic Survey (NGS) as&lt;br/&gt;official parts of
the Continuously Operating Reference System or CORS, that supports
the&lt;br/&gt;National Spatial Reference System (NSRS). Funds originating from
US Army Corps of&lt;br/&gt;Engineers (New Orleans District) through this
proposed contract will permit the expansion&lt;br/&gt;of GULFNET by adding three
additional continuously operating sites and the infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;to
continue operation of the network. This new part of the system will come on line
in&lt;br/&gt;early 2002 and will provide near complete coverage of the Louisiana
coast.&lt;br/&gt;