* 0220924
* Workshop:  Support for Hosting 5th CIRP International Workshop on Modeling of Machining Operations, May 20-21, 2002 at Purdue  University(West Lafayettee, IN)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Ibrahim Jawahir, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides partial financial support for the 5th CIRP International
Workshop on Modeling of Machining Operations to be held at Purdue University
(West Lafayette, IN) on May 20-21, 2002. The objective of the proposed workshop
is to review the current state of the art and to promote modeling research
aligned with industry needs. The workshop program covers three major areas:
materials, processes, and performance. It is planned to have paper sessions,
three breakout discussion sessions and a final analysis/discussion session. The
goal of the workshop is to identify existing and future research capabilities
for modeling of machining operations. The NSF grant will be used for
participation by young researchers/faculty and graduate students and for
producing a bound volume of workshop proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop participants will benefit from the paper sessions, focused breakout
discussion sessions, and the final discussion. The industry viewpoint in all
planned sessions will provide stimulus for initiating, broadening or redirecting
current academic research. The workshop will provide deeper insights into
contemporary research issues providing an opportunity for the exchange of
research ideas leading to cooperative research. The analysis of the breakout
session findings will set the direction for future research. A bound volume of
the workshop proceedings containing presented papers from the workshop will be
produced. Also, discussion summaries will be made available to all participants.
The academic researchers will have an opportunity to bring the new knowledge
into the classroom for teaching, labwork, and for dissemination through
seminars, projects, etc. It is also planned to develop a website containing the
proceedings of the workshop including a summary of the final discussion and
conclusions. The list of participants (with their contact information) will also
be included to facilitate networking and for the dissemination of new knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;