* 0220191
* Structure of Homeodomain Gene Regulatory Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Cynthia Wolberger, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 505,000.00

A hallmark of gene regulation in eukaryotes is the central role played by
multiprotein complexes that bind DNA and recruit additional proteins that
modulate mRNA transcription. The study of the protein-protein and protein-DNA
interactions that govern multiprotein complex formation is therefore essential
to a mechanistic understanding of the complex molecular switches that regulate
eukaryotic transcription. This laboratory's structural and biochemical studies
of combinatorial regulation by yeast mating-type and human Hox homeodomain
proteins have revealed principals for complex formation among homeodomain
proteins, which are found in all eukaryotes and constitute the second largest
class of human DNA-binding proteins. Prior work has focused on the
heterodimerization and DNA-sequence selectivity of the yeast MATa1 and MATa2
homeodomain proteins and on comparative structural studies on the human
HoxB1/Pbx1 homeodomain heterodimer bound to DNA. In addition, the structure was
determined of a monomeric C-terminal fragment of the Tup1 corepressor that
interacts with a2. This project builds upon this work, addressing questions of
co-repressor recruitment, Hox homeodomain specificity and activity, and the
structure of domains outside the homeodomain that play key roles in
multimerization and nuclear localization. The crystal structure of the intact
Tup1-Ssn6 corepressor complex, which is recruited to the DNA by MATa2 and other
yeast transcription factors, will provide much-needed insights into the overall
structure of this important yeast transcriptional repressor. In addition to
revealing the fold of domains required for transcriptional repression and
showing how the TPR repeats of Ssn6 bind to Tup1, knowing the domain
organization of the entire 4:1 Tup1/Ssn6 will be key to building up a model of
the complete a2/a1/Tup1/Ssn6 complex that is assembled upstream of target genes.
Complementary biochemical studies of histone deacetylase recruitment will shed
light on how Tup1 recruits selected histone acetylases to a target gene, and
will provide a basis for the design of future structural studies. Since Tup1 and
Ssn6-like proteins have been identified in many eukaryotes, including man, the
findings from the yeast system will have direct implications for a general
mechanistic understanding of eukaryotic transcriptional regulation. The PI's
continuing studies of Hox proteins and their partners will provide further
insights into how these important developmental regulators discriminate among
potential binding sites in the cell and how they are regulated by post-
translational modification. The structure determination of a Pbx1/Meis1
heterodimer will shed light on an aspect of homeodomain gene regulation that has
not been previously addressed, namely the important regulatory role of domains
that lie outside the DNA-binding domain.

The results of these studies will yield fundamental insights into basic
mechanisms of gene regulation, and in particular into the role played by large
protein assemblies in regulating eukaryotic transcription. In addition, these
projects provide outstanding opportunities for the training of graduate students
in the methods and approaches of structural biology.