* 0220327
* A Probabilistic Model for Microstructure Evolution with Application to Smart Concrete Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Mircea Grigoriu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 07/31/2006
* USD 271,717.00

The project proposes to formulate methods for representing and analyzing
random&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous materials in three directions. First, general
probabilistic models are developed&lt;br/&gt;for the microstructure of cement
based composites with carbon fibers. The models&lt;br/&gt;are random fields
characterizing the geometrical, mechanical, and electrical properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;material constituents. These cement based composites have an
interesting microstructure,&lt;br/&gt;and are used in both mechanics and
electronics as sensors of mechanical properties. Second,&lt;br/&gt;a
computational environment is developed for calculating the evolution in time of
the&lt;br/&gt;properties of microstructures subjected to deterministic loads.
Finite element procedures&lt;br/&gt;are used to calculate changes in, for
example, the stress, strain, damage and electric fields&lt;br/&gt;in cement
based composite specimens generated from their probabilistic models.
Development&lt;br/&gt;of the finite element code entails advances in numerical
solver techniques as well as&lt;br/&gt;formulation of new mathematically sound
traction-displacment relationships to model cohesive&lt;br/&gt;fracture. Third,
the results of the finite element analyses are used to (i) update&lt;br/&gt;the
probabilistic models of the material microstructure so they reflect the current
damage&lt;br/&gt;state and (ii) develop macroscopic damage models for cement
based composites by using&lt;br/&gt;homogenization procedures.&lt;br/&gt;The
evolution of the material state is monitored by a mathematical object,
referred&lt;br/&gt;to as digital material (DM), that defines uniquely the state
of the microstructure at any&lt;br/&gt;time during loading and can be stored in
the computer. The results of the analytical and&lt;br/&gt;numerical developments
are validated against experimental tests providing information of&lt;br/&gt;the
properties of the fiber matrix interaction and on the dependence of electric
conductivity&lt;br/&gt;of macroscopic specimens on their damage
state.&lt;br/&gt;The main outcome of the project is a novel methodology for
predicting structural behavior&lt;br/&gt;of composite materials and for
designing materials with better structural properties&lt;br/&gt;and better
capabilities for sensing damage and strain. Other outcomes include new
finite&lt;br/&gt;element codes, new mathematical models, and a strong
educational outreach program.