* 0220856
* Tech Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Lynn Trimpe, Linn Benton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2006
* USD 396,000.00

Linn-Benton Community College's (LBCC) project expands opportunities for
education,&lt;br/&gt;increases retention to baccalaureate degree achievement,
and improves employability of low-income,&lt;br/&gt;academically talented
students in transfer programs in Computer Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;This is accomplished by providing targeted academic,
career, and other support services to the&lt;br/&gt;recipients of 30 scholarship
awards each year.&lt;br/&gt;The four main components of the LBCC Tech Scholars
Program (TSP) are:&lt;br/&gt;oFinancial support through TSP scholarships to
allow talented low-income students to pursue full-time studies in Computer
Science, Engineering, and Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;oAcademic support through
existing programs and new initiatives to assist students with current coursework
and prepare them for success in upper division coursework&lt;br/&gt;oMentoring
and student support to increase retention at LBCC and to promote a smooth
transition to the transfer institution&lt;br/&gt;oActivities to strengthen
employability, including career explorations, preparation for internships, and
development of job-seeking skills&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme permeating all
components of this project is 'community building' a focus on establishing
a&lt;br/&gt;cohort that provides peer support; develops an increased sense of
belonging; and promotes identification&lt;br/&gt;with the discipline at LBCC,
the target transfer institution, and the chosen profession. Enhancements
to&lt;br/&gt;existing support services as well as new initiatives are designed
specifically to strengthen these bonds and&lt;br/&gt;reduce feelings of
isolation. There is a great need in Oregon for skilled high tech employees. LBCC
is in a prime position to work toward meeting that need because of high
unemployment in parts of our service district, a large percentage of students
who have financial need, strong community support for this community college,
robust transfer programs in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics, and
extensive articulation with both high schools and transfer
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LBCC initially recruits low-income students
who are currently enrolled at the college and who&lt;br/&gt;have demonstrated
academic talent in Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics into the
TSP.&lt;br/&gt;After the first year, the program expands to include low-income
high school students who have&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated academic talent and
expressed an interest in majoring in one of these three areas.
The&lt;br/&gt;financial support provided by the scholarships increases full-time
enrollment and improve academic&lt;br/&gt;life by reducing the need to work long
hours for an income. TSP scholars are then able to more fully&lt;br/&gt;utilize
the academic, career, and personal support services. TSP scholars benefit from
extensive academic support systems currently available, including free tutoring;
Supplemental Instruction; and a Learning Center with Math, Science, Writing,
Reading, and Study Skills assistance. Enhancements and additions included as
part of the project include the establishment of a Tech Scholar Center (a
designated room on campus where TSP scholars can hang out, work on their studies
together, and get academic assistance); expanded connections between TSP
scholars and faculty, students, and organizations at transfer institutions; site
visits and presentations by industry representatives; development of job-seeking
skills; and increased participation in career-enhancing activities such as
internships.&lt;br/&gt;