* 0220612
* Supporting Students for Success in Math and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2009
* Joseph Chase, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 394,996.00

The overall goal of this Radford University project is to produce more highly
skilled graduates in Computer Science and Mathematics. The project's approach is
one of aggressive tracking and continuous financial, academic, and social
support throughout the crucial freshman and sophomore years. At least 30
scholarships are awarded to freshmen and sophomores in each of the four years of
the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Program objectives are (1) to recruit and
select students, especially nontraditional students, to pursue careers in CSEM
fields; (2) to support participants with intensive academic advising and with
social activities; and (3) to obtain internships and other experiential learning
positions for all participants. Recruitment of academically strong students,
especially women and minority students is in cooperation with the university's
Admissions Office and through the Office of Multicultural Services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are supported by individual attention from
project staff as well as a well-developed institutional support system. This
includes constant monitoring; frequent, individualized advising; academic
support (through tutoring and other services); social support (through clubs and
social events related to CSEM disciplines); internships; and career counseling
(in individual sessions with the university's Career Services Center).
Participants meet monthly with project staff, and are required to seek tutoring
or other help as appropriate. Project staff meets regularly to discuss
participants' progress and needs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project evaluation is
based on student progress, and on student opinion as revealed in annual
structured interviews. Evaluations are used to modify the project to provide the
best possible support for students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;