* 0220214
* ITR:    Spatial Computing Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Herman Schmit, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2005
* USD 249,976.00

This project investigates new architectures for domains such as cryptography,
signal processing, and error correction, where the applications are highly
parallel. Traditional microprocessor architectures will not efficiently scale to
exploit the parallelism present in these applications. Hardware design for these
applications is too expensive, risky, and inflexible. Reconfigurable computing,
which attempts to combine programmability with hardware performance, has
logistical problems that will prevent its widespread adoption. This project will
develop and evaluate architectures that combine the portability and abstraction
of software development with the performance of reconfigurable hardware. This
will be done by converting a serial representation of an application into a
spatial representation, and executing the spatial representation on a fabric of
locally interconnected processing elements. The conversion from&lt;br/&gt;serial
to spatial representation will be performed at run time, concurrently with
execution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase of this project will involve
the definition and prototyping of a first generation of this architecture. The
second phase of the project will refine the code generation techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;the architecture. The third phase of the project will investigate
the incorporation of various control-flow operations in the
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;