* 0220488
* Collaborative Research:  AWARE -- International Linkages of Center for Intelligent Maintenance Systems on Web-Enabled and Tether-free Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

0220488&lt;br/&gt;Ni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research and education program between the Center for Intelligent
Maintenance Systems (IMS) and counterpart centers/laboratories in China, Hong
Kong, Japan, Korea and Australia. IMS is an NSF multi-campus Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center between the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and
the University of Michigan-Ann Arbor. The Center is focused on web-enabled
technologies and predictive intelligence to enable products and manufacturing
systems to achieve near-zero-downtime performance. IMS is developing a Web-
enabled Manufacturing, Maintenance and Service Education, Training and Research
Program in partnership with government, industry, and international
institutions. Through the international center-to-center projects supported by
this award, IMS will advance a) a comprehensive, multidisciplinary and highly
collaborative research agenda, b) a cross-university educational curricula, c)
virtual student research teams, and d) global educational experiences for
American students. A critical element of the program will be the placement of
U.S. undergraduate and graduate students in internships in the foreign partner
laboratories to collaborate on research projects that are an integral part of
the IMS research agenda.&lt;br/&gt;