* 0220832
* Recruit, Retain, and Support Two-Year College Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2003,05/31/2008
* James Ellis, State Fair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2008
* USD 300,705.00

State Fair Community College has been serving the residents of central Missouri
for 34&lt;br/&gt;years. In their 14-county service area, only 11% of the
residents have baccalaureate degrees and 80% of the students at SFCC are low-
income. To meet the cost of attending college, over 90% of SFCC's students must
work while attending school. Thus, high-maintenance degree programs such as
Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics are difficult for students and
result in low-retention rates in these programs. With special emphasis on
underserved-populations, the goal of this project is to recruit, retain, and
graduate or transfer each year 12-13 academically talented but financially needy
students in the fields of Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics thus
increasing the numbers of well-educated and skilled employees in technical areas
of national need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets individuals from
under-represented groups such as women, African-Americans, Hispanics and persons
with disabilities, focusing on recruiting and retention activities. A recent
report in&lt;br/&gt;the American Association of Community Colleges' College
Times indicates that the number of minority students attending college must be
increased if a severe shortage of skilled workers in the future is to be
prevented. For example, the rapid growth in the Hispanic population is not being
reflected in college enrollment. Recruiting activities includes visits to high
schools by faculty, a Career Fair, and training of high school counselors to
promote careers in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics. Retention
activities include new student orientation, mentoring, supplemental instruction,
tutoring, the 'buddy system', business/industry tours, internships/partnerships,
tracking student success, cultural opportunities, and financial aid
counseling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. Each year recruit 12 to 13 academically talented students
who are disadvantaged and under&lt;br/&gt;represented, into the fields of
Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;2. Improve educational
opportunities for these students and others enrolled in Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics Programs.&lt;br/&gt;3. Establish support systems
that maximize the students' ability to achieve and maintain a 2.5
GPA.&lt;br/&gt;4. Increase the number of students completing degrees and/or
transferring to four-year colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;5. Implement,
improve, and/or utilize student support programs for these
students.&lt;br/&gt;6. Strengthen and utilize, for the benefit of students,
partnerships between institutions of higher education and high technology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundations for success at SFCC include
articulation agreements with the University of Missouri and Central Missouri
State University. SFCC also is a recipient of an Implementation Site Seed Grant
for the adaptation and implementation of curriculum for an Associate Degree in
Networking. In addition, SFCC received a federally funded TRIO Student Support
Services project in the fall of 2001. As a result of this program, supplemental
instruction was established on campus. The outcome of this project results in
students successfully completing a two-year degree program and either
transferring to a four-year program or being immediately placed in employment
directly related to Computer Science, Engineering or Mathematics. Additionally,
a strong foundation is formed on which to perpetuate the process of attracting
and retaining talented students.&lt;br/&gt;