* 0220352
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Design and Implementaion of RF MEMS Components for Wireless Application
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Mohammed El-Naggar, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0220352&lt;br/&gt;Elnaggar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Mohammed I. El-Naggar, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio and Dr. Hamed El-
Simary, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt. The two investigators will
focus their research on the microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and their
interface circuit. They aim to integrate passive components permitted by MEMS
technology to implement an integrated RF system on a chip, including the
integration of sensors and the electronics circuits on the same chip. The
deliverables from the various work-packages of this project will have an
application in the area of RF circuits, which is important for industrial
purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: MEMS technology permits the fabrication
of complex mechanical shapes on a micron scale, and it allows production of
capacitive sensors, high-Q (Quality factor) resonant structures for oscillators,
mixers, and filters. It also allows fabrication of variable capacitors and
suspended inductor for high frequency tuned oscillators. The US PI has the
facilities and expertise to develop such devices. The project will involve
design activities by the Egyptian team and fabrication and testing by the U.S.
team. It will facilitate transfer of technical know-how to Egypt and also
intellectual transfer to the U.S. The two teams have already done some work in
this area. Participation by industry is expected in assessing the degree of
improvement of components. The project will involve one U.S. graduate student
and exchanges of visits by the Egyptian and the U.S. investigators. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;