* 0220284
* Collaborative Research: Form and Function of Phytoplankton in Unsteady, Low Reynolds-Number Flows
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2007
* James Riley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 356,512.00

Small-scale flow dynamics at low Reynolds numbers (Re) are important to
phytoplankton cells in delivery of nutrients, sensory detection by and physical
encounter with herbivores, accumulation of bacterial populations in the
"phycosphere" or region immediately surrounding phytoplankton cells and
coagulation of cells themselves as a mechanism terminating blooms. In nature
most phytoplankton experience unsteady flows, i.e., velocities near the cells
that vary with time due to the intermittency of turbulence and to discontinuous,
spatially distributed pumping by herbivores. This unsteadiness has not
previously been taken into account in models or measurements with plankton.
Moreover, there have been decade- and century- long lags in moving relevant
models of unsteady flow effects at low Re from applied mathematics and
engineering to ecological applications. Engineering models show unsteady effects
due to the history of formation of spatially extensive flow perturbations or
wakes should be important to unsteady motions of moderately small biota. This
project will address these affects. Non-swimming phytoplankton, and in
particular diatoms, will be used as the simplest case where important unsteady
flow behaviors should arise. This research activity will include a multi-level
educational program, aimed at graduate research assistants, undergraduate
research interns, undergraduate marine sciences majors and high-school teachers.
Low-Re behaviors afford unusual opportunities to experience how mathematics,
physics and biology inseparably catalyze understanding of phenomena that run
counter to intuition. This activity will also include international
collaborations with world experts on organism-flow interaction in Cambridge
(T.J. Pedley) and Copenhagen (T. Kiorboe &amp; A.W. Visser). The overall goals
of the activity are to accelerate the flow of understanding from modelers to
measurers to users of the information and back again. Educational materials that
project U.S. national standards will be developed during intensive summer
workshops with the high-school teachers and be made available on the web.
&lt;br/&gt;Unsteady flow effects on phytoplankton will be predicted with
explicit models based on singularity solutions (that involve the useful
simplification that force is applied to the fluid at a small number of points)
and mathematical models that include both the near field at low Re and the far
field over a range of Re, both representative of nature. Singularity solutions
allow explicit treatment of the role of complex cell shapes. Scaled-up analog
models will be placed in a large Couette vessel to better visualize behaviors
for both the research and teaching efforts. Natural-scale, but simplified,
unsteady flows will be produced in smaller Couettes (nested, counter-rotating
cylinders with seawater in the gap between the two cylinders) containing live
phytoplankton and will be quantified by magnifying, particle-imaging velocimetry
(PIV). Image analysis will be used to measure translation, rotation and flexural
deformation of the phytoplankton. These studies will test various hypotheses
derived from the general thesis that cell shapes and mechanical properties
interact with unsteady flows to produce potentially fitness-enhancing, relative
motions of the cell or chain and its surrounding fluids. A basic hypothesis is
that unsteady fluid motion will interact with bending of cells to produce
relative motion of fluid and phytoplankter. A very exciting prospect is that
periodic instabilities known to arise at low Re may allow flexible organisms to
act as "self-organizing engines" - through elasticity to harness energy from
decaying turbulence and thereby move relative to the fluid. It is also expected
that this study of passively bending structures in unsteady flows will help to
understand the use of flexible appendages in swimming. The work is likely to aid
significantly in associating functions with the shapes and spines of
microplankton that are used in the identification of fossil specimens. By
including relevant, unsteady fluid motions at low Re, the study will also
provide firmer linkages between form and function in living plankton in the size
range from 10 - 1000 mm that many large phytoplankton, invertebrate and fish
larvae and other small zooplankton occupy.&lt;br/&gt;