* 0220761
* Reaching Out to Academically-Talented, Financially-Disadvantaged Students for Careers in Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Rolando Bravo, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project provides scholarship support for academically talented and
economically disadvantaged students seeking to earn undergraduate degrees in
Engineering or Mathematics at Southern Illinois University Carbondale. The
primary goal of this project is to improve the recruitment and retention of
these students, thereby increasing both the number and quality of students in
these disciplines who are well prepared to enter the high-technology workforce.
The program provides scholarship support to seventy-two students during the
crucial first two years of their university training. By the end of this period,
the students have achieved a sound foundation in the fundamentals of science and
mathematics on which to build their specialized training in their chosen
disciplines during the final two years of their university training. Following
the period of scholarship support, the students in the program are provided with
the opportunity to participate in: 1) a cooperative educational experience or an
internship designed to prepare them for the transition into their professional
careers, 2) a departmental research project as an undergraduate researcher, or
3) the College of Engineering supplemental instruction program as a mentor or
the Department of Mathematics tutoring program as a tutor. These experiences
help develop a sense of responsibility and instill leadership skills in these
students as well as provide them with financial support to partially offset
their school expenses. To complement the job offerings, an industrial
scholarship coalition provides additional financial support to the students
during their junior and senior years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two target
groups of students being recruited for this program: 1) economically
disadvantaged high school students from the southern Illinois region, which
constitutes the northernmost part of the Delta Regional Authority of 236
counties and parishes in the eight-state Mississippi delta region, and 2)
African-American and Hispanic-American high school students from Illinois,
mainly from urban centers such as Chicago and East St. Louis. There is a special
emphasis on attracting female students from these groups. Recruitment and
support activities for the scholarship recipients is being carried out within
the context of established mechanisms that exist in the College of Engineering
and the Department of Mathematics and builds upon established collaborations
between all of the involved departments. &lt;br/&gt;