* 0220118
* ITR:    Cross-Layer Optimization For 4G Wireless Networks:   Heavy-Tailed Traffic, Multiuser Channels, and Pseudocells
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Upamanyu Madhow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 461,952.00

This project addresses some fundamental aspects of the theory and practice of
wireless networking. An integrated approach, combiningphysical layer innovations
with new protocols for medium access control and scheduling, while accounting
for application requirements and transport protocol dynamics, is employed for
solving the research problems that are identified. Two major research thrusts
are considered. In the first research thrust, the concept of ``pseudocellular''
wireless networks, which combine the best features of cellular and ad hoc
networks, is considered as a paradigm for plug-and-play fourth generation (4G)
wireless networks. Such a flexible architecture is clearly critical for quick
set-up of wireless networks in emergency situations, in which stationary, or
perhaps even mobile, base stations are deployed at convenient (but not
optimized)&lt;br/&gt;sites to serve both slow-moving and fast-moving users.
However, it is also a key ingredient of our vision of achieving a quantum jump
in wireless link speeds, by going beyond the current cellular frequency bands of
1-2 GHz to the large bandwidths available in frequency bands in the 10s of GHz.
The path loss in such bands is high, forcing the use of a dense network of base
stations on the one hand, and enabling more aggressive frequency reuse on the
other. The focus of the research is to support a mix of user mobilities, and a
mix of real-time and non real-time applications, over a packetized
pseudocellular infrastructure. This setting differs from conventional cellular
networks, in that the cell sizes are small, and cells may have substantial
overlap. It differs from wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs), in that it allows
for rapidly mobile users despite the small cell sizes. Instead of a conventional
hierarchical structure (i.e., large cells for fast-moving users, overlaid on
small cells for slow-moving users) to deal with a range of mobility, a mobile-
centric approach, which combines handoffs and reservation-based medium access
control, is considered to allow for flexible deployment. A novel idea to be
investigated is the support of priorities on the reservation channel, so as to
allow, for example, highly mobile users with real-time calls in progress to
rapidly reserve resources when entering a new pseudocell, thus implicitly
achieving a handoff. Another important issue is transceiver optimization of the
reservation channel, which requires solution of new problems in multiuser
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second research thrust is motivated by
the well-known observation that Internet traffic has a heavy-tailed
distribution, which typically calls for more conservative resource provisioning
than for traditional Markovian traffic models. Since overprovisioning is
unattractive in resource-constrained wireless environment, the approach
considered is toemploy a new Quality of Service (QoS) framework that allows
foraggressive resource utilization, by serving the bulk of
the&lt;br/&gt;transactions (which are short) rapidly, and penalizing the small
fraction of long transactions that contribute to the heavy tails. Scheduling
disciplines that achieve this goal are very different from&lt;br/&gt;popular
round robin or fair queueing schedulers, and were considered in the queueing
theory literature more than three decades ago. The implication of these results
for heavy-tailed Internet&lt;br/&gt;traffic is explored for the first time (to
the best of our knowledge) in this project. The scheduling strategy is extended
to a shared wireless channel, where fairness is traded off against
system&lt;br/&gt;efficiency, with the latter dictating that users seeing the
best channels are the ones that should get link access. The tradeoff is expected
to be biased towards efficiency in order to support&lt;br/&gt;heavy-tailed
traffic effectively. The interaction between scheduling and the dynamics of TCP
connections (TCP is the Internet data transport protocol on top of which most
transactions run) is explored, keeping in mind that a TCP connection that is
starved of network resources can get locked out of the network due to repeated
timeouts and rate cutbacks. Finally, the dependence of scheduling on mobility is
explored, with the concept of assigning priority to highly
mobile&lt;br/&gt;users (who have a smaller chance of getting access to the link
during their sojourn in a given pseudocell), while keeping overall QoS and
fairness in mind. The scheduling methods we develop place a high importance on
overall system efficiency, and are therefore well-suited to flat rate pricing,
which is arguably an effective mechanism of promoting usage growth in wireless
data networks.&lt;br/&gt;