* 0220735
* Operation of the Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC) and Interhemispheric Investigations of Multi-Scale Current Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Calvin Robert Clauer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/2006
* USD 524,910.00

0220735&lt;br/&gt;Clauer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is directed toward
the continuation of the operation of the Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice
Cap (MAGIC) and the continued analysis of the data from these stations together
with data from other ground based and satellite instruments. The overarching
objective is to explore a new approach to investigate the multi-scale solar wind
- magnetosphere - ionosphere electrodynamic system through high temporal and
spatial resolution, magnetically conjugate arrays of digital magnetometers
deployed in Greenland and Eastern Antarctica. Major new elements of the proposed
investigation include: (1) the upgrade of existing Greenland magnetometers to
1-second samples, (2) simultaneous visualization of interhemispheric ground
geomagnetic field variations with the goal to investigate multi-scale
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, and (3) the detailed study of the transition
in magnetospheric electrodynamic morphology from weakly southward IMF to weakly
northward IMF conditions and vice versa. This project is a cooperative effort
between the University of Michigan and the Danish Meteorological Institute. The
project is a continuation of a collaboration that began with the installation of
the original magnetometer stations on the Greenland ice cap in 1991. The
autonomous magnetometer systems in central Greenland provided valuable
intermediate variometer measurements of magnetic perturbations between the
Greenland west and east coast stations. One station is located at the central
Greenland summit site to provide continuity between the west and east coast
stations, and one station was placed at the Air National Guard LC130 Raven
skiway to provide a dense two-dimensional array for detailed current
calculations. The MAGIC data in combination with data from the Greenland coastal
stations and Sondrestrom incoherent scatter radar have been crucial in resolving
the spatial and evolutionary characteristics of various dynamic ionospheric
current systems, including traveling convection vortices, poleward propagating
DPY currents, and the transition of large scale convection systems from one
state to another. Using data from the Greenland stations in combination with
Canadian, Scandinavian, and Antarctic magnetic data, and coordinated with other
ancillary ground based and satellite data, this effort will investigate high
latitude magnetic pulsations and interhemispheric auroral oval and polar cap
relationships. The focus is on understanding the various electrodynamic current
systems that couple energy and momentum from the solar wind to the magnetosphere
and ionosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;