* 0220764
* The Garden in the Machine: The Adaptation of Canine Biotechnology and Human Society
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Edmund Russell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 110,000.00

SES 0220764&lt;br/&gt;The Garden in the Machine: The Adaptation of Canine
Biotechnology and&lt;br/&gt;Human Society&lt;br/&gt;Edmund Russell, University
of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have long thought about the relationship
between technology and nature as "the machine in the garden," which focuses our
attention on ways that technology intrudes into nature. This project reverses
our framework by focusing on the garden in the machine (more accurately, the
organism in the artifact), or ways that technology emerges from nature.
Organisms shaped to serve human ends, such as domesticates, became one form of
biotechnology. Analyzing the workings of this process can help us understand the
past, present, and future of biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses the history of dogs in the 19th and 20th centuries in the United States and
United Kingdom as a case study. Dogs were the first domesticated species, make
the impact of breeding easily visible, have done a wide variety of jobs (with
companionship becoming an ever more important source of employment), and are
important to many people -- a fact that increases interest in the products of
this research. This study analyzes several factors important in shaping canine
biotechnology: economics, class, gender, institutions, culture, gambling,
breeding, and national differences. We like to think that we have been in
control of dog evolution, but dogs have also shaped us. To understand the
coevolution of humans and dogs, this project introduces a new field to history
called evolutionary history. This field pairs strengths of history of
technology, environmental history, history of science, and evolutionary biology
to gain a fuller understanding of the coevolution of humans and other species
than we could obtain from one field alone. One of evolutionary history's
strengths is focusing on cultural as well as genetic evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project relies on standard historical methods,
including research in libraries, archives, and museums. It will produce
conference papers, articles, and a book.&lt;br/&gt;