* 0220941
* Apex Predators in the Central Pacific: An Ecosystem Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Timothy Essington, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2008
* USD 750,000.00

The current levels of mortality owing to fisheries are unlike anything in the
long evolutionary history of exploited species and, therefore, that fisheries
are a powerful ecological force. Understanding fishery effects as causes of
perturbation offers important lessons about the ecological processes that
regulate structure and function of pelagic ecosystems. The previous project,
Apex Predators in Pelagic Ecosystems, focused on trophic interactions in the
central north Pacific (CNP) ecosystem based on modeling analyses at three
scales: bioenergetics of individual fish species, predator-prey interactions and
ecosystem models. The ecological effects of long-line fisheries for tunas,
billfishes and sharks has been a consistent theme in all three areas of model
development. The major lessons were that: 1. Characterizing trophic ontogeny was
a key component to building effective models for this system of strongly
overlapping use of prey resources and intra-guild predation, and 2. Fisheries
have become and continue as the main cause of change in trophic structure of the
CNP. This project will support continuation and expansion of the first project.
Dr. Kitchell and collaborators will develop models that can evaluate the role of
fishery effects in food web dynamics, expand that to include interactions with
large-scale environmental effects such as those due to ENSO, PDO, and/or climate
change dynamics and use the consequent models as a basis for evaluating resource
management policies that can change ecosystem structure and function. Three
major objectives will be pursued: Experimental Approach to Modeling. They have
developed a model of trophic interactions and fishery effects for the central
north Pacific (CNP) based, in part, on merging population-scale data with food
web information and the history of fishery development. An ecological analogue
exists in the central south Pacific (CSP) where fishery development occurred at
a later time. The researchers will use the CNP approach to develop a CSP model,
then conduct the equivalent of an independent, replicate analysis of the trophic
changes owing to fishery development. Merging these models creates a single tool
that allows evaluation of local effects expressed in a large-scale context.
Characterizing fisheries as the equivalent of new predators allows an evaluation
of .strong interactions in food webs and the complex feedback mechanisms that
emerge from fishery effects. Modeling to Include Environmental Drivers. They
will implement environmental forcing due to ENSO, PDO and/or global change
effects expressed in our models of the CNP, CSP and a similar model of the
eastern tropical Pacific (ETP) developed through collaboration sponsored by the
National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS). The investigators
will use statistical approaches that evaluate anomalies in the population data
as the basis for differentiating effects of the fisheries from those of the
environmental forcing that alters primary production rates and its expression in
production of higher trophic levels. Bycatch and Ecological Interactions. Major
conservation issues revolve around bycatch of threatened or endangered turtles,
birds, sharks and billfishes in these pelagic ecosystems. Dr, Kitchell and co-
workers will use a "scenarios" approach to simulation of alternative management
actions, the likely responses of changes in fishery exploitation processes,
their consequent ecological changes and their socioeconomic consequences. The
basic Ecosim model now includes the capacity to evaluate the latter using inputs
of fish prices plus weighting for goals based on employment, conservation and/or
ecosystem management.

