* 0220026
* ITR: MAC Protocols Specific for Sensor Networks (MACSS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,01/31/2005
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 01/31/2005
* USD 305,641.00

Wireless sensor networking is an emerging technology that has a wide range of
potential applications including environment monitoring, smart spaces, medical
systems and robotic exploration. While the technology is very promising, it
raises serious challenges in network&lt;br/&gt;and system design. Sensor
networks differ in many ways from than the traditional IP or voice networks, and
have their unique features and requirements. Although MAC protocols such as
802.11 and TDMA are ideal for wireless IP or voice, no MAC protocol today meets
the needs&lt;br/&gt;of sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
execute a systems-driven research program to address these problems through the
development of sensor-network specific MAC protocols. Specifically, we are
investigating:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADAPTIVITY AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY: Sensor
network MACs must be adaptive in several dimensions, including energy
consumption, traffic loads, and deployment density. Energy is *the key
limitation* for battery-powered sensor nodes. The researchers are investigating
and will provide designs for ENERGY CONSERVATION approaches that modify node
duty cycle&lt;br/&gt;to conserve energy while considering user varying
application traffic requirements. One approach to energy conservation is to
trigger primary node radios with a paging channel, but this requires a second
radio (with corresponding cost, space, and money requirements). Sensor nodes
already must operate sensors full time, so the researchers are evaluating the
use of sensors (acoustic, seismic, etc.) as a PHYSICAL SENSOR PAGING
CHANNEL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAC INTERACTION WITH THE PHYSICAL LAYER: With low-
power, relatively unsophisticated radios, sensor networks applications and MAC
protocols are very close to physical layer effects of radio propagation. A
serious problem with current sensor applications is dealing with
link&lt;br/&gt;error conditions such as packet loss and asymmetric
communication. Energy-conserving MAC layers already keep track of neighbors, so
the researchers will provide a BLACKLISTING SERVICE that allows the MAC to
identify and exclude unusable links. The researchers also will study and report
on radio POWER CONTROL AND APPLICATION INTERACTIONS to understand how MACs can
control neighborhood size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNIQUE APPLICATION NEEDS OF
SENSOR NETWORKS: Sensor networks are fundamentally different from Internet-style
networks of peer nodes in several different ways. A first differences is that
sensor networks are primarily quiescent, but they occasionally become very
active when&lt;br/&gt;something is sensed. The researchers will develop a MAC
PROTOCOL WITH MULTIPLE&lt;br/&gt;OPERATING MODES to allow the MACs to adjust to
this ``feast or famine'' traffic load. In addition, energy conservation
introduces a *directional bias* in node communication; sleep/wake-up schedules
can either add latency to all directions equally, or can allow rapid
communication in one direction and slower communication in the other. The
researchers will evaluate how controllable MAC-LEVEL DIRECTIONAL BIAS INTERACTS
WITH APPLICATION, exploiting it where possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
the research community has a compelling need for a publicly available, freely
modifiable Sensor-MAC protocol for experimentation and simulation. Evaluation of
our ideas requires implementation and evolution of a MAC protocol. We will
provide this implementation to other researchers for use over existing sensor
network radios (with a reference implementation on the UC Berkeley Mote
hardware) and in simulation (with a reference implementation in the ns-2
simulator).&lt;br/&gt;Thus, in addition to opening up sensor-network-specific
MAC protocols as a new subfield of research, this work will serve as a catalyst
for wider sensor network research that is sorely in need of an appropriate and
modifiable MAC.&lt;br/&gt;