* 0220920
* Workshop on Interdisciplinary Polar Research Based on Fast Ice-Sheet Drilling - FASTDRILL; Santa Cruz, CA, October, 2002
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2004
* USD 38,283.00

This award provides partial support for an interdisciplinary workshop to bring
biologists, geologists, glaciologists and paleoclimatologists together to
discuss the various scientific studies that could benefit from the development
of a new, fast and mobile drilling technology for accessing the base of the
polar ice sheets. Some of the scientific applications which have been mentioned
which would be made possible by such technology include opening of access to
subglacial lakes, detection of life in ancient ice, borehole paleothermometry,
site selection for deep ice cores, logging of climate proxies with geophysical
tools, ice rheology studies, investigation of basal conditions and their control
on basal sliding, sampling of subglacial geology and geothermal heat flow
measurements. This workshop will provide a forum for discussions with experts in
ice drilling, conventional drilling and downhole sampling systems and will lead
to the formulation recommendations to NSF for future directions in rapid access
drilling technology. This workshop will contribute to research on sub-glacial
lakes in Antarctica, such as Lake Vostok. Prior to the initiation of a research
program to study the interrelationship among geologic history, glaciology and
biology in sub-glacial lakes, it is necessary to make progress on sampling,
measurement and contamination control technologies so that the Lake can be
sampled in order to maintain sample integrity in an environmentally sound
manner. This workshop will contribute to technology development that will have
application to the study of subglacial lakes.