* 0220835
* Modeling Adsorption in Complex Porous Structures: Equilibrium, Hysteresis and Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,794.00

Peter A. Monson, University of Massachusetts - Amherst

"Modeling Adsorption in Complex Porous Structures: Equilibrium, Hysteresis and
Dynamics"

This research will use molecular modeling to understand the behavior of fluids
confined in porous materials with complex pore structures. The primary goal is
to develop a more refined understanding of how the combined effects of molecular
interactions and the structure of the porous material over several length scales
yield particular kinds of adsorption behavior. This understanding is central to
important applications such as separations and catalysis, as well as in porous
materials characterization. A combination of dynamical as well as equilibrium
modeling techniques is a central feature of this project. Two complementary
areas of research are planned.

In the first area the PI is concerned with coarse-grained lattice models of
adsorption/desorption in complex pore structures. The goal of this work is to
develop a framework for understanding the relationship between adsorption
measurements and the porous material microstructure - particularly for states in
the capillary condensation and hysteresis regime. The recent work has shown that
coarse-grained lattice models provide important insights into hysteresis and the
PI seeks to build on this in several ways. In the proposed work the PI will
extend the range of materials that can be treated by this approach, including
applications to a variety of mesoporous silica materials, and apply the approach
to analysis of intrusion/extrusion hysteresis in mercury porosimetry.

The second research area is concerned with the dynamics of adsorption and
desorption. The PI's goal here is to use simulations that mimic dynamic uptake
experiments to investigate the stability of states in the hysteresis region. The
PI has used this approach to establish the significance of the hysteresis loops
encountered in Monte Carlo simulations and to investigate the role of pore
blocking in hysteresis. The proposed work deals with dynamical simulations of
coarse-grained lattice models as well as application to mercury porosimetry. The
PI also plans to extend these techniques to the study of wetting dynamics in
confined geometries in the context of nanotechnology applications.

Broader Impact: The research while fundamental is closely linked with
application, especially in the context of porous materials characterization.
Traditionally engineers and others using porous materials have had to view the
porous material microstructure using rather imprecise quantities like the pore
volume, surface area and pore size distribution. It is anticipated that the
project could provide a foundation for a new approaches to the characterization
of porous materials. There is substantial potential impact in applications of
porous materials ranging from traditional areas such as catalysis and
separations to emerging areas in nanotechnology.

The research program has a strong educational component through the involvement
of graduate students, postdoctoral scholars and undergraduates. The students
regularly attend and present their work at major conferences. Research group
meetings are designed in part to develop the ability of students to communicate
their research achievements, and our graduate students participate in teaching
undergraduate courses as an educational requirement of their degree program.

The project features collaboration with industry (Quantachrome Corporation) as
well as an international collaboration with researchers at the Technical
University of Berlin, Germany.