* 0220070
* ITR Collaborative Research:  Complexity-Theoretic Applications of Fourier Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Cristopher Moore, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 195,036.00

Fourier analysis appears in many of the celebrated cornerstones of theoretical
computer science. It plays essential roles in expander graph construction and
derandomization, complexity lower bounds, probabilistically checkable proof
systems, quantum computing, lower bounds for distributed computation, and
traditional applications to computer algebra. The majority of these applications
involve the familiar framework of commutative Fourier analysis. The proposed
project brings together a multidisciplinary research team to apply the beautiful
tools of non-Abelian (that is, noncommutative) Fourier analysis to investigate
open questions in two areas where non-Abelian groups have recently become very
important: lower bounds for parallel computation and quantum algorithms. The
program also further develops efficient algorithms for the discrete Fourier
transform over finite non-Abelian groups.

This project focuses on developing tools for separating the complexity classes
ACC^0 and NC^1, in order to demonstrate that there are natural (polynomial-time
computable) problems which simply cannot be parallelized in the sense of ACC^0.
The project applies a new family of tools for separating such circuit classes,
using non-Abelian Fourier analysis to bound their computational power. These
tools apply also to the problem of solving equations over finite groups, and the
development of new probabilistically checkable proof systems based on non-
Abelian groups. In addition, the project applies non-Abelian Fourier analysis to
develop improved lower bounds on the standard Quantum Fourier Transform approach
to Graph Isomorphism and study quantum Monte Carlo algorithms. Finally, the
project focuses on adaptations of Bratelli diagrams and quivers to develop
classical and quantum algorithms for the non-Abelian Fourier transform itself.