* 0220486
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gentrification and the Displacement of Work and Home
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Susan Hanson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 10,053.00

Gentrification is a process experienced by cities around the world. It
exemplifies the shift from an industrial economy to a service economy. Yet, the
fact that manufacturing is still an important part of urban economies should not
be ignored. Manufacturing is being threatened by the process of gentrification.
The loss of manufacturing affects the employment and housing opportunities of
inner city residents. The debate around gentrification has concentrated on its
causes, while its effects on the existing communities has been largely
unexplored. What work has been done has largely concentrated on the effects of
gentrification on housing. The effect on work and the linkages between home and
work for working class residents has gone unexplored. This doctoral dissertation
research project explores the effect of gentrification on small manufacturers
and blue collar-workers in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn. The
project asks the following questions: 1) To what extent has gentrification
caused manufacturing displacement? 2) How has the job market changed as a result
of gentrification? and 3) How has gentrification affected the residential and
employment opportunities of working-class people in Williamsburg? In-depth
interviews with key informants, business owners and workers will provide data on
the changing structure of opportunity for working-class residents and the
changing geography of their work, home, and social networks. The findings will
demonstrate where manufacturing jobs move within the metropolitan region and
explore the ability of working-class residents to maintain their socioeconomic
levels in an area undergoing industrial displacement. It is expected that the
study will demonstrate that manufacturers are being displaced because of
gentrification and that those who lose these jobs are unlikely to find jobs at
equal skill and pay levels.

The proposed research looks at how a global process like gentrification affects
a local neighborhood and the population that lives there. It analyzes the nature
of urban change, the directions in which that change may lead, and the
implication of this change not only for local neighborhoods, but for cities in
general. In the process of gentrification, de-industrialization may be
encouraged, so much so that the city loses its productive base. There may be a
greater homogeneity not only of the economic base, but of the populations within
urban neighborhoods as well, jeopardizing the economically and culturally
diverse populations that are such a vital element to central cities. This
research opens up the field of gentrification to examine the links between home
and work in gentrifying areas and to analyze the effects of gentrification on
labor and labor markets. This research has potential implications for urban
policies on zoning, industrial retention, job creation, and affordable housing.
It may also impact the literature of spatial mismatch and skills mismatch and
the racialized and gendered patterns of work and residence. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.