* 0220180
* Hierarchical Modular Fault Diagnostics for Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Laci Jalics, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 288,010.00

Laci Jalics, Delphi Research Labs&lt;br/&gt;Giorgio Rizzoni, The Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;Andrea Serrani, The Ohio State University&lt;br/&gt;Ahmed
Soliman, The Ohio State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hierarchical, Modular
Fault Diagnosis in Complex Systems&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this GOALI
project program are: 1) to develop a methodology that permits the design of
modular, hierarchical, model-based diagnostic algorithms that can result in re-
usable software modules, and that can be methodically organized into a complete,
self-contained monitoring system; and 2) to demonstrate the methodology in
collaboration with an industry partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fault tolerance is
a critical element in complex automotive systems because of the introduction of
"by-wire" systems in vehicles. "by-wire" systems generate electrical commands
through driver input and transfer them to the computer-controlled electro-
mechanical actuators. With respect to traditional systems, "by-wire" systems
require complex control and diagnostic strategies to guarantee proper vehicle
behavior and to prevent system malfunctions. A significant roadblock for safety-
critical by-wire systems is the realization of a robust fault-diagnostic
strategy that can be accomplished quickly and with limited or no additional
hardware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these issues in three
stages: 1) through the use of physically based system models to understand
interactions and dependencies among subsystems in a complex system; 2) with the
design of residual generator units that can locally diagnose faults in
components, sensors and actuators; and 3) using a hierarchical structure that
links components, systems, and subsystems through the use of fault propagation
digraphs. The fault propagation digraph contains a hierarchical representation
of available knowledge about the characteristics of fault propagation within the
system. Each level in the hierarchy contains one or more structures that
together represent a view of the system under a particular granularity. The
granularity of view increases with levels. Thus as one traverses down the levels
of the model, the resolution of view increases. If a high resolution of
diagnosis is not required, failure analysis may be confined to the upper levels
of the hierarchy, thereby preventing a slowdown of the diagnosis due to
excessive detail. &lt;br/&gt;