* 0220755
* Community College Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Maria Reyes, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2007
* USD 395,148.00

This project is serving students in the western portion of Phoenix and Maricopa
County, Arizona. The Project seeks to recruit academically talented yet
financially needy students interested in the fields of computer science,
computer technology, engineering, engineering technology, and mathematics
(CSEMS), especially those from underrepresented groups in these disciplines. The
Project's goals are to support CSEMS recipients in their academic endeavors,
promote student success through the completion of an associate's degree and/or
the transfer to a four-year institution, and expose participants to the various
professional avenues that the CSEMS disciplines offer. The project utilizes
existing structures at the college with a proven success record in promoting
diversity and academic quality in the fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. Through the college's Achievement in Mathematics
and Science (AMAS) Program, Achievement in Mathematics, Engineering, and Science
(AIMES) Programs, and Summer Bridge Program, strategies have been developed to
recruit capable students, especially underrepresented groups, into the these
disciplines and ensure their success in academic programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to achieve the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;(1) 90% of CSEMS scholarship recipients make satisfactory
progress (GPA of 2.5 or better) in a targeted program of study leading to an
associate's degree as full-time students during semesters for which they receive
scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;(2) 100% of CSEMS scholarship recipients
participate in at least 90% of CSEMS special events and activities during
semesters for which they receive scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;(3) 85% of CSEMS
scholarship recipients make satisfactory progress towards their educational
goals (i.e. be enrolled as full-time students at a community college in the
following semester, transfer to a university, or have met the requirements
for/been awarded an AAS or AS degree in the targeted programs.)&lt;br/&gt;(4)
50% of CSEMS recipients are from groups that are traditionally underrepresented
in the CSEMS disciplines (women, persons with disabilities, Hispanics, African-
Americans, and/or Native Americans).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project is
establishing support structures that are exclusive to CSEMS recipients. These
include mentoring from Faculty Coordinators, Individual Education Plans,
tutoring services and study groups, supplemental instruction, special events and
activities, career counseling, and university transfer options. The Team is
monitoring the progress of the students and conducting both formative and
summative evaluations of project processes and outcomes.