* 0220292
* The Identification of Early Maize Farming Sites in Chihuahua, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* William Merrill, Mexico-North Research Network, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 19,998.00



Perhaps one of the most important changes that occured in the history of
humankind was the shift from hunting and gathering to farming. With agriculture
populations dramatically expanded and cities, states and empires emerged. Over
the millennia this pattern repeatedly occurred around the world. However, this
sequence is not invariably the case. Learning how and why farming began, spread,
and why many cultures began to farm, but others did not, remains one of
archaeology and anthropology's major research priorities.

Scientists worked for decades in southern Mexico to learn when, where, and how
some of the world's most important crops, including maize, beans, and squash
were domesticated. In the American Southwest archaeologists have long known that
these crops diffused northward to become the economic mainstay of hundreds of
Southwestern Native American cultures. However, archaeologists have almost no
information about the spread of crops across the intervening hundreds of
thousands of square miles. This project seeks to begin to fill this void by
searching for archaeological sites that contain remains of these ancient crops
that can begin to tell the story of how agriculture spread from Mexico to the
Southwest, a topic of active debate but with little solid data.

Archaeologists have argued that about 3000 years ago, either the crops spread
northward with migrating Mexican Indians, or was passed along between successive
groups of hunter-gatherers across northern Mexico. With NSF support, a team of
five experienced scholars will search southwestern Chihuahua, about 300 miles
south of the border for locations that may yield significant answers concerning
these questions. This project is suitable for NSF's High Risk Projects in
Anthropology program as the goal is to discover previously unknown sites of the
appropriate age that contain maize. Yet they must search in the vast expanses of
verdant river valleys, deep canyons and the uplands of southwest Chihuahua. All
are potential routes for the spread of agriculture but have received little
archaeological attention.

The major river valleys of western Chihuahua are likely places to search as team
members Robert Hard, John Roney, Karen Adams, and Art MacWilliams have been
involved in excavating, with previous NSF support, the dramatic remains of
large, 3000 year old, farming settlements built on hilltops above a major
floodplain in the northwest corner of Chihuahua, only about 30 miles south of
the border. Team member Art MacWilliams and colleagues have also previously
found evidence that adjacent regions in central Chihuahua were occupied 4000 to
3000 years ago. Innumerable dry caves, ideal locations for preserved plant
remains, in the Sierra Madre Occidental, current home of the Tarahumara Indians,
of western Chihuahua may also contain key evidence of early agriculture. This
mountain range, which extends from Mesoamerica north to the international
border, is another previously suggested route for the advancement of
agriculture. Project ethnobotanist Karen Adams, will work with plant remains
recovered from these caves. The Tarahumara Indians, long studied by project
member William Merrill, continue to practice corn farming in small, dispersed
fields, using techniques and knowledge that may have extraordinary time-depth.
We expect to obtain new information about strategies of subsistence farming in
southwest Chihuahua. This NSF-supported project will provide new information
about how and when agriculture spread from Mexico to the Southwest and
contribute to the global questions of how farming spread around the world.

