* 0220532
* RUI:  Mechanism and Function of Subunit Interactions in Oligomeric Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Ellis Bell, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 70,892.00

9986278&lt;br/&gt;Bell&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The exquisite control of
the levels of metabolites within the cell involves a combination of both long-
term adaptation involving control of gene expression and short-term regulation
involving either the covalent modification of an enzyme, frequently by
phosphorylation, or the binding of an allosteric regulatory ligand. The
effectiveness of allosteric regulation is amplified in oligomeric enzymes by
subunit interactions leading to cooperative interactions between regulatory
ligands or between substrate binding events and catalysis. While several
allosteric models have been presented to explain the roles that allosteric
effects can play in the regulation of activity, the work proposed will
investigate the requirement for subunit interactions in the normal catalytic
cycle of an oligomeric enzyme, referred to as "reciprocating subunits". The
major aims of the work are to understand the role that subunit interactions play
in the regulation [both homotropic and heterotropic] and activity of four
important enzymes, Malate Dehydrogenase, Fumarase, 3-Phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase and Glutamate dehydrogenase, all of whose 3-dimensional structures
are available. This work will provide direct evidence for or against the
existence of a reciprocating subunit mechanism with these four enzymes. We will
also test our hypothesis that reciprocating subunit mechanisms may also play an
integral role in regulation of these enzymes, and will test whether our proposed
mechanism where heterotropic regulators of either the K-type or the V-type
effect subunit-subunit interactions to elicit their effects is appropriate for
these enzymes. This work will involve the construction of a series of hetero-
oligomers containing combinations of "normal" and modified sites to thoroughly
test the roles that ligand induced changes across subunit interfaces play in the
regular activity of these enzymes. Furthermore, working in conjunction with
several crystallography labs, we will be able to obtain detailed structural
information as to the mechanism of the subunit interactions involved in the
activity and regulation of these enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;