* 0220085
* Functional Roles for Tetrahymena RAD51 During Conjugation and the Cell Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Daniel Romero, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,000.00

The regulation of genome dynamics has been evolutionarily conserved. A key
factor involved in maintaining the genome's integrity is the ubiquitous DNA
strand transfer protein Rad51p. Despite a full decade of research on RAD51 from
model systems ranging from yeast to mammals, it is still unclear how Rad51p
mediates its effects. This project focuses on RAD51 from the ciliated protozoan
Tetrahymena thermophila. Due to Tetrahymena's unique cell biology and nuclear
organization, genetic manipulations can showcase the separable functions of
Rad51p, including roles unwitnessed in other model organisms. Ciliates possess
an unusual genome organization that effectively divides the somatic and germ-
line genetic functions between two distinct nuclei. The micronucleus (MIC) is
the germline nucleus, dividing mitotically during vegetative growth, and
transcriptionally silent. The macronucleus (MAC) is the somatic nucleus,
dividing amitotically, and transcriptionally active. The MICs of a conjugating
pair undergo a series of meiotic and mitotic divisions, followed by an exchange
of haploid nuclei, which fuse to produce a zygotic nucleus. Late in conjugation
the parental MACs are destroyed, and new MACs develop in a programmed manner
from copies of the zygotic MIC. Tetrahymena RAD51 expression varies under a
number of different environmental conditions and developmental stages.
Constitutively high Rad51p expression during vegetative growth decouples MAC
division from the cell cycle, leading to a high percentage of amacronucleate
progeny. This project has two goals. First, a cDNA expression library will be
screened for Tetrahymena gene products that suppress the severe amacronucleate
phenotype exhibited by strains that constitutively express Rad51p. This
experimental approach will help identify factors that directly and/or indirectly
interact with Rad51p during macronuclear division. Second, randomly mutagenized
Rad51p will be constitutively expressed in an effort to identify missense
mutations that alleviate the amacronucleate phenotype in transformants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, taking advantage of genetic manipulations
possible only within the Tetrahymena experimental system, should extend our
understanding of Rad51p structure and function and thus will contribute to the
analysis of this highly important protein in other eukaryotic model systems.
Both undergraduate and graduate students will help carry out this
research.&lt;br/&gt;