* 0220818
* Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Sue Casey, Weatherford College of Parker Co. Jr. College System
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 135,500.00

The goal of this project is to increase the numbers and percentages of area high
school graduates that enroll as full-time students in pursuit of associate
degrees with majors in Computer Science, Engineering Technology, and Mathematics
(CSEM). The project seeks to (1) address the need for greater access and
retention of students in the college's technical programs, (2) attract more
women into the non-traditional computer science and engineering technology
fields, and (3) provide opportunities for a rich pool of academically talented
students who lack financial resources to complete their studies on a full-time
basis, thereby speeding student progress in completing an associate degree or in
transferring to a four-year institution. Priority is given to eligible first-
generation and low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An environment is being
created that encourages academic and personal growth for CSEM Scholar. In
addition to financial support, the program includes an array of intensive
student support and career services, including comprehensive assessment of
academic deficiencies; individual and computerized tutoring; study skills and
standardized test preparation workshops; academic, personal, and career
advising; and faculty, student, and industry mentors. A major component is the
active recruitment of high school students enrolled in computer science and
engineering related courses in the 42 school districts participating in the
Weatherford College Tech Prep Consortium, with a special focus on recruiting
female students. The project strengthens the transfer bridge between the college
and the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) and increases the incentives for
students to pursue higher education through the newly implemented Texas TWO-STEP
(Technology Workforce Opportunities through Seamless Transitions and Educational
Partnerships) Project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over time, the combined efforts of
these students provided can make a large impact on communities in high-poverty
areas like those in the Weatherford College service area. This program increases
the number for women choosing high-demand career fields. As graduates, they are
role models to underrepresented students and women as they join national and
international firms across the nation.