* 0220737
* Dissertation Research:  The Genetics of Malarial Selection in Sub-Saharan Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Hammer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,930.00

The nearly complete sequence of the human genome has greatly enhanced our
understanding of human genetics. This single reference sequence, however, is not
able to capture the extent and nature of human genetic variation. Efforts are
now are shifting to describing patterns of variation across populations and
regions of the genome particularly as it relates to human genetic diseases.
Disease association studies are proving useful in identifying individuals at
risk for certain diseases; however, much of human genomic variation is not
related to disease. Patterns of variation can be shaped by natural selection
(e.g. on variants in disease-related genes) and historical processes (e.g.,
migration and genetic drift). Natural selection affects variation associated
with a specific gene or set of genes. Additionally, regions associated with a
given disease comprise a relatively small portion of the entire genome.
Historical processes, on the other hand, affect the entire genome. While a
clearer picture of human evolutionary history is emerging, it is not known to
what extent historical processes have shaped patterns of variation at disease
genes. This study will assess the role of historical processes in shaping
variation at genes conferring resistance to the infectious disease,
malaria.&lt;br/&gt;Each year malaria affects ~500 million people and kills ~2
million with the vast majority of these deaths occurring in Africa. Alternate
forms (alleles) of the beta-globin and G6PD genes are known to confer resistance
to malaria and these alleles are found at high frequencies in populations
residing in malarial environments. Interestingly the same alleles that confer
resistance to malaria can also cause inherited diseases (i.e., sickle cell
anemia, G6PD deficiency). The question is what is the relative role of natural
selection and historical processes in shaping patterns of variation in and
around these genes? To address this the reseachers will perform a two-way
controlled comparison of patterns of DNA sequence variation in these two genes
in four African populations with different susceptibility to malaria as a
selective agent. Two of the four populations (the Luo and Dogon) occupy regions
of sub-Saharan Africa that are strongly impacted by malaria, and two populations
(the San and Southeastern Bantus) live outside malaria areas. Additionally, to
dissect the role of historical processes in shaping variation in these
populations, DNA sequences of two other gene regions that are not affected by
malaria will be determined. One of these regions is on the tip of chromosome 16
(16p13.3) and the other is within an intron of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy gene
(Dmd intron 44) on the X chromosome. This experimental design should provide a
sound hypothesis-testing framework for distinguishing those forces that act a
single gene from those that affect the whole genome. Furthermore, collaborations
with researchers at the Center for Disease Control in Atlanta and at the Kenya
Medical Research Institute in Nairobi, Kenya, as well as the involvement of
students from the University of Arizona and Pima Community College, will enhance
the intellectual and training environment of this research.&lt;br/&gt;