* 0220520
* Mercy College Minority Institution Infrastructure Program One-Year Planning Grant
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Nagaraj Rao, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

EIA 02-20520&lt;br/&gt;Rao, Nagaraj&lt;br/&gt;MacIntyre, Richard&lt;br/&gt;Mercy
College &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mercy College Minority Institution Infrastructure:
Planning &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year planning award, expanding
activities geared to attract and retain minority students, supports the
development of a project that will position Mercy College, a minority serving
institution, to expand its capabilities in the Division of Mathematics and
Computer Science. Faculty members will be hired with experience in human
communication technology to incorporate cutting edge technological advancements
into teaching and research activities and to develop multidisciplinary,
discipline-specific and foundational modules in key areas of the curriculum. The
modules will provide a foundation for the integration of new technologies. The
award will also facilitate further development by a planning group consisting of
faculty members at Mercy, and researchers from the University Arizona,
University of Colorado-Boulder, and University of Houston-Downtown. The project
supports on-site faculty training at the University of Colorado's Center for
Spoken Language Research and the development of a five-year infrastructure
development proposal to improve faculty and student research capability at
Mercy. The award will enable Mercy College to initiate and continue critical
steps towards invigorating and strengthening offerings in the computer science
and information technology fields