* 0220830
* Information Technology Training and Academic Enhancement Program for Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Undergraduate Students
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Frank Neubrander, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 12/31/2007
* USD 396,604.00

The Departments of Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics, in
collaboration with the Office of Strategic Initiatives and the Center for
Academic Success at Louisiana State University, is increasing the educational
and career opportunities for academically talented, financially disadvantaged
students to reach their fullest potential through a student/faculty partnership
with a comprehensive monitoring system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to recruit financially disadvantaged students, to retain these
students, and to enhance the educational experience of these students in the
technology disciplines. Specific objectives are: (1) Recruit qualified students
through an active K-12 educational outreach program, including math and science
fairs, competitions, and in-school math and science laboratories, (2) Retain
these students through the incorporation of student support and mentoring
programs, (3) Enhance the educational experience of these students through
workshops/seminars, industrial outreach, and community service opportunities,
(4) Increase the number of undergraduates, including women and minorities in the
above-mentioned disciplines, and (5) Promote intercultural participation among
non-minority and minority students. In addition to the scholarships, the project
consists of three activities: (1) mandatory computer and information technology
training (average 2 hrs/wk), (2) mandatory academic enhancement activities
(average 1 hr/wk), and (3) optional educational and industrial outreach programs
(up to 3 hrs/wk). CSEMS Scholars receive additional information technology
training through various workshops and training courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of Strategic Initiatives and the Center for
Academic Success, Co-PIs, and several other faculty members provide active
mentoring and academic assistance for the CSEMS Scholars to maximize their
chances for academic success. The faculty mentors also assist CSEMS Scholars in
pursuing their professional careers though continuing graduate studies or job
placement in industries relevant to their education. There are 29 students per
year majoring in computer science, engineering, or mathematics disciplines who
hold scholarships. Scholarships can be renewed up to graduation. CSEMS Scholars
form a community that interacts regularly with each other, with faculty, and
with other students on campus. &lt;br/&gt;