* 0220971
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Technology Spillovers are Localized: Importance of Technological and Regional Attributes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Harvey Goldstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 1,500.00

Research and development activities, innovations, subsequent technological
changes, and spillovers are important factors that influence economic
development. New growth theory emphasizes the role of technology spillovers and
subsequent scale effects, which lead to increasing returns to scale and long-
term growth. Research and development may not be a sufficient condition for
regional growth, however. Although research and development has been considered
the most important factor contributing to technological progress and hence
productivity increase through spillover effects, when it comes to regional
economies, research and development itself does not automatically guarantee
technology spillovers within regions, which would eventually drive regional
economic growth. For example, a new innovation introduced in California can be
picked up and implemented in North Carolina, and vice versa. What may be more
important to regional economies is the degree to which externalities created by
innovative activities are localized within geographical boundaries. Strong
evidence has been presented in the scholarly literature that research and
development activities and consequent new innovations are the source of
productivity growth. Evidence also has mounted that technology spillovers, which
lie at the center of this mechanism, often are localized. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine technological and regional attributes
that influence the geographic localization of technology spillovers. The study
mainly focuses on what kinds of technological and regional attributes affect the
degree to which technology spillovers are localized and how much. The study will
use U.S. Patent and Trademark Office patent citation data and county business
pattern data and will apply simultaneous equation modeling techniques to explain
the relative importance of technological and regional attributes to the
localization of technology spillovers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
help fill gaps in the literature on spillovers and regional economic
development. So far, a major interest of many researchers has been to show that
technological innovations often spill over space and that such localized
technology spillovers affect the productivity level in a region. Relatively few
considerations have been given to the influence of technological and regional
attributes on geographical technology spillover patterns. The project also will
provide guidance for future science and technology policy development. State and
local governments can design policy instruments that specifically aim to promote
important regional attributes influencing geographical technology spillover
patterns. More efficient allocation of resources may result if it is known how
technological attributes influence the localization of spillovers. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;