* 0220773
* Seasonal and Interannual Variations of Stratification and Cross-Shelf Density Structure on the Middle Atlantic Bight Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Steven Lentz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2005
* USD 429,388.00

0220773 Lentz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to better understand the annual and
interannual variability of the density structure over the Middle Atlantic Bight
shelf and the linkages between forcing mechanisms and responses, others have
studied temperature and salinity variability, but not the important density
parameter. The PIs propose to utilize, in their research, National Centers for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis products and historical data from a
variety of sources, including light ships, buoys, moorings, and cruises.
Initially, the PIs propose to characterize the temperature structure over the
shelf and determine its response to heat flux from the atmosphere as opposed to
wind stirring and advection. Then they will address the effects of salinity and
the variability of the full density field. NCEP reanalysis products are
available for the period 1948 to present. Oceanographic observations extend to
1900, but most observations post-date 1950. Air-sea fluxes may need to be
recalculated to account for significant variability at scales unresolved by the
NCEP grid. Bin sizes for analysis will be determined by data coverage. Temporal
resolution of interannual comparisons will also be determined by data
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;