* 0221493
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Historic Range of Variability of Ponderosa Pine in the Northern Colorado Front Range: Past Fire Types and Fire Effects
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The development of ecosystem-based management is a major paradigm shift in the
study and management of native forests in the western United States. A key
component of this new scientific-management paradigm is the recognition of past
natural and human-caused variability in disturbance processes and forest
conditions. Understanding the spatial extent and temporal changes of
climatically-sensitive disturbances such as fire as ecological mechanisms that
have affected forest composition and structure is essential for managing natural
areas. However, in most ecosystems we lack detailed studies on the behavior and
effects of ecological mechanisms such as fire. This doctoral dissertation
research project will utilize fire history data in combination with intensive
tree age data to determine past fire types and fire effects across the
elevational range of ponderosa pine in the northern Colorado Front Range. The
objectives of the study are: 1) to determine variation in past fire behavior in
relation to topographic position and elevation within the ponderosa pine zone;
2) to determine the effects of past fires on forest regeneration through
detailed reconstruction of forest age structure over a range of habitat types
within the ponderosa pine zone; 3) to synthesize the results of objectives 1 and
2 into a series of fire regime-stand development models for major habitat types
within the ponderosa pine zone. In order to characterize fire behavior and the
resulting effects across the montane zone in the northern Colorado Front Range,
a multi-scale sampling approach will be applied. Sampling and synthesis will be
conducted at three scales: 1) broad-scale GIS analysis of fire regimes and
habitat types across the northern Front Range; 2) meso-scale sampling of forest
structure and fire history in areas of 30 to 100 ha; and 3) intensive age
structure and fire history analyses in plots of approximately 100 to 500 m2.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of ecological restoration, it is important
that we have a better understanding of the spatial variability of fire regime
type (surface, stand-replacing, or mixed) as it has changed over the past
several centuries in ponderosa pine forests and woodlands. Through a multi-scale
approach of reconstructing past fire regime types and forest age structure, this
study will produce a series of habitat-specific models of fire-regimes and stand
development for the lower through the upper montane zone. These models can be
used by resource managers in formulating the goals of fire and vegetation
management in particular types of habitats. We know that fire regimes have
varied significantly over both time and space in the montane zone, but we lack a
useful classification of past fire regimes according to habitat type. A
classification of fire behavior within different habitat types of the montane
zone will allow managers to project appropriate fire management prescriptions
within the historic range of variability. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;