* 0221962
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: A Genetic Study of Prehistoric Chen Chen - Implications for the Genetic Relationships of Tiwanaku Peoples and the Peopling of South America
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2002,09/30/2003
* Anne Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/2003
* USD 2,500.00

The proposed research will use ancient DNA and mortuary data to examine the
social organization, biological heritage, and cultural composition of the
archaeological site of Chen Chen to determine whether the inhabitants of Chen
Chen represent more than one distinct ethnic group and to compared Chen Chen to
other modern and ancient Native American populations in order evaluate the
population history of South America. The potential biological relationships
between the Chen Chen population and the people of the Andean highlands, the
Peruvian coast, or other valleys has been an important topic in regional
archaeological research, and although cultural and skeletal investigations have
made important contributions, there are still several unresolved issues.
Molecular genetic data can provide a fresh look at the ongoing study of the
Tiwanaku expansion and the biological composition and structuring of Tiwanaku
colonies. The data from the proposed research will provide the first large
number of genetic sequences (=50) for the Osmore drainage and the Tiwanaku
population in general. Furthermore, these data, in combination with spatial and
mortuary data, are an effective means of evaluating the hypothesis that the
Tiwanaku polity was a multi-ethnic society.

On a larger scale, these data will represent an ancient sample that can be
compared to data from other native groups to make inferences regarding the time
and nature of the peopling of the Americas in general and South America
specifically. Ancient genetic data are particularly helpful in these studies
because they provide information about the genetic composition for an indigenous
population prior to Western influence. This is especially beneficial for the
western coast of South America where direct colonization by Europeans, catalyzed
by the rich geological and marine resources and arable land, had strong effects
on the demography of native populations.

An additional benefit of this research will be understanding the connection
between prehistoric and modern American Indians. The focus of this study is to
illuminate the biological connections of Chen Chen peoples, both to their time
frame and society, as well as to modern Native populations throughout the
Americas. Studies of DNA diversity from ancient and modern Native Americans have
determined a degree of continuity both temporally and spatially for some
regions. Yet, the occurrence of continuity is not universal. By comparing modern
native DNA sequences to those of prehistory, we gain better understanding of the
degree of genetic continuity over time as well as a temporal framework for
population events. In conjunction with this research, a collaborative project
between the Laboratorio Genetica at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos
and the Stone Laboratory at the University of New Mexico has been formed to
collection additional data on modern Native American populations throughout Peru
so as to compare them with Chen Chen and other American Populations.