* 0221113
* Collaborative Research: Organic Compounds in Hydrothermal Systems: A Framework for Investigating Heterotrophy at High Temperature.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Annelie Skoog, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 176,527.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0221417&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0221113&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study sets out to make chemical measurements
of inorganic and organic carbon compounds found in a complex and poorly
understood environment, shallow water marine hydrothermal systems. Due in part
to limited sampling opportunities, our understanding of marine hydrothermal
microbial systems and especially of their organic geochemistry is lacking. The
metabolic energy requirements of microbial lifeforms in these environments is
also unclear. Determination of the chemical structures and concentrations of a
series of aqueous low molecular weight organic compounds (amino acids,
carbohydrates and organic acids) will allow the modeling of the energetic bounds
associated with the metabolism of these substrates by heterotrophic
thermophiles. A series of studies, including using direct SCUBA field sampling
of the study site (Aeolian Islands, Sicily), will allow hydrothermal vent fluid
collection including temporal variation. Thermophilic bacteria are known to be
metabolically opportunistic, having the capability of utilizing a variety of
carbon sources present in their environment along with one or more electron
acceptors. How these organisms perform such metabolic manipulations and how they
dynamically adapt to changes in their chemical and physical environment is not
yet known. These investigators will employ a thermodynamic modeling approach,
using known concentrations of specific substrates at known temperatures, to
calculate the possible bioenergetic energy yields of the respiratory and
fermentative reactions these organisms use in hydrothermal environments. This in
turn will increase our understanding of the biogeochemical processes that may
fuel the microbial energetics in the deeper subsurface
biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;