* 0221680
* IGERT:  Multidisciplinary Integration of High Performance Computing in Ph. D. Programs in Science and Engineering
* EHR,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2010
* Michael Caramanis, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 11/30/2010
* USD 3,224,043.00

Science and technology of the twenty first century will be dominated by
computing. The training of well prepared computational scientists and engineers
demands an approach that transcends the strictures of the standard academic
curriculum. This IGERT project will provide students who follow discipline-
specific studies with a multidisciplinary program of training in computational
science that will maximize their exposure to the cross-disciplinary nature of
computational science and to its realm of industrial applications. This program
will build a three-way interface between graduate students, the academic faculty
training them, and industrial, government, and academic research laboratories
who may ultimately be their employers. It will offer training opportunities
through a program of visits and internships at such institutions. As the
students proceed towards a Ph.D. within their chosen field, they will also earn
a certificate in computational science in recognition of the special expertise
that they have developed. The students will have access to state-of-the-art
computational facilities at the University and will participate in
multidisciplinary seminars, workshops and regular meetings with faculty and
students in this program. They will also attend specialized lectures on ethics
and issues of law that are relevant for scientists in the computational field.
Special efforts will be made to enhance the participation of students from
groups underrepresented in the sciences. The IGERT project will have the merit
of providing a large number of doctoral students pursuing disciplinary research
with broad education on the methods and scope of application of computational
science, through the teamwork of faculty from many different departments. The
results of this interdisciplinary project will be widely disseminated through
seminars, workshops and web publishing and thus it will have the broad impact of
establishing a model for training in computational science students who are
pursuing education in a variety of disciplinary fields.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.