* 0221905
* BE/CBC: Geomicrobiological Interactions and Carbon Flow in Extreme Thermal Springs: Kamchatka, Russia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Juergen Wiegel, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,378.00

0221905&lt;br/&gt;Cady&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to analyze
the structural and chemical fidelity of biocomplexity indicators preserved in
siliceous hydrothermal deposits in Yellowstone National Park, USA. Biocomplexity
indicators characteristic of thermophilic microbes in ancient hydrothermal
mineral deposits include organic and inorganic chemical fossils (e.g., carbon
and sulfur isotopes, biominerals, trace element anomalies), carbonaceous
microfossils, and microbially influenced sedimentary structures (stromatolites,
microbialites, biofabrics). The structural and chemical fidelity of these
biocomplexity indicators depend on the size of carbon reservoirs available to
the microbes. This work is significant in that biocomplexity information gleaned
from ancient siliceous hydrothermal deposits will provide details regarding the
earliest life on Earth. This study provides a framework for analyzing surficial
and subsurface hydrothermal silica deposits in Uzon Caldera, Kamchatka,
Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of biocomplexity indicators in
Yellowstone hot springs provides a means to study the preservation of Bacteria
in silica deposits. The dataset acquired during this one-year study also
establishes a baseline for interpreting how biocomplexity information indicative
of mixed Bacterial and Archaeal thermophilic communities is preserved in the
siliceous hydrothermal deposits of Uzon Caldera. Molecular phylogenetic analysis
suggests that high-temperature microbial communities comprised of Bacteria and
Archaea are more appropriate homologs for ancient hydrothermal ecosystems. By
quantifying how carbon cycles through the various subsystems (fluids and gases,
microbial communities, and mineral deposits) of active silica-depositing hot
springs, this research addresses one of the central challenges of environmental
research: understanding how the physical, chemical, geological, hydrological and
biological processes that comprise the Earth's natural systems are functionally
interrelated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;