* 0221669
* Collaborative Research: Compression of Geometry Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Mathieu Desbrun, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2005
* USD 112,496.00

DMS-0138458&lt;br/&gt;Peter Schroder&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0221642&lt;br/&gt;Ronald A.
Devore&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0221669&lt;br/&gt;Mathieu Desbrun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a collaborative project funded by the CARGO program
under&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0138458, DMS-0221642, and DMS-0221669. This is the Age of
Information. Whether it be in scientific computation or reverse engineering, in
remote sensing or medicine, data sets of &lt;br/&gt;incredible resolution and
exquisite detail are created&lt;br/&gt;daily. These data sets often have
geometric structure which &lt;br/&gt;contains important information about the
data and its &lt;br/&gt;application. The usefulness of such geometric datasets
&lt;br/&gt;rests on our ability to process them efficiently, whether
&lt;br/&gt;it be for storage, transmission, visual display, correlation,
&lt;br/&gt;or registration against data from other modalities.
&lt;br/&gt;Compression is the common critical issue in all&lt;br/&gt;these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current data processing technology does not
provide the &lt;br/&gt;efficient and geometrically faithful representations
demanded &lt;br/&gt;by applications. In fact, a satisfactory data processing
&lt;br/&gt;platform will not be created by incremental advances of current
technology but rather through a fundamental investigation of &lt;br/&gt;how to
represent large data sets with inherent geometry. To &lt;br/&gt;pursue the
necessary advances a team of researchers and &lt;br/&gt;application developers
representing expertise from&lt;br/&gt;several disciplines including mathematics,
computer science, &lt;br/&gt;and engineering has been assembled. As drivers of
the research, specially targeted applications (DTED, reverse engineering,
&lt;br/&gt;physical simulation) have been selected to guide the formulation
&lt;br/&gt;of the most critical and meaningful problems, as well as testing
approaches to solving them. The team is carrying out &lt;br/&gt;fundamental
investigations on the representation and compression &lt;br/&gt;of data sets
with geometry by building new mathematical theory&lt;br/&gt;including
deterministic models, appropriate application &lt;br/&gt;specific error metrics
(e.g., Haussdorf distance rather&lt;br/&gt;than Lp norms), an information theory
based on Kolmogorov &lt;br/&gt;entropy to determine the optimal compression, and
the &lt;br/&gt;development of nonlinear methods for representing the data
&lt;br/&gt;sets which are near optimal in the entropy sense.&lt;br/&gt;