* 0221041
* IGERT:  A Joint Graduate Program in Applied Mathematics and the Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2009
* Duong Phong, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 11/30/2009
* USD 3,509,406.00

Columbia University is establishing a new, multi-departmental graduate program
in Applied Mathematics and the Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences. The aim of
this new IGERT Joint Program is to train a new generation of scientists whose
level of mathematical sophistication will be considerably higher than that of
typical students currently graduating from earth and environmental science
programs and, at the same time, whose familiarity with the important issues and
major open research questions in the earth and environmental sciences will be
much deeper that what is usually expected of students trained uniquely within
applied mathematics departments. To achieve this goal, five departments at
Columbia - Mathematics, Statistics, Applied Physics &amp; Applied Mathematics,
Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences, and Earth &amp; Environmental Engineering -
under the coordinating role of the Columbia Earth Institute, will
collaboratively train graduate students under this new IGERT Joint Program.
While students in the IGERT Joint Program will be individually admitted by each
department, their progress will be monitored by a Steering Committee of faculty
associated with the Joint Program. In addition to satisfying the requirements of
the departments into which they are admitted, all students in the Joint Program
will take a new integrated two-semester sequence in Applied Mathematics
specifically tailored to issues and problems in the global environmental
sciences, and will be expected to earn a minimum number of credits in both
mathematical and earth science courses. In addition, they will be expected to
attend a weekly colloquium organized by the Joint Program, give a formal
presentation of their research results once a year to the faculty and other
students affiliated with the Joint Program, attend special series of invited
lectures, assist in the mentoring of undergraduates, and complete a one summer
internship during their graduate training at a research institution, national
laboratory, or industrial research center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists
and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being made
to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;