* 0221586
* Organic Crystal Growth on Flexible Templates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2007
* USD 249,282.00

Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Organic Crystal
Growth on Flexible Templates"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will to explore
the possibility of morphological control and confinement of organic crystals
using polymeric templates. The nucleation and crystallization of model organic
dyes will be studied on two-dimensional (2-D) polyelectrolyte templates, and in
three-dimensional (3-D) polyelectrolyte shells by atomic force microscopy and
other in situ methods. The proposed research aims at (1) understanding the
effect of polyelectrolytes on organic crystallization; and (2) encapsulating
organic crystals in polyelectrolyte shells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
explores the rich interplay between the surface structure of polyelectrolytes
and the habit of nascent crystals. Polyelectrolytes exert templating effect via
preconcentration of lattice ions, geometric and stereochemical match, specific
interactions, and adsorption-induced stabilization. Polymeric substrates differ
from inorganic templates in that they do not show the order and rigidity
implicit in the epitaxial mechanisms. However natural polymers are known to
induce crystals of a uniform habit that is different from those grown without
the polymers. Research in biomineralization has shown that the templating effect
of polyelectrolytes does not require the same degree of geometric match as the
inorganic counterparts. Polyelectrolytes may display rich stereochemical control
because of their many surface conformations. There may exist several geometric
matches for a given crystal face. Segments protruding into solution may
stabilize side faces of the nascent crystal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the
above notions, an approach consisting primarily of experiments, but also
utilizing the Cerius2 program, will be used to study the interfacial structure
between the polyelectrolyte template and the nascent dye crystal. Initial
experiments will focus on the crystallization of dyes on 2-D thin films so that
the kinetics and crystal habit modification can be probed at the molecular
scale. The kinetic parameters include critical supersaturation, pH, induction
time, and rate of crystallization. The crystal habit variables include size,
shape orientation, and correlation to the template structure. In the second
stage, the study will focus on the dye crystallization inside the
polyelectrolyte shell. The shell will consist of polyelectrolyte multilayers
permeable to small polar molecules but not their crystals. In addition to the
polyelectrolytes, supported phospholipid bilayers will be used as templates
because they provide intermediate order and flexibility. This project is
intended as a proof-of-concept study. Future work can go beyond the generic
polyelectrolytes using polymers with higher architectural definitions such as
amphiphilic polymers, ionomers, and biopolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research may have broader impact in terms of its relationship to the concept of
nano-science and technology especially in areas such as materials processing,
color displays, information storage, nanocomposites, drug encapsulation, and
sensors. For example, the encapsulated colloids can be used as tips for
micropipettes, as chemical sensors to detect pollutants, and as heterogeneous
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also, the support will allow the P.I. to
continue exploring the molecular mechanisms in the templated growth of organic
with potential applications in encapsulation, coatings, and materials
processing. It will also help the P.L to establish long-term collaboration and
exchanges with a foreign research institution: the Max-Planck-Institute of
Colloids and Interfaces. Some experiments will be conducted at the Institute
with a number of characterization methods not present at the P.I.'s home
institution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The planned educational and outreach
activities include incorporation of research topics into materials engineering
curricula, global education associated with the World Bridge program, mentoring
of Detroit high school students in the Science Summer Camp program, and training
science teachers from local community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;