* 0221500
* Manganese Cycling in the Subtoxic Zone in the Black Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

OCE-0221500&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elemental profiles in the suboxic zone of the
Black Sea suggest that the upward flux of sulfide may be oxidized by manganese
oxides rather than oxygen and that ammonia reacts with nitrate to produce N2. In
addition, the profiles suggest that Mn(II) oxidation occurs anaerobically,
possibly coupled to denitrification. However, the occurrence of the proposed
reactions remains controversial. A scientist from Scripps Institute of
Oceanography, in collaboration with scientists from the University of
Washington, the University of Delaware, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute, Russia and Ukraine, plans to carry out field work in the suboxic zone
of the Black Sea, as well as laboratory culture experiments to test the
hypothesis that Mn species act as a catalyst for oxidation of sulfide and
ammonia and reduction of nitrate and nitrite. The PI also will assess the
microbial and abiogenic reaction rates of the oxidation of Mn (II) and reduction
of Mn (III, IV) and assess how oxygen affects these processes. In the
laboratory, the distribution of bacteria and the genes involved in Mn(II)
oxidation throughout the vertical and horizontal transects of the Black Sea also
will be determined. Lastly, the PI will ascertain the importance of lateral
inputs versus in-situ processes in controlling the suboxic zone of the Black
Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;