* 0221743
* BE/CBC: Geobiology and the Emergence of  Terraced Architecture during Carbonate Mineralization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2010
* Nigel Goldenfeld, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,263,926.00

ABSTRACT

Objectives and Methods: The goal of this proposal is to determine how the
biodiversity and activity of specific living microbes and/or microbial
communities are required to create the terraced architectures universally
observed in high-temperature and low-temperature carbonate spring deposits.
Results will provide a fundamental knowledge of microbe-water-mineral
interactions during carbonate precipitation that are needed to more accurately
reconstruct the history of microbial life on earth and other planets. This
project advances the field of biocomplexity by combining geological studies,
microbial rDNA and gene analyses and quantitative modeling to provide a detailed
geobiological account of carbonate terrace formation. The integrated
multidisciplinary research and educational aspects of this project meet a
national need to train personnel for future geobiology and biocomplexity
studies.

The project is headed by a unique interdisciplinary research team with specific
expertise in geology, microbiology, and physics. Project milestones include:1)
performing in situ crystallization experiments to determine the form and
chemistry of travertine deposited when the microbes have been UV-irradiated, a
sterilization technique that will leave the other fundamental physical and
chemical conditions of the spring drainage outflow relatively unchanged; 2)
documenting associations between calcite crystal growth form, distribution and
chemistry with microbial form, diversity and metabolic activity; and
3)quantitative modeling of carbonate terrace formation using stochastic
differential equations to describe the combined effects of geological and
biological processes.

Mammoth Hot Springs is the most appropriate natural laboratory in the world for
conducting the proposed research. Although CO2 degassing and decreasing
temperatures strongly influence the spring water chemistry, significant
biological controls on travertine crystal form and isotope chemistry have
recently been quantitatively documented. Mammoth Hot Springs uniquely offers:1)
precipitation rates as high as 5 mm/day that allow short-duration in situ
crystallization experiments in a regime of coupled biological and physical
influences;2) the full spectrum of high-to low-temperature carbonate
precipitates at one site;3) long-term familiarity of the study site by the PI 's
who have all required research permits in hand; and 4)the only easily accessible
hot spring complex in the world protected in its natural state.

Intellectual Merit: The main question addressed is whether the presence of
terraced carbonate architecture is prima facie evidence for the presence of
microbial activity. Results from this study will permit the identification of
microbiologically influenced crystallization in other modern and ancient high-
temperature and low-temperature terraced carbonate spring deposits. The
techniques employed in the quantitative modeling provide a first principles
understanding of significant geological features from a physical and biological
perspective. Of equal importance, the results from this study will establish a
systematic and quantitative toolkit to identify microbial influence during
carbonate deposition that can be used in a wide variety of other important
terrestrial, marine, and burial environments on earth and other planets. Broader
Impacts: This systems-level understanding of the interaction between biological
and geological processes and resultant conceptual approaches will provide
learning opportunities at all levels from postgraduate to K-12, as well as to
the general public. The program to train personnel in biocomplexity studies will
include undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, international student
exchange with the University of Siena in Italy, web-based curriculum development
for Geobiology courses, and the development of a formal Geobiology program at
Illinois. This project enhances public awareness of the need for biocomplexity
studies through museum displays, brochures, and interpretive trail signs for the
Canyon and Mammoth Hot Springs Visitor Centers in Yellowstone National Park,
which will be seen and used by over 3 million park visitors each year.