* 0221594
* IGERT:  Integrated Graduate Training in Archaeological Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2003,09/30/2008
* John Olsen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,623,877.00

The University of Arizona's IGERT program is an outgrowth of the emergence of
the interdisciplinary field of archaeological science, in which expertise in one
or more fields of scientific inquiry is integrated with training in
archaeological theory and method. The program will integrate archaeology,
geosciences, physics, tree-ring studies, and materials science and engineering
into a coherent program of field- and laboratory-based training that will
prepare doctoral graduates for employment in academia as well as the public and
private sectors. The study of archaeology, and of the environmental contexts
within which the human species evolved and diversified, requires the application
of multiple techniques drawn from the sciences and engineering. These include
techniques for (a) dating archaeological and paleoecological records; (b)
reconstructing past climates, plant, and animal communities; (c) locating buried
and submarine sites; (d) reconstructing extinct technologies and their impacts
on past environments; and (e) identifying past exchange systems by tracing
inorganic materials to their geological sources. Graduates of the IGERT program
will acquire specific expertise in one or more of these areas, together with a
knowledge of the broad range of archaeological sciences, plus a firm grounding
in archaeological theory and techniques, blending experiences acquired in
classrooms, laboratories and fieldwork. IGERT support will also provide minority
undergraduate students and high school science teachers internships in
archaeometric laboratories at the University, and will be paired with IGERT-
supported graduate students to develop materials for school science
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;