* 0221896
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Global Climate Change: Risk Perceptions and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Paul Slovic, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2003
* USD 11,414.00

This project will investigate the roles of affective imagery and
cultural&lt;br/&gt;worldviews in risk perception, decision-making and behavior,
using global&lt;br/&gt;climate change as a case study. Past research has focused
on the role of&lt;br/&gt;cognitive factors like knowledge, mental models and
general environmental&lt;br/&gt;beliefs in risk perceptions of climate change.
Recent research, however, has&lt;br/&gt;also begun to focus on the role of
affective factors. This project will&lt;br/&gt;develop and test affective image
analysis as an innovative method to study&lt;br/&gt;public risk perceptions
along both cognitive and affective dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, cultural
theorists argue that cultural worldviews are also&lt;br/&gt;important factors
and need to be included as explanatory variables. This&lt;br/&gt;project will
operationalize and test the predictions of cultural theory.&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
many researchers assume that risk perceptions and behaviors&lt;br/&gt;correlate,
yet little focused research has been done. This research will&lt;br/&gt;test
this assumption, using climate change as a case study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also addresses several applied questions: Does the
American&lt;br/&gt;public perceive global climate change as a serious risk? What
specifically&lt;br/&gt;do they fear about it? Do these risk perceptions
translate into personal&lt;br/&gt;actions and/or support for mitigation
policies? This research will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the continuing discussion
on global climate change, as&lt;br/&gt;scientists and policymakers attempt to
find scientifically appropriate and&lt;br/&gt;publicly acceptable solutions to
this global problem.