* 0221825
* BE/CBC: Quantification and Modeling of DOC and DON Release in Marine Systems: A Study of Increasing Trophic Complexity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Craig Carlson, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,699,795.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0221825&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study focus is to consider the range of dissolved organic matter (DOM) release
processes exhibited by marine phytoplankton species, to describe how these
processes regulate and couple to the cycling of fixed carbon and nitrogen
species in the surface ocean, and to model, based upon both controlled
laboratory and field experiments, the interactions of these chemical species
between phytoplankton trophic structure, community succession and senescence as
mediated by viral lysis, micro and macrozooplankton grazing and bacterial
heterotrophy. A series of hypotheses, involving the production and consumption
of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and nitrogen (DON) compounds, will be tested
on each of a series of manipulable culture experiments and a program of seasonal
cruises in both estuarine Chesapeake Bay and coastal upwelling dominated
Monterey Bay as contrasting physical systems. Modeling objectives include a
mechanistically informed simulation of field and culture experiments capable of
descriptive and predictive insight as to DOC and DON composition, molecular
weight and bio-availability as a function of trophic structure and complexity.
Associated educational activities will be centered around highlighting the
current research efforts of this multidisciplinary investigation in the context
of public education programs coordinated by the Virginia Institute of Marine
Sciences Mini-School program. This existing course development program has
intensive participatory and outreach components and proposes to expand the
opportunities of the pubic to learn about how contemporary scientific issues
such as biocomplexity in marine environmental systems are being approached by
research scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;