* 0221032
* Patterns of Variability in Alaskan Salmon Populations and Their Ecosystems During the Last Five Centuries
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 533,703.00

Understanding the causes and manifestations of biological variability over long
time scales &lt;br/&gt;remains a critical and elusive goal for ecosystem
ecology. In the Northeast Pacific, long-term variation in &lt;br/&gt;atmosphere-
ocean coupling appears to have organized biological production into a series of
distinct &lt;br/&gt;interdecadal regimes during the last century. For instance,
up to three-fold changes in salmon fishery catches in the Alaska Current were
coindicent with shifts between interdecadal climate regimes. Despite this
enormous temporal variability in fish population dynamics, we have only a weak
understanding of the long-term climatic drivers that control biological
productivity in this vast and important ecosystem. A &lt;br/&gt;key hypothesis
proposes that the main drivers of biological change in the Northeast Pacific
involve the &lt;br/&gt;interactive effects of pan-Pacific, bi-decadal and penta-
decadal climate oscillations. Historical records of biological productivity
prior to the 20th century have not been established for the Alaskan Current
domain &lt;br/&gt;of the Northeast Pacific; their absence represents a major
impediment towards understanding the temporal &lt;br/&gt;organization of
biological productivity in this ecosystem. Here, the investigators propose to
quantify the fundamental modes and magnitude of interdecadal variability in
sockeye salmon populations of the Alaska Current during the last 500 years, to
improve our understanding of the critical sources of temporal organization in
the Northeast Pacific. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These scientists will use
paleoecology to characterize the long-term patterns of biological variability in
the Alaskan Current domain of the Northeast Pacific. Specifically, they will
infer historical changes in populations of sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka)
by tracking variation of a natural geochemical tracer (15N) that accumulates in
the sediments of spawning lakes in proportion to salmon density. High resolution
dating of sedimentary sequences will be accomplished through detailed radio-
isotope analyses of sediments and by identifying volcanic ash layers with known
ages. Existing 35-to-100 year long historical records of salmon population
dynamics, climatic conditions, and lake production will enable them to calibrate
sedimentary chronologies of geochemical and biological markers. They will also
use carbon stable isotopes and fossil algal pigments from sediments to quantify
the impact of salmon-derived nutrients on lake productivity. They will use
spectral analysis and temporal domain time-series models to quantify the
frequency, duration, and magnitude of historical shifts in fish production, and
how these relate to independent proxies of paleoclimatic conditions. They will
then apply the time-series models developed from sedimentary and other existing
paleoclimate records to forecast future changes in the biological productivity
of the Northeast Pacific for the next century. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
synthesis of new and existing data will provide a high-resolution, concrete
description of the &lt;br/&gt;long-term variability in the biological
productivity of the Alaska Current domain of the Northeast Pacific.
&lt;br/&gt;They will test the hypothesis that the biological productivity within
this oceanic domain has been &lt;br/&gt;synchronized by inter-decadal climate
regimes associated with bidecadal and pentadecadal climate
&lt;br/&gt;oscillations. These data will provide the information needed to
investigate the spatial and temporal &lt;br/&gt;coupling of biological
productivity to climate oscillations throughout the Northeast Pacific. In
particular, &lt;br/&gt;our work will provide the data needed to test the
hypothesis that biological productivity in the Alaska and &lt;br/&gt;California
current domains of the Northeast Pacific respond synchronously, but out of
phase, to &lt;br/&gt;interdecadal climatic forcing. The synthesis of historical-
and paleo-indicators of oceanic conditions, &lt;br/&gt;climatic conditions, and
biological productivity will place the recent century of ecosystem dynamics in a
&lt;br/&gt;substantially longer temporal context than is currently available.
This knowledge will provide a scientific &lt;br/&gt;basis for adapting
management to the time scales relevant to the coastal marine, freshwater and
riparian &lt;br/&gt;ecosystems of the Northeast Pacific.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;