* 0221865
* Integration of Wear-resistant and Anti-stiction Coatings Deposited from Waterborne Chemistries into Micro-electromechanical System Fabrication Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Pierre Deymier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 02/28/2006
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop the chemistry and
techniques for the application of duplex wear resistant and anti-stiction
coatings; onto polysilicon MEMS based structures from aqueous media. The anti-
stiction properties will be evaluated through a characterization of the
hydrophobicity of the coated surfaces under different temperature and humidly
conditions. Friction and wear properties of the deposited coatings will be
investigated using friction force microscopy. By working in collaboration with
Sandia National Laboratories, a GOALI partner in the proposed research, coatings
will be applied to test structures and the wear between coated surfaces will be
measured using a microtribometer device. Using atomistic computer simulation
methods, viz. molecular dynamics, the relation between the chemical structure of
coatings and their friction/wear properties will be explored. Designing anti-
stiction and wear resistant coating begins with linking molecular structures,
coating structure and morphology to film properties. Objectives of molecular
level simulations are to understand the evolution of the coating structure
during sliding as well as shedding light on the tribo-chemical processes in the
anti-stiction film under dynamic rubbing conditions. The modeling work is driven
by a need to compare simulated friction and wear properties of anti-stiction
coating with experimental observations and gaining further insight into the
physics and chemistry at scales inaccessible by
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will provide educational
and research opportunities to graduate, undergraduate and post-doctoral
students. The principal investigators of the research program have a strong
history of involving underrepresented minority and female students in their
research program through regular and REU research programs. The results from
this work will be used to enhance the content of courses in applied surface
chemistry and atomistic computation techniques taught in the department of
Materials Science and Engineering as well as a teaching module for use in an IC
fabrication class taught at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;