* 0221307
* Terminus Dynamics and Active Deformation of Proglacial Sediments at an Advancing Glacier:  Taku Glacier, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Roman Motyka, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2006
* USD 356,463.00

Motyka&lt;br/&gt;00221307&lt;br/&gt;Taku Glacier has been steadily advancing for
the last several decades, excavating its bed and entrenching itself into
glaciomarine, fluvial, tidal, sediments and glacier outwash deposits. The cause
of this advance is related to the advance phase of the "tidewater glacier
cycle". A 19th century calving retreat resulted in a high area accumulation
ratio (AAR) during most of the 20th century (~ 0.90). The high AAR and gradual
diminishment of calving due to infilling of the fjord by glacial and fluvial
sediments resulted in a positive net balance for several decades, driving the
current advance 7 kilometers (km) since 1890. Taku Glacier therefore presents an
ideal setting and rare opportunity for the study of slow glacier advance onto
and into soft sediments. Continued thickening of ice in the terminus region
indicates this advance should continue over the next several years.
Reconnaissance observations have documented contemporaneous deformation of
proglacial sediments about 200 meters (m) in front of the terminus and prominent
bulges up to 10 m high have formed in the compressed sediments with buckling of
the overlying soil and vegetation. The Principal Investigators will study the
dynamics of the advancing glacier terminus and investigate the effects of this
advance on the proglacial geomorphology. Surface velocities, strain rates, and
surface elevation changes will be measured both on the glacier terminus and on
proglacial features, along with measurements of changes in terminus position.
Ground penetrating radar (GPR) and radio echo sounding (RES) will be used to
define the glacier geometry and the nature of the bed. They will repeat RES
surveys to investigate ongoing subglacial sediment excavation and entrenchment.
GPR will also be used to develop a 3-dimensional picture of the structure of the
proglacial sediments and their deformation. Existing and new markers on the
sediments will measure motion and strain. A key feature of this study will be
simultaneous measurement of short-term changes in terminus ice speed and
proglacial sediments using precision GPS over several months. Terminus dynamics
and the mass balance are integral parts of glacier response theories, but they
are poorly understood. The Principal Investigators will use finite element
analyses to investigate the deformation and stress fields in the terminal ice
wedge and of the sub- and proglacial sediments, using strain data and geometry
as constraints. Their aim is to understand the detailed dynamics of terminus
advance and the rheological properties of the sediments and the ice near the
terminus. They will also investigate the relation between glacier thickening and
terminus advance, using our continuing airborne altimetry and photogrammetric
measurements of surface elevation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;