* 0221288
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Role of Obliquity and Insolation Gradients in Controlling Global Ice Volume
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Peter Stone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David J. Verardo
* 12/31/2004
* USD 105,678.00

The goal of this research is to construct a series of process models to examine
the transport of heat and moisture from low to high latitudes in the atmosphere
and oceans and their interactions with ice sheets. The central thesis of the
research is that the Earth's obliquity controls the differential of insolation
between high and low latitudes and, hence, ice volume and climate.

Milankovitch theory postulates that ice-age cycles are controlled by insolation
in high northern latitudes in summer. This insolation is dominated by the
23,000-year period of the precession cycle. Paleoclimate evidence, however,
indicates that the dominant period in ice volume over the last three million
years is the 41,000-year period of obliquity. This discrepancy represents a
crucial gap in understanding in the science of paleoclimatology.

Validating the insolation gradient hypothesis would greatly advance our
understanding of Earth's past climate history. Since no climate model has yet
succeeded in reproducing the record of the ice ages, the knowledge gained in
validating the hypothesis would also point the way towards constructing climate
models with greater reliability for predicting future climate changes.

Funding is primarily for the support of a graduate student who would carry out
the proposed research as part of a doctoral research project.