* 0221768
* BE/GEN-EN: Analysis of Factors Determining the Ecological Function and Resilience of Microbial Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,524,700.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental chemistry is largely controlled by
the interplay between microbial activity &lt;br/&gt;and geochemistry. The
complex nature of most communities in natural systems makes it
&lt;br/&gt;difficult to unravel the specific mechanisms of this interaction. A
compounding factor is that most microorganisms have not been isolated, and thus
their biochemistry and actual roles in geochemical cycling are largely unknown.
This project will study a community at the level of its metabolic network in
order to develop and test ecological models for community resilience and
function. The approximately five member community is derived from a subsurface
extreme acid mine drainage (AMD) site within an ore body. The environmental
geochemistry is simple because the ore deposit is ~95% pyrite (FeS2), and
receives minimal inputs of fixed carbon and nitrogen. Energy is supplied to
autotrophs from only two sources: aerobic iron and sulfur oxidation. These and
other characteristics make the system tractable to bioreactor experiments and
modeling that can document ecosystem structure and function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two groups of hypotheses based on established ecological
principles will be tested. First, microorganisms responsible for nitrogen
fixation and oxidation of elemental sulfur are hypothesized to be keystone
species because their impact on the community is disproportionate to their
abundance. Perturbation studies will be used to test this hypothesis. Second,
iron-oxidizing organisms are hypothesized to be adapted to higher pH conditions.
Microbes colonize pyrite surfaces, and through a series of species succession
events, lead to a climax community at an optimal low pH (facilitative
succession). The identity and metabolic characteristics of early to late
colonizers in bioreactor communities will be determined in a series of eight
washout-perturbation treatments in order to test this hypothesis. The central
product of this study will be a genome-enabled elucidation of the metabolic
pathways that regulate and determine survival of individual species and the
community. Genome data and gene expression will be analyzed to identify and
monitor activity of genes responsible for oxidation of ferrous iron (the primary
sulfide oxidant) and sulfur (the key acid generating reaction), and CO2 and
nitrogen fixation. Metaphysiological trophic models will be developed to
describe the system and test hypotheses. This modeling technique is particularly
adept at handling non-linearities in complex systems. Outcomes will include the
first tests of ecological theories of succession and species interactions with
genetic-level resolution, and students trained in the development of new
approaches to ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;