* 0221122
* Collaborative Research:  Production and dynamics of DMSP and related compounds in response to oxidative stress in marine phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Ronald Kiene, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 246,197.00

Oxidative stress is a pervasive problem for oxygen-evolving plants, and is
likely to be especially important for marine phytoplankton growing in nutrient-
impoverished waters with high fluxes of visible and ultraviolet (UV) solar
radiation. Very little is known about how marine algae cope with oxidative
stress. In this study, a new hypothesis is presented that
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) is a unique and very important antioxidant in
the ocean that serves as a primary defense in combatting and alleviating
oxidative stress. Its role as an antioxidant is likely because DMSP is the
dominant cellular sulfur compound in, and a major organic constituent of many
marine algae worldwide. Furthermore, preliminary results indicate that DMSP and
its enzymatic lysis product, DMS are highly effective scavengers of toxic
reactive oxygen species (e.g., hydroxyl radicals) in cells, removing these
species faster, in some cases, than the well documented antioxidants, ascorbic
acid and glutathione. DMSP and DMS oxidation yield dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO),
which is also an effective oxidant scavenger as is acrylate, the other product
of DMSP lysis. Together, these related compounds should serve as a
multifunctional, highly flexible antioxidant system in DMSP-containing algae. To
investigate this DMSP antioxidant system, the following related hypotheses are
being tested by this research team: 1) Intracellular DMSP concentrations in
phytoplankton will increase in response to chronic oxidative stress, and will
decrease in response to acute oxidative stress. 2) Turnover of cellular DMSP is
induced by oxidative stress, resulting in increased production of putative
antioxidants. 3) Phytoplankton with high DMSP content and high DMSP lyase
activity will be more resistant to oxidative stress than phytoplankton with low
DMSP or low lyase activity. To test these hypotheses, axenic cultures of
ecologically-important phytoplankton species and natural seawater populations
are being exposed to various forms of oxidative stress, including high photon
fluxes of visible light (400-700 nm) and/or UV radiation (290-400 nm), nutrient
limitation (Fe and N), and addition of paraquat or copper. During these
exposures, changes in cellular DMSP and related compounds will be determined
along with DMSP lyase activity. Complementary measurements of other antioxidant
defense systems (e.g., ascorbate, reduced and oxidized glutathione, ascorbate
peroxidase, superoxide dismutase) will provide information on how the DMSP
system varies in relation to these well-established antioxidant defenses. This
project will elucidate the mechanisms that control DMSP levels in the ocean and
its rate of conversion to DMS, which is globally-significant because of the
important role of DMS in atmospheric chemistry and, possibly, climate. If the
DMSP antioxidant hypothesis is correct, then an important, hitherto unknown,
cellular function of DMSP will have been identified. Understanding the cellular
physiology of DMSP and its relationship to other poorly-understood algal
antioxidant systems will increase our understanding of the factors that control
the distribution of ecologically-important phytoplankton in the sea. This study
will also result in the interdisciplinary training of advanced undergraduate and
graduate students in algal physiological ecology and oceanography. The PIs and
students will disseminate results of this study through scholarly and public
presentations, scientific journals, popular articles and freely-accessible web
pages.