* 0221781
* Mesoscale Variability and Processes in an Eddy-Resolving Global POP Simulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Julie McClean, Naval Postgraduate School
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 129,168.00

Mesoscale Variability and Processes in an Eddy-Resolving Global POP
Simulation&lt;br/&gt;Julie McClean&lt;br/&gt;NPS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A high-
resolution global configuration of the Parallel Ocean Program (POP) model will
be analyzed to determine the mescoscale transfer of properties between basins,
hemispheres, and gyres with the goal of identifying the role of these
fluctuations with thermohaline properties. Global eddy variability will be
quantified by calculating energy levels and intrinsic length scales (Eularian
and Lagrangian) to allow comparison with global or near-global coverage
(drifters, altimetry, and floats). Meridional heat transports, their components,
and divergence and time variability will be calculated. Particular emphasis will
be placed on eddy heat transports. The western boundary current and tropics will
be regions of interest for the analysis of the characteristics, generation and
dissipation mechanisms, and dynamics and property fluxes associated with
mesoscale eddies. The studies will be coordinated with those of the Kuroshio
Extension System Study (KESS). Mixing rates along isopycnals will be computed
from the model eddy and dispersion statistics and then will be compared with
rates obtained from the Southern Ocean Floats on Isopycnal Experiment (SOFIE). A
web-based autonomous extraction system will be set up to disseminate subsets of
model output to help facilitate collaborations and community
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;