* 0221715
* IGERT:  Graduate Education Program in Computational Science and Engineering with Emphasis on Multiscale Problems in Fluids and Materials
* EHR,DGE
* 12/15/2002,06/30/2013
* Bjorn Birnir, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2013
* USD 3,374,065.00

This IGERT program is structured to provide a unique Ph.D. program in
interdisciplinary research and education in Computational Science and
Engineering (CSE). The vision is to educate students for whom working in
interdisciplinary teams is the norm, and who have the ability to acquire
knowledge, ways of thinking, and perspectives from other disciplines. The
proposed IGERT PhD experience is different from one in a traditional discipline,
and possibly unique among CSE programs in the USA. The IGERT PhD theses will be
jointly supervised, and those students with a particular disciplinary
orientation will share resources, knowledge, and approaches with IGERT students
with other orientations. While a typical IGERT PhD thesis will still have a
strong focus in a discipline, it will contain major elements of independent
creative work in other disciplines relevant to the general problem area under
study. IGERT students and faculty will work together in three Focus Groups:
Microscale Engineering, Complex Fluids, and Computational Materials Science, to
solve a wide range of important and timely problems that depend deeply on
integration of information from the smaller scales to the larger scales. These
multiscale problems require a strong foundation in both engineering and the
mathematical and computational sciences. The curriculum ensures depth in one
area and a significant exposure to high level courses in one or more ancillary
areas. It includes new courses in atomic-scale computer simulation, and
computing for high performance, to specifically address the multiscale nature of
the Focus Group problems and their computational requirements. An internship is
required to broaden and reinforce the interdisciplinary research experience, and
a required series of workshops and seminars will give IGERT students a
significant exposure to important aspects of career development and
ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;