* 0221529
* Research and Infrastructure Development for Public-Resource Scientific Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* David Anderson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 911,264.00

The SETI@home project has pioneered public-resource computing, using millions of
computers in homes and offices around the world to perform scientific computing.
This approach, though it presents some difficulties, has provided unprecedented
computing power and has led to a unique public involvement in science. The
researchers propose research in which anew software infrastructure for public-
resource computing will be developed. The researchers call this the Berkeley
Infrastructure for Distributed Computing (BIDC). Among the design goals of BIDC,
two are of special importance: BIDC will provide mechanisms for efficiently and
economically distributing data from project servers to participant hosts, which
typically have commercial ISP connections. The mechanisms will use noncommercial
networks like Abilene and organizational LANs where possible, and will use idle
link capacity, similarly to the use of idle CPU cycles, with little or no impact
on regular network usage. BIDC will be open-source, and will have an open
architecture that will allow multiple independent projects to share a single
participant base. Participants have fine-grain control over how much of their
resources are used, and how they are divided among the projects. New projects
can be started easily, and function even if existing projects fail. The
researchers will use BIDC for upcoming SETI projects, including new searches
using the Parkes observatory in Australia, the future multibeam receiver at
Arecibo, and wider frequency bands from the current receiver at Arecibo. In
addition the researchers will encourage and support the use of BIDC by other
distributed projects; there are potential users in numerous areas including
climatology, oceanography, physics, mathematics, and ecological science. There
will be social and educational components as well. Public-resource computing
projects succeed only if they attract and retain participants. In SETI@home, the
researchers have developed a number of schemes for encouraging and harnessing
friendly competition among users, and for keeping users informed and interested
about the contributions of their computers to research. BIDC will include
variants of these schemes that can be used within and across the projects based
on it. The proposed research will advance knowledge in Internet-scale public-
resource computing, which has emerged as an important direction both in Computer
Science and in numerous application areas. In particular, the research will
expand the range of applications for which public-resource computing is
effective, including applications that involve large data. It will allow
projects to develop and deploy these applications easily, and will allow many
such projects to efficiently share a single resource pool. By carrying out the
SETI@home project the researchers have demonstrated their qualification to do
this research, and are in a unique position to connect new projects with their
user base of 3,500,000 people worldwide. The research will have a broad impact.
It will enable computational techniques that were previously impractical because
of their resource requirements, and will therefore make possible new types of
research in many scientific areas. It will provide a framework for experimental
research in other types of Internetscale systems (storage, semantic-based
searching, security and communication). By enabling new scientific computing
projects, it will help educate and inform the worldwide public in multiple
scientific areas, it will directly involve the public in science, and will give
the public a voice in the directions of science research.