* 0221658
* IGERT:  Integrated Graduate Education and Research in Biogeochemistry and Environmental Biocomplexity
* EHR,DGE
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2009
* USD 3,304,053.00

This IGERT project is an integrated program of education and research in the
area of Biogeochemistry and Environmental Biocomplexity. Conceptual, technical,
and computational developments are driving a major convergence among the
biological, earth, and physical sciences. Over the next several decades, this
disciplinary convergence will transform understanding of basic processes that
control the stability and sustainability of natural environments. These insights
will have extraordinary implications for the ability to predict and manage the
effects of modern human activities on the structure and function of ecosystems
across local, regional, and global scales. Such new knowledge is critical in
planning for a safe, sustainable, and prosperous future. The IGERT project goals
are to create an environment where researchers from ecology and evolutionary
biology, biogeochemistry, environmental engineering, hydrology, environmental
microbiology, and materials science come together to create novel
interdisciplinary approaches to major questions in environmental science, and to
train the next generation of leaders in this new interdisciplinary science.
Emphasis will be on intellectual diversity and non-traditional pedagogies in
training students across disciplinary boundaries, while deliberately enhancing
connections with international and non-university partners. Workshop and seminar
style learning will be employed, as well as active involvement of students in
the management and implementation of the program. The intellectual foci will be
the interaction of biological and physico-chemical controls on the cycling of
metals and nutrients, especially terrestrial nitrogen; the role of
microbiological processes in mediating biogeochemical cycling; and the effects
of variation in genotype and phenotype on ecosystem functioning. Ultimately, the
program will consider how complex behavior arises from the interaction of
individually simple relationships in natural and managed ecosystems. Cornell
University has outstanding resources in individual disciplines, and the IGERT
program offers a unique opportunity to bring together many of these individual
efforts into an integrated whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being made
to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;