* 0221468
* Evaluating the Last Glacial Maximum Ice-Sheet Extent in the Northen Kara Sea and its Effect on the Siberian River Drainage.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Leonid Polyak, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 345,762.00

Polyak 0221468

The Principal Investigator will investigate the stratigraphy and morphology of
Quaternary deposits in the northern part of the Kara Sea in order to delineate
the ice-sheet limits at the Eurasian Arctic margin during the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM). This will test whether voluminous West Siberian rivers were
dammed by the ice on the Kara Sea continental shelf and thus, prevented from
discharging into the Arctic Ocean.

He will conduct a study based on seismic-reflection data, including sparker,
subbottom sonar and sidescan sonar records and sediment cores collected from the
northern Kara Sea. A pre-evaluation of these data reveals a complex system of
glacigenic deposits, riverine networks, extended on the shelf during low sea
level and proglacial/prodeltaic basins. A detailed investigation of these data,
preferably supplemented by additional transects to be run in 2003, and their
comparison with glacial-geological results from adjacent land areas will allow
them to answer whether the Barents-Kara ice sheet expanded across the entire
northern Kara Sea during the LGM.

This study will involve processing and interpretation of seismic-reflection
records, construction of detailed digital bathymetric and seismo-stratigraphic
models and determination of age and depositional environments of sediment-core
material. The resulting products will include stratigraphically-controlled,
three-dimensional terrain models or morainic deposits, adjacent depositional
basins, and major paleo-river channels. Sidescan data will provide additional
information on seafloor texture. These results will provide necessary boundary
conditions for modeling the paleohydrology of the Eurasian Arctic for the last
glacial cycle. Generated data on the configuration of the ice-sheet margin and
the distribution of glacigenic erosional and sedimentary features will help
understand the patterns of glacial development in northern Eurasia and the
potential role of ice shelves in the Arctic Ocean. In addition, generated
bathymetric grid models will improve the international bathymetric data base for
the Arctic.