* 0221224
* Collaborative Research: Toward Environmental Genomics: Can We Estimate Bacterial Diversity in the Ocean?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Daniel Distel, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2006
* USD 161,880.00

Environmental genomics, wherein the total genomic diversity of a natural
community may be sampled and analyzed in an ecological context, remains an
elusive goal. This is due, at least in part, to (I) a lack of reliable estimates
of total community diversity and (II) a lack of information regarding the exact
phylogenetic, genomic and ecological units measured by commonly used diversity
estimators. Although ribosomal RNA approaches have provided the first steps
towards diversity estimation, and are widely used as a proxy for unique
bacterial types in natural populations, the genomic unit a ribotype measures
remains largely unexplored. It is generally believed that ribotype is a poor
indicator of ecotype because its slow molecular clock does not track many other
genomic changes that are significant with respect to physiological functions and
ecological roles. Further, there are reasons to believe microbes in typical
natural environments encounter forces much different from those that shape
genome evolution among the cultivated opportunists and pathogens that
predominate in genomic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is using an
approach that will allow the systematic sampling of environmental genomes by
capturing large gene fragments anchored to ribosomal genes (the current standard
biomarker for diversity estimation) as well as methods by which this approach
can be extended to reassembling larger genome regions of uncultivated bacteria.
The goals of this investigation are: 1) to estimate total ribotype diversity in
a coastal marine environment taking into account new developments in
understanding of PCR artifacts and new statistical approaches toward estimating
sampling coverage, 2) to explore the relationship of ribotype diversity to
genome diversity by sampling sequences contiguous to rRNA genes in abundant
ribotypes, 3) to explore the mechanisms that may contribute to shaping genomes
in natural communities, and 4) to continue development of methods to automate
and extend the reach of genomic research in natural communities. This research
will provide (I) boundaries for bacterial diversity estimates in the environment
and (II) insights into how processes that are important in shaping the structure
and dynamics of microbial communities may also be influential in shaping the
evolution of microbial genomes.