* 0221144
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Dynamic Approach to the Assessment of Vulnerability: Farmers' Coping Responses to No-Flow Events in the Lower Yellow River, 1991-1999
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Roger Kasperson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 02/29/2004
* USD 11,970.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the vulnerability of
farming households to irrigation water shortages that result from "no-flow"
events in Lower Yellow River in the Shandong Province of China. Prior to 1949,
severe flooding was the major threat in this region. Ironically, the increasing
frequency, duration, and extent of "no-flow" events mean that a lack of water,
rather than a surfeit, may be the problem of the future. But just how vulnerable
are farmers to irrigation water shortages resulting from no-flow events on the
Yellow River? What factors determine vulnerability to these shortages? How have
farmers been coping with no-flow events to date, and how can farmers reduce
their vulnerability to no-flow events in the future? The research will attempt
to answer these questions by developing and testing a framework that
conceptualizes vulnerability as a dynamic, evolutionary and iterative process
that operates at different time and space scales. The research will focus on the
experiences of farming households in two villages in Shandong Province during
the period 1991-1999. Household surveys will be conducted in these villages to
gather information about farmers' knowledge and awareness of no-flow events and
the coping strategies that they have employed. Additional interviews will be
conducted with key informants at the village and regional levels. Interview data
will be supplemented with official data on the frequency, duration, and extent
of no-flow events, crop yields, and irrigation quotas. These data will be used
to map the temporal patterns of vulnerability at the household level, using a
modified version of the coping response sequence developed by the Famine Early
Warning System (FEWS). The data will also be used to identify the links between
coping capacity and the transitional economy by examining socio-economic factors
that have influenced the pattern of entitlement changes, and explore the
differing social processes that affect vulnerability at various spatial scales.
Qualitative analyses will be used to generate a meaningful understanding of the
effects of agricultural policies and water management institutions on farmers'
livelihoods, and the linkages between institutional responses at different
levels. Quantitative analyses will be used to determine the statistical
association between stress levels and household coping responses, between
household assets and coping responses, and between household coping responses
and specific institution strategies, and thus to identify the main factors
affecting household vulnerability to irrigation water shortage.

The research will contribute to the study of vulnerability in several practical
and conceptual ways. First, by focusing on household coping sequences, the
research will clarify the factors that determine the nature and temporal
dynamics of vulnerability for specific people in specific places. Second, the
study will extend the empirical analysis of vulnerability to a transitional
economy, which have been largely ignored to date. Third, the study focus on the
Lower Yellow River will provide better understanding of water shortage problems
in North China, and help improve the coping capacities of water management
institution and farming households, and thus aid in the development of a
sustainable water resource management regime at the regional and national
levels. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.