* 0221912
* Spatial information technology and society: Ethics, values, and practice (Asia, January 2003; Honolulu, Hawaii, January 2004)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Jefferson Fox, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/2005
* USD 118,142.00

This project involves case studies and workshops to assess ethical,
organizational, and socioeconomic issues involved in using spatial information
technology for promoting community-based resource management in the Asia/Pacific
region. Recent growth in availability of modem spatial information technology
such as geographic information systems (GIS), low-cost global positioning
systems (GPS), and remote sensing image analysis software has empowered those
traditionally disenfranchised by maps to record and control mapped information,
a privilege formerly available only to state-funded mapmakers. At the same time,
this newly acquired authority to define and exert control over the use of space
compromises the customary uses it is intended to protect. Spatial information
technology and mapping generally promote practices that shift attention and
concern away from qualities of human/environment relationship to quantifiable
limits on that relationship implied by boundaries/borders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's primary objectives are to: 1) analyze the
impact of mapping technologies and activities on the cultural and social
dynamics of rural communities, 2) understand the social and political dynamics
involved in enrolling in and employing/deploying new technologies, and 3)
develop a general strategy for critically evaluating the ethical,
organizational, and socio-political impacts of technology transfer. Since most
research on the implications of spatial information technology has been
conducted in North America, this project fills a gap in understanding the impact
of importing technology conceived and developed in societies with different
developmental histories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants are from seven Asian
organizations currently involved in NGO projects that use spatial information
technology for promoting community-based resource management in the Asia/Pacific
region will participate, and from Canadian and U.S. projects that have relevant
prior experience. The project is structured to allow participants to learn from
each other's experiences, and to develop a more realistic understanding of the
challenges and opportunities involved in adopting spatial information technology
for promoting community based resource management. Workshop discussions will be
distilled into a publication that will provide a state-of-the-art survey of
methodology and issues as well as specify specific technologies and how they
should be used. Project activities are designed to provide social activists with
conceptual tools to assist them in evaluating the roles of spatial information
technology in advancing their goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;