* 0221063
* Speciation and Gene Flow in the Open Ocean:  the Phylogeography of an Oceanic Copepod Family
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 158,135.00

This project will develop a model system for the study of speciation in marine
holozooplankton populations, to examine the biogeographic and ecological factors
important during speciation in the open ocean. The calanoid copepod family
Eucalanidae is oceanic in distribution, and component species are likely to have
evolved entirely in the open ocean. The 23 extant species in this family will
serve as our model system. The research will consist of two parts. First, a
species level molecular phylogeny based on one mitochondrial (16s rDNA) and one
nuclear (Elongation Factor-1-a) gene locus will be developed, including all
known species within the family. Sister species pairs will be identified based
on the phylogeny. Three central hypotheses are being tested regarding the
comparative biogeographic distributions, morphological characteristics, and
genetic diversity of these sister species pairs. Results will elucidate patterns
in the extent of biogeographic range overlap, post-speciational range evolution,
divergence in reproductive morphological characteristics, divergence in
ecological characteristics, and differences in historical population sizes. Such
results will provide insight into those factors that play a role in the
speciation process. The second, intraspecific, part of the study will examine
geographic distributions of genetic lineages in circumglobal Eucalanus hyalinus
s.l. and Rhincalanus nasutus s.l. This component will identify oceanographic
features that create boundaries to gene flow between conspecific populations on
a global scale. Intraspecific haplotype networks will be generated based on the
mitochondrial gene locus Cytochrome Oxidase I (COI). The goal of this second
portion of the research is to understand how populations undergo the initial
differentiation process, a step critical to speciation models. Initial results
demonstrate the tremendous potential value of the proposed work. At least three
previously cryptic species have been uncovered within the family, and current
understanding of the biogeographic distributions of existing species has been
modified. Half of the DNA sequencing for the mtDNA molecular phylogeny has been
completed, and most of the specimens required for this work have already been
collected. &lt;br/&gt;The sequences resulting from this research will be
deposited in GenBank, and thus disseminated broadly to all interested parties.
The proposed research is the doctoral study. In addition to answering the
specific questions posed, this proposal will contribute to the training of a new
generation of oceanographers with abilities in systematics and modern molecular
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;