* 0221934
* EMSI:  Stony Brook-BNL Collaboration to Establish a Center for Environmental Molecular Science (CEMS)
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Nicholas Fisher, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2009
* USD 6,074,134.00

Richard J. Reeder, Nicholas S. Fisher, Clare P. Grey, Gary Halada, Christopher
Jacobsen, John B. Parise, Brian Phillips and Martin A. Schoonen of SUNY Stony
Brook, James Kubicki of Penn State University and Daniel R. Strongin of Temple
University are jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Division
of Earth Sciences for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at
significantly advancing our understanding of the fundamental molecular basis for
the sequestration of hazardous contaminants and radionuclide species in natural
geomaterials and engineered materials. This award includes collaborations with
five scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory and the National Synchrotron
Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven receiving parallel funding from the DOE. The
team will be focusing on molecular-scale reaction mechanisms that govern the
interaction of selected contaminant species (including actinides, toxic metals
and metalliods, CFC's) with minerals and mineral-like phases. Enhanced
understanding of the stability and lability of molecular contaminant species
bound by mineral and organic phases is needed to ensure effective long-term
sequestration of contaminants. The collaborations between researchers at Stony
Brook, Brookhaven and selected industrial partners offers unique
interdisciplinary training opportunities for the students and postdoctoral
researchers involved with this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental
Molecular Science Institute (EMSI) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams
of university, industrial and/or national laboratory scientists working on
problems aimed at increasing fundamental understanding of natural processes and
processes resulting from human activities in the environment at the molecular
level. The emphasis in these awards is on collaborative research among teams
with complementary research interests and the creation of broad educational
experiences for students.&lt;br/&gt;