* 0221105
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examination of Local-Scale Spatial Variability of Heat Fluxes Across an Urban Area: Integration of Measurements, Remote Sensing, and Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* C Susan Grimmond, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,983.00

Urban energy consumption and land-surface modification create distinct patterns
of urban climates by altering the exchange of energy, mass and momentum with the
atmosphere. These processes are linked to phenomena such as the urban heat
island, the transport and dispersion of pollutants and are fundamental to
understanding urban impacts on weather and climate. This doctoral dissertation
research will investigate the transfer of energy between the urban landscape and
the atmosphere through a combination of meteorological measurements, remote
sensing and numerical modeling. This combination of methods generates accurate
measurement of exchanges over the local-scale (~1 km, e.g. neighborhoods) and
extends them to the scale of a city. Previous studies, conducted mostly in North
America, were limited by short-duration campaigns or lacked direct measurements
by which to evaluate models. The study will be conducted in Lodz, Poland;
selected because it experiences a different seasonal climatic regime to those
sites already studied, large amounts of anthropogenic heat are released in the
winter-time, and the building style (density and morphology) of the city is
distinct from North American cities but typical of many cities in central
Europe. This research will enhance existing long-term measurements in Lodz and
address the lack of understanding of within urban variability by adding direct
measurements in areas with differing building densities and land-uses. These
sets of measurements will provide the basis for calibrating remote sensing and
numerical models of the exchange processes. The patterns and magnitudes of
fluxes predicted by the two approaches can be interpreted in the context of
emerging understanding of heat exchange across the urban landscape given that
direct observations on this large an extent are not
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban areas, although small in terms of total
land surface area, are growing and contain an increasingly large share of the
world's population. Thus urban-atmosphere interactions disproportionately impact
humans with implications for human health, safety and comfort. Moreover, urban
effects extend beyond the boundaries of cities, with implications for regional
and larger-scale atmospheric conditions and climates. With increases in
computing capacity, numerical weather forecasting, air pollution and long-term
climate models now run with greater spatial resolution and can explicitly
incorporate urban areas. This research will contribute directly to the
development of such models, by producing a methodology by which to study local
urban impacts as well as providing data against which to evaluate predictions.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;