* 0221706
* IGERT:  Public Policy and Nuclear Threats:  Training the Next Generation
* EDU,DGE
* 12/15/2002,06/30/2010
* Herbert York, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 06/30/2010
* USD 3,596,340.00

The Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC), a multi-campus research
institute of the University of California, is establishing an IGERT program to
train NSF Fellows on Public Policy and Nuclear Threats. IGCC will use its long-
established programs on all nine campuses of the University of California and
institutional ties with Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National Laboratories
to implement this program. During the Cold War, nuclear threats drove
investments and keen young minds into the study of nuclear weapons issues.
Today, the incentive to become experts in nuclear matters is much reduced. Yet,
the nuclear threat has not gone away. As has been underscored by the events of
September 11, 2001 and their aftermath, it is time to build a new community of
scholars and practitioners trained in strategic analysis, nuclear policy issues,
the roles of nuclear weapons, the regional and global realities that comprise
today's nuclear threats, and in traditional and prospective responses ranging
from arms control to nonproliferation to counter-proliferation. The principal
goals of the program are: to attract and train the next generation of strategic
thinkers to address the public policy issues of tomorrow about nuclear threats;
to produce new incentives for interdisciplinary research in the field of public
policy and nuclear threats; to provide students with access to organizations and
individuals engaged in nuclear policy development at home and abroad; to develop
career opportunities at such organizations for post-doctoral employment; and,
ultimately to provide the expertise the United States needs to develop sound
nuclear policies in a changing international environment. Another important goal
is to create an interdisciplinary and intergenerational community of scholars
who can learn from one another and create synergies across disciplines that last
well beyond this program. The IGERT program is designed to achieve these goals.
Two groups of approximately ten UC doctoral dissertation students will be chosen
by statewide competitive selection, and supported fully for five years each.
IGERT Fellows will be supported for one of these years by their respective UC
departments that will provide research or teaching assistantships in nuclear
policy-related topics. IGCC will work with science, social science, and
humanities departments to recruit new Ph.D. students for this program.
Applications will be reviewed and Fellows selected by a statewide
interdisciplinary subcommittee of the IGCC steering committee. IGCC, Ph.D.
programs on the UC campuses, Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National
Laboratories, and senior mentors will team to conduct this program. Students
will receive their fundamental Ph.D. education in their home departments; this
education will be enhanced by a series of required IGERT training activities: a
four-week summer training seminar on the historical and current security
implications of nuclear weapons both globally and regionally, including their
strategic and political roles, arms control, nonproliferation, missile defense,
terrorism, and related technology issues; a research or teaching assistantship;
two-month summer internship at Lawrence Livermore or Los Alamos National
Laboratory; an overseas fellowship in Asia or Europe; a summer policy internship
at a governmental or non-governmental organization in Washington, DC; and
monthly interdisciplinary video-conferences focused on contemporary research
issues surrounding nuclear weapons and public policy. Where appropriate and
possible, additional UC students will be invited to participate in IGERT
training activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;