* 0221796
* BE/CBC: Biocomplexity of Marine Stromatolites: Biogeochemical Cycling, Microbial Population Dynamics, and Mineral Formation in a Three Billion Year Old Ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Pieter Visscher, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,013,097.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Modern marine stromatolites are a highly organized, yet
compact ecosystem that is uniquely appropriate for studies of coupled biosphere-
geosphere interactions. Results from recently funded NSF research indicate that
these living examples of Earth's oldest macrofossi s form by repeated
transitions among three distinct microbial communities, whose predominance
appears to be driven by interactions between microbial population dynamics,
biogeochemical cycling, and mineral deposition. The compact nature of this
ecosystem allows components to be sampled, experimentally manipulated, and
modeled, such that the sensitivity of the system to internal and external
perturbations can be evaluated and biogeochemical cycling and minera formation
can be quantified. It is thus an ideal model system for investigating functional
linkages between microbes, minerals, and the environment and for addressing
fundamental questions such as "what is the role of biodiversity in
biogeochemical processes and what are the effects of geochemical processes on
species richness ?how do microorganisms modify and adapt to their abiotic
environment? what constrains a seemingly 'equilibrium 'state and what are the
forces that produce ecosystem transitions?" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will use diverse but highly complementary methodologies to investigate
the complexity of the stromatolite ecosystem over spatial scales ranging from
single cells (m) to kilometers and temporal scales ranging from minutes to
seasonal and multi-annual. The program adopts a powerful approach to the
investigation of linkages between 'populations processes and products' through
integration of field studies of&lt;br/&gt;natural systems, experimental studies,
and quantitative modeling. Our studies of microbial populations will focus on
composition, abundance, and distribution of species in four main functional
groups (cyanobacteria, aerobic heterotrophs, sulfate reducers, and sulfide
oxidizers) using a variety of techniques including 16S rDNA, Terminal
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism analysis, and fluorescent in situ
hybridization coupled to confocal microscopy. A combination of field
measurements and flume experiments will determine the response of populations,
metabolic rates, and chemical gradients to variations in hydrodynamic
conditions, sedimentation and light; chemical gradients will be measured in situ
using microelectrodes. As exopolymeric secretions (EPS) are likely to regulate
mass transport and so the exchange within the stromatolites, EPS structure and
composition will be measured using a variety of techniques, including Fourier-
Transform Infrared and Raman spectroscopies, atomic force microscopy, and GC-MS;
solute flux will be measured using benthic chambers. Effects of EPS properties
and elemental cycling on mineral deposition will be determined through
construction of C, O and S budgets, complemented by studies of Ca 2+ binding,
microscopy analyses to define micrometer-scale relationships between activities
and microstructure, and culture studies of precipitation by species. Flume and
field studies will determine critical erosion thresholds and erosion rates of
emergent macrostructures. Finally, we will look for 'fingerprints'of microbial
and environmental processes preserved in the rock record through analyses of
stable isotopes, morphometric parameters, and intracrystalline organic matter.
Ultimately, a full understanding of the stromatolite system will rely on
development of quantitative models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three separate modeling
approaches, which relate to different aspects of the stromatolite ecosystem,
will be developed -(1)a diagenetic model, which will quantify elemental
cycles;(2) a simulation model, which will quantify the interactions between
elemental cycles, populations of microbes and community status in the
stromatolite and (3) a stage-based matrix model, which will attempt to relate
environmental components to the distribution of, and transitions among, the
microbial assemblages at the level of the ecosystem. These models will serve as
critical tools for understanding the reciprocal interactions between elemental
cycles, microbial populations, and sedimentation in past,present, and future
environments on earth and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities
that foster the integration of education and multidisciplinary research will
include (1) active participation of undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates in field and lab studies, and an international student
exchange program (2) expansion and maintenance of the RIBS public web site; and
(3)a field guide to Bahamian stromatolites for the general public. Participation
by four European scientists will establish global networks for continuing
collaborative studies in the emerging field of geomicrobiology.&lt;br/&gt;