* 0221357
* Data Centric Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jennifer Hou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2006
* USD 540,000.00

Recent technological advances have led to the emergence of sensor networks that
integrate small, low-power sensors and actuators with limited on-board
processing and wireless communication capabilities.An example of this type of
sensor networks is homeland security at airports, bridges, and public buildings:
a large number of low cost lightweight wireless devices is scattered in a
geographic region and form a surveillance and communication network.Its major
function is to locate and track unusual sounds in the region.These wireless
devices are equipped with acoustic sensors and can locate a sound wave.They have
to organize themselves dynamically, and convey the location information within a
time frame that allows the controller to take necessary action, even in the case
of poor spatial distribution of sensor devices, wireless/acoustic interference,
and malicious destruction. Out-of-date information is of no use, as the object
that was tracked may no longer be in the vicinity when the information is
received.This presents a key technical challenge in cooperative engagement how
to effectively coordinate and control sensors over an unreliable wireless ad hoc
network and is the focus of this proposal. Specifically, the researchers propose
an integrated framework in which a comprehensive solution can be designed with a
set of component solutions to achieve the targeted goals.Then the resesarchers
propose to carry out tasks along the following five research avenues: A unified
framework for designing, and reasoning the effectiveness of, sensor networks:
the researchers survey several application scenarios of data-centric,
application-oriented sensor networks, define an abstract problem for information
dissemination in sensor networks, and identify a set of requirements and
objectives. Then, the researchers configure the required functionalities into
modules in/across layers, and figure in their functional dependency.Under this
unified framework, one can design protocols specific to a layer without
negligence of their interaction, and compatibility, with protocols in other
layers.Also, cross layer issues can be identified and appropriately addressed.
Hierarchical cluster formation and routing: Due to the unique characteristics of
data-centric sensor networks, the researchers believe topology in the form of
hierarchical cluster structure offer the greatest performance benefits.Also, as
the information collected by various sensors may be correlated, redundant,
and/or of different qualities, this structure facilitates digests of sensor
data. The researchers propose to develop, and rigorously prove its optimality
of, a decentralized cluster formation scheme that captures and utilizes these
unique characteristics. The researchers will also exercise motion control of
mobile routers/base stations to effectively recover network partition and/or to
relieve communication bottlenecks. Topology control and power management: The
researchers consider, in conjunction with the hierarchical cluster formation
scheme, how to exercise power management so as to maintain network connectivity,
optimize spatial network reuse, and mitigate MAC-level interference.This is
achieved by (i) powering off sensors that are not relay nodes when there are no
events; and (ii) devising strategies for setting (a set of) minimal transmission
powers when sensors are not evenly distributed.Again tasks in this avenue will
be carried out with a rigorous theoretical base. MAC design for timely
dissemination of delay-sensitive data: The researchers address several medium
access issues: (i) how to mitigate medium contention to improve short-term and
long-term throughput fairness, (ii) how to incorporate well-grounded scheduling
policies in MAC to achieve temporal QoS within/between clusters, and (iii) how
to tradeoff throughput for delay when real-time messages are involved. Empirical
study with the use of Motes: To validate the design and to empirically study the
overall performance, the researchers will leverage the tiny wireless sensors,
Motes, and construct a sensor network testbed. As Motes are rather limited in
their processing and communication capability, the researchers will integrate
Motes with MOPS/520 PC104 boards.This is realized by attaching a Mote to the PC
board and use the Mote's serial peripheral interface (originally for synchronous
data transfer between the Atmega 163 processor in Motes and peripheral devices)
for data transfer between the two boards.The researchers will also simulate
acoustic sensor behaviors by using the sound cards and microphone on the PC104
board.With such a sensor network testbed in place, the researchers will be able
to implement and experiment with the proposed protocols and algorithms. The
researchers plan to simulate homeland surveillance where acoustic sensors can
give clues to guards who watch close circuit TVs.