* 0221884
* High Performance P/M Components Conference; Coimbra, Portugal; April 28 - May 3, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Francis Froes, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2003
* USD 6,000.00

This grant supports the International Conference on High Performance P/M
Components, to be held in April 28 to May 3, 2002 in Coimbra, Portugal. The
object of the meeting is to provide a forum for discussions in the area of
powder and particulate materials. Senior scientists and engineers from the
United States and Europe, and from other parts of the world will participate. In
addition, it is intended to encourage young professors and students to attend
and funds are sought through this proposal. Both conventional powder metallurgy
such as pressing and sintering for production of cost-effective components for
use in various transportation and energy industries, as well as new and cutting
edge particulate materials such as nanotechnology for structural and device
uses, are covered. The conference is organized with United Engineering
Foundation with mainly invited overview presentations by experts followed by
shorter more specific papers and posters solicited and selected from submitted
abstracts. The conference will thus provide a forum for young scientists and
research students to learn the past and current aspects related to particulate
materials. The NSF funds are used to pay for travel and registration expenses
for the appropriate personnel to attend and participate in the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference addresses the production of high
performance powder metallurgy components using traditional and new techniques
that include rapid solidification, mechanical alloying, thermal spraying and
sputtering, cold spraying, vapor deposition, laser forming, metal injection
molding, hot isostatic pressing, high strain rate compaction, loose sintering
and powder forging, etc. In addition, new grades of alloys with higher densities
and enhanced behavior will be discussed. The conference is expected to have over
l150 participants from different countries; about 120 participants from Europe,
30 from the USA, and 20 from other countries. This conference will allow
Portuguese researchers to present their work on powder metallurgy, and hear of
developments in other parts of the world, and this will probably give rise to
new scientific collaborations between Portugal and the United States. Because of
the format that includes mainly invited talks followed by shorter more specific
papers, the young scientists and students will have an excellent opportunity to
develop new ideas on the related subject.&lt;br/&gt;