* 0221602
* Post-natal Development of the Coronary Arterial Tree
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Ghassan Kassab, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 09/30/2003
* USD 63,444.00

9978199&lt;br/&gt;Kassab&lt;br/&gt;There is no doubt that knowledge of the
adaptation mechanisms in structure and function during normal growth is
important in human health. The objective of this proposal is to gain a better
understanding of the adaptation mechanisms in the structure, zero-stress state
and function of the coronary arteries during normal cardiac growth. The specific
aims are: 1) To obtain a complete set of morphometric data on the branching
pattern and vascular geometry of the coronary arterial tree during cardiac
growth and to demonstrate some of the hemodynamic applications of the
morphometric data; 2) To determine the changes in the stress-strain relationship
of the epicardial coronary arteries during cardiac growth and development, with
reference to the zero-stress state; and 3) To obtain a complete set of
morphometric data of the micro-structural components of the epicardial coronary
arteries during cardiac growth and to correlate the structural components to the
hemodynamic and mechanical data of Specific Aims 1 and 2. The branching pattern
and vascular geometry of the coronary arterial trees will be measured with the
elastomer-casting method. The order number, diameter, length, and connectivity
matrix will be measured for all orders of vessels of the right coronary artery,
left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries. The vessel wall
structural remodeling will be studied with light and electron microscopes. The
changes in the volume density of arterial components, including intima, smooth
muscle cells, fibroblasts, collagenous bundles, and elastic laminae will be
determined. The remodeling of the zero-stress state (the state of the organ when
the external loads are removed) of the epicardial coronary arteries will be
determined by first cutting the arteries into short ring-shaped segments
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the blood vessel, and then making a
radial cut. This procedure causes the ring to open into a sector whose internal
and external circumferential lengths will be measured and used as reference
parameters at the zero-stress for the analysis of arterial mechanics. This
research will lay a structural and mechanical foundations for the study of
tissue engineering of the blood vessels during growth and development.
&lt;br/&gt;