* 0221058
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A New Stage in Global Innovation Networks? Why Multinational Corporations Locate Advanced Global Innovation Centers in Beijing and Shanghai
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Michael Storper, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

For many decades, a fundamental tenant of development economics is that
developing countries have great difficulty becoming creators of technology. This
assumption has been based on the belief that multinational corporations (MNCs)
function according to a "locational hierarchy" of global innovation networks,
with "intellectual" activities located in more advanced countries while routine
production is situated in developing countries. Empirical evidence indicates
that these traditional assumptions no longer are viable. In recent years, many
world-class MNCs now are locating advanced research and development (R&D)
centers in Shanghai and Beijing, China. This trend is typified by Microsoft's
establishment of its first academic-style R&D center in Beijing in 1998, three
years before it established a similar center in Silicon Valley in 2001. Once
principally a routine production site, China appears to have become a "center of
excellence" in global innovation networks. This advanced type of MNC activity
represents not only an important turning point in China's development but a
possible harbinger of developments that may occur in other large developing
countries, thereby transforming the processes of globalization and economic
development. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the
processes that have been evident in China. The focal questions of the project
are: Why are MNCs locating their R&D centers in developing countries like China?
How can a developing country like China integrate itself at the highest level of
global innovation networks? An ancillary question to be examined is: Why have
MNC R&D centers tended to concentrate in Beijing (a highly controlled political
city) rather than Shanghai (a commercialized global city)? The doctoral
candidate will conduct case studies of a set of MNCs that have established R&D
centers in China. She will conduct surveys of company officials, and she will
undertake statistical analyses of economic data.

This project will contribute to the understanding of how developing cities
become integrated into global innovation networks. This study will consider the
increasingly important role of global (exogenous) factors in the study of
knowledge-based development of city-regions. Moreover, it will explore the
thesis a developing nation's strategy for knowledge-based economic development
no longer should rely solely on local and national (endogenous) factors. This
project will consider the relationship of local, national, and global variables,
especially in developing countries or transitional economies. Among the broader
impacts of the project are practical insights regarding how cities and regions
can mobilize its knowledge assets (human capital, specialized industrial
clusters, local business networks, enabling industrial policies, and/or skilled
labor policies) to bargain with both the central government and the MNCs to
improve its competitiveness in the global economy. Understanding the current
direction of extensions of global innovation networks and the ways in which
cities and regions can cultivate and capitalize on these processes will provide
policy makers and investors alike with the tools necessary to support and
maintain more dynamic forms of economic growth. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.