* 0221247
* Is There an Ocean Primary Production Paradox(OP3)?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,675,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0221247&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary
production and remineralization in oligotrophic ocean waters like those around
Bermuda are phenomena of central importance in the ocean carbon-cycle and figure
prominently in climate change impact modeling. Geochemical constraints on
primary production at Bermuda, characterized by annual and longer time-scales
and based on three fundamentally different systems, lead to quantitatively
consistent estimates of new, net community and export production. This agreement
between the three types of primary production would at first seem to be expected
on such time-scales, but leads to the basic "Redfield Paradox ": nutrients
advected or mixed upward into the euphotic zone must carry with them an
associated oxygen debt (AOU) and dissolved inorganic carbon sufficient to negate
largely the observed seasonal photosynthetic oxygen buildup and carbon drawdown.
An exhaustive consideration of various explanations and scenarios that can be
offered fail to explain the observations -- a dilemma here referred to as the
"Ocean Primary Production Paradox (OP3)".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will re-examine the OP3
by simultaneously and definitively measuring all three geochemical systems over
a period of three to four years. These three systems are, specifically, euphotic
zone oxygen production, aphotic zone oxygen consumption, and nutrient flux-gauge
determinations. The euphotic zone oxygen system will be constrained by the time-
series measurement of the full suite of noble gases (He-Xe) plus O2 and N2,with
emphasis on precision measurements of O2 and Ar (to 0.1%),the latter as a
biogenic analog of oxygen. The other gases will be used to more completely
constrain and refine the air-sea gas exchange and upper ocean model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from addressing fundamental problem in ocean
biogeochemistry, this work is expected to have considerably broader impact in
the field of ocean geochemistry by providing the oceanographic community with
new sampling technology (the noble gas sampler) that can be used in a broad
variety of biogeochemical problems. The design and expertise will be made freely
available to those who request it. &lt;br/&gt;