* 0221126
* GOALI: Double-Gate Silicon on Insulator (SOI) Devise Consideration for Nano-Scale Design
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Dimitrios Ioannou, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

0221126 Ioannou

This is a proposal to carry out research on the interaction between device
physics and circuit design using nano-scale double-gate SQI CMOS technology.
Fully depleted, double-gate (FD-DG) S0I is currently recognized as the most
suitable SOI version for nano-scale integration. Published research has focused
on the physics of the device in isolation, in an effort to establish and examine
the many attractive advantages, and connect them with the device design.
However, viewed from the circuit point of view, more often than not these
advantages come at the expense of higher capacitances and leakage currents,
which (if unchecked) might degrade the circuit performance and reliability. It
will be the central theme of the proposed research to seek out the subtleties of
the devise design most relevant to circuit implementations, with the ultimate
goal to skew the device design space towards better circuit performance, and
suggest suitable circuit alternatives that derive maximum benefit from the use
of DG devices. For example, it is not known a priori that the enhanced drive
current of the DG transistor will make up for its enhanced capacitance, and one
needs to examine the circuit topology for each of the DG structures available.
Since DG structures suffer less from short channel effects (SCE) and supply
double the current, thicker oxides can be used, which also lower the gate
capacitance. Floating body effects (FBE) are thought to be inactive in DG
structures; FBEs might, however, be triggered by deliberate (or otherwise) bias
conditions, for example by inducing an overpopulation of holes in the body of an
nMOS device. DG devices are currently been vigorously researched and evolving,
and are commonly categorized as symmetric (SDG) and asymmetric (ADG). The SDG is
a "normally on" device and for this and other reasons the favor is currently
with the ADG device. Rather than modify the SDG device at the expense of
complicated processing, the possibility will be investigated of using this
intrinsically on structure as a load device for DG-SOI based ratioed logic, with
ADG drivers.