* 0221562
* A Systems Theoretic Approach to Robust Active Vision
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Octavia Camps, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2006
* USD 240,004.00

Active vision - the confluence of control and computer vision - is positioned in
an optimal situation to address the needs of a growing segment of the
population. Aware environments would enable elderly people to carry on
independent lives. Computers that interpret facial expressions to obtain cues to
user confusion or frustration can lead to simpler interfaces. Finally,
intelligent activity surveillance systems capable of detecting suspicious
activities can substantially improve the ability to prevent tragedies. Clearly
these applications would not be possible without the use of feedback to
compensate for uncertainty and errors, stemming for instance, from poorly
calibrated cameras, blurring or only partially determined feature
correspondences between images. Indeed, computer vision and control are already
linked through many successful proof-of-concept systems developed at several
research institutions, including Penn State. However, there is a consensus in
both the computer vision and control communities that, in spite of the implicit
power of visual control, there are relatively few instances where these
techniques have been successfully applied in unstructured environments. This can
be traced, to a large extent; to theft-agility (i.e. lack of robustness) of
active vision systems designed using classical methods.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal is motivated by preliminary work by the Co-PIs
strongly indicating that this fragility can be addressed by appealing to a
common systems theoretic substrate to make the interconnection between the
different aspects of the problem stronger and more direct. Specifically, the
objectives of the proposed research are:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Development of a
paradigm for systematically designing provably robust active vision systems.
This paradigm will address the computer vision and control aspects of the
problem within a common systems-theoretic framework, exploiting their synergism
to optimize performance. Examples of the advantages offered by this approach
include:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(i) Integration of robust identification/model
(in)validation based predictions into target localization algorithms to improve
robustness and reduce search time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(ii) Robust
identification of models that combine computer vision and dynamical effects, as
well as the corresponding uncertainty structure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(iii)
Controller design that exploits these models and the associated uncertainty
structure to robustly optimize performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Comprehensive
experimental validation and performance characterization of the resulting
systems, using several pan and tilt units and dedicated image processing
hardware currently available in our lab.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key point of
the research is the realization that the problems of robustly tracking an object
in a sequence of frames and robust performance analysis, share an underlying
common fact: they are equivalent to analyzing the existence of a bounded L2 to
L2 operator that satisfies certain interpolation conditions. While the details
are somewhat different in each case, this allows for developing a common set of
tools, by appealing to the rich language of convex analysis to recast these
problems into an LMI optimization form.