* 0221974
* Continued Mathematical Modeling of Seafloor Hydrothermal Systems:  Fracture Mechanics, Heat Transfer, and the Evolution of Permeability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Leonid Germanovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 08/31/2006
* USD 486,806.00

This award is an Accomplishment-Based Renewal for the PIs to continue to develop
mathematical models of seafloor hydrothermal processes. The award will support
modeling studies divided into two main scientific themes: Stability and Temporal
Variability. The models will be strongly linked to observations, and, hopefully,
the model predictions will guide subsequent field efforts. The Stability theme
addresses fundamental aspects of heat transfer across the basal boundary layer.
The main objective is to develop a fracture mechanics model that yields heat and
mass transfer in ridge crest systems that is consistent with observations and
that addresses the stability and propagation of fractures at the base of the
hydrothermal system. The Temporal Variability theme addresses processes of: (a)
permeability evolution resulting from mixing between hot deep-circulating
hydrothermal fluids and cooler, shallowly circulating seawater and (b)
hydrothermal system response to earthquakes. Development of these models will be
closely linked to various data sets including thermal and isotopic data from the
EPR 9- 10N, the Souther EPR, and the Juan de Fuca Ridge. The Broader
Implications of this research center on the training and education of both
undergraduate students, suport of the RIDGE 2000 Integrated Studies (IS)
program, and broa dissemination of research results.