* 0221055
* Evolution of Biogenic Exopolymer Concentrations and Interaction with Physical Structure in Arctic Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* John Wettlaufer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 562,444.00

Krembs&lt;br/&gt;0221055&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exopolymeric substances (EPS)
comprise a suite of microbially produced, structurally diverse polysaccharides
that play important roles in organismal physiology, aquatic ecology, and the
oceanic "biological carbon pump". High concentrations of EPS are known to
significantly alter the physical properties of water containing habitats as
diverse as rocks, aquifers and sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPS have long
been observed in high concentrations in polar seas. They have recently been
observed in high concentrations in arctic sea ice with an unknown variable,
poorly understood balance of microbial production in the ice and loss via
biochemical conversion and export at the ice-water interface. The PIs have also
observed a relationship between EPS concentration and sea ice salinity, which
indicates a fundamentally new and prospectively consequential interaction
between biological processes and the physical structure of Arctic sea
ice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The difficulty of separating temporal from spatial
variability in ice core observations impedes understanding of environmental
forcing of the balance of EPS production and losses. Neither can ice core
methods illuminate the key process of biomass incorporation at the ice-water
interface, nor the mechanism (and thus environmental sensitivity) underlying the
covariation of EPS concentration and salinity. Thus effects of changing arctic
climate on marine ecology, carbon cycling, and sea ice properties via EPS
production cannot be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant sets out to
investigate the environmental factors leading to high EPS production and
interaction with arctic sea ice physical properties using a combination of field
observations and theory for sea ice growth. The group will collect and analyze
fast ice core samples over the course of three ice seasons to track the
evolution of the autotrophic community and the organic material pool. They will
apply theory for the growth of sea ice to investigate the mechanism(s) of salt
retention and biological influence on ice physical properties, and develop and
apply nondestructive, in situ fluorometric measurements of Chlorophyll a in the
water column and in the ice to observe the key process of biomass incorporation
at the ice-water interface. This work will build a basis for automated in situ
acquisition of time series of the dynamic of sea ice biota across the ice-water
interface, which will be essential for future investigations of large scale
polar marine ecological changes in response to varying climate.&lt;br/&gt;