* 0221181
* Isotopic Constraints on the Origin of Bioaccumulating Halogenated Organic Compounds in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Christopher Reddy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 378,025.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-01221181&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
presence of thousands of halogen and especially chlorine containing secondary
metabolites in marine organisms has long been documented by marine natural
products chemists. However, the presence in marine biota of many halogenated
organic compounds very close in structure to specific man-made chemicals leaves
their ultimate source in question. A multi-isotopic abundance measurement
approach is suggested as a means of differentiating anthropogenic halogenated
organic compounds (HOCs) from those arising naturally in the marine environment.
This investigation seeks to measure the compound specific isotopic 14C abundance
of several HOCs whose anthropogenic vs natural origin is uncertain, using the
expected isotopic depletion of any fossil fuel derived carbon implied for
anthropogenically sourced compounds. Further source discrimination may be
afforded by consideration of the stable chlorine isotopic ratios of HOCs. Stable
isotopic chlorine (d 37Cl) ratios, as yet only preliminarily studied for this
purpose, may be expected to exhibit larger, or simply different, chlorine
isotope effects during enzymically controlled biochlorinations compared to those
observed during industrial synthesis. A dual isotope approach may be
additionally useful in unraveling both the complex sources, widespread
distribution and chemical transformations that these molecules may undergo in
the natural environment. &lt;br/&gt;Proposed activities to be undertaken include
graduate student training, employing unique analytical capabilities and
infrastructure and enabling continuance of international collaborations on a
problem of high scientific interest. The recalcitrance or reactivity of HOCs in
the marine environment has important implications for societal concern and
policy as to the environmental persistence, bioaccumulative properties and toxic
effects of HOCs in the environment, in marine life, and in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;