* 0221140
* Activity-Dependent Growth Cone Properties
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Gregory Lnenicka, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 327,984.00

Lay Summary Experience plays an important role in the development, maintenance,
and modification of the nervous system. Activity-dependent changes in the
nervous system are responsible for the strong effect of early experience on
adult behavior and the modifications in behavior (learning) that continue
throughout life. A major goal of brain research is to understand how electrical
activity influences the properties of individual brain cells (neurons) and their
interconnections (synapses) . It is very difficult to study single neurons and
synapses in the vertebrate brain; this is much easier in the simpler
invertebrate nervous system. In the crayfish neuromuscular system, single axons
(elongated portion of the neuron), which form synaptic connections on the
muscle, can be studied in the living animal or in a culture dish. Here axons
with different levels of electrical activity develop differences in synaptic
structure and function. The proposed research examines the activity-dependent
development of intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i) regulation and the formation of
synaptic structures at the axon terminal: both of these are important for the
release of neurotransmitter, the signal used at synapses. The regulation of
[Ca2+]i is very important since [Ca2+]i also controls gene regulation, as well
as neuronal growth and death. The developmental effect of electrical activity
will be examined by removing the crayfish nerve cord and studying regenerating
(developing) axons in a culture dish over a period of days. Pharmacological
agents will be used to alter electrical activity, calcium influx, and perturb
intracellular signal-transduction pathways. Calcium regulation will then be
examined at the growing tip of the axon (growth cone) using fluorescent calcium
indicators and electrophysiological techniques, and synaptic structures will be
visualized with electron microscopy. To determine whether similar activity-
dependent changes occur in mature axons, the electrical activity of axons will
be altered in an intact, adult crayfish, and the axon terminal will again be
examined. Findings from these studies will add to our knowledge of the basic
mechanisms responsible for nervous system development. In particular, these
results will further define the role of experience in specifying neuronal
structure and function, and the range of adaptation of the nervous system to
altered use.

