* 0221748
* Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE), Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles (CBC):  Complex Molecular to Global Interactions and Feedbacks in the Marine Dimethylsulfide (DMS) Cycle
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 1,716,238.00

Matrai&lt;br/&gt;0221748&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean ecosystems are part of a
complex geophysical-biogeochemical web that transforms matter and energy and
sets the conditions for life. Feedback between different parts of this web is
mediated to a significant degree by the exchange of radiatively important,
biogenic trace gases. One such feedback involves marine plankton, the volatile
sulfur compound dimethylsulfide (DMS), and global climate. In this feedback, DMS
produced by marine phytoplankton and the food web enters the troposphere and is
oxidized there to sulfate particles, which influence cloud albedo and,
consequently, climate. Large-scale climate change, in turn, affects
phytoplankton abundance and food web processes in the oceans and thereby closes
the feedback loop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength-and even the sign-of this
feedback loop is still unresolved, largely because of the exceedingly complex
network of biogeochemical and ecological processes that affect the concentration
of DMS. Fascinating new interactions in this cycle are still being discovered
with some regularity, but mechanistic and prognostic mathematical models of this
system have yet to incorporate many of these developments. Furthermore, there
have been no field studies in which all of the relevant rates and concentrations
in the marine DMS cycle have simultaneously been measured, nor have complex
interactions or measurements been included for important geophysical or chemical
parameters, hampering the ability of models to accurately map spatial and
temporal variations in surface DMS concentrations. This effort will: 1) Measure
and model all known relevant fluxes of concentrations of DMS and related species
during intensive field studies in two ocean biomes: a subtropical gyre and the
Southern Ocean; 2) Develop a global marine DMS model built upon the proposed
field measurements and other existing measurements and models; and 3) Use such a
model to evaluate the potential for feedbacks between climate and the marine DMS
cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DMS biogeochemical system represents a
tractable research subject that can aid in understanding the complexities
involved in biosphere-geosphere regulation at the regional and global scales.
The DMS system also serves as an excellent, research- accessible model for food-
web dependent biogeochemical processes. This investigation of the complex
controls on the DMS cycle should shed light on the critical factors influencing
the ecological distributions of organisms in the sea and the biogeochemical
cycles of major nutrient elements. Advancing the knowledge of DMS
biogeochemistry will allow better predictions of the local, regional and global
scale responses to anticipated shifts of climate, and provide valuable insights
into the connections within the biogeochemical-geophysical web that sustains
life on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;