* 0221599
* IGERT:  Working Forest in the Tropics
* EHR,DGE
* 12/15/2002,05/31/2011
* Francis Putz, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 05/31/2011
* USD 3,315,547.00

Interdisciplinary skills and knowledge are required to address issues related to
the use and conservation of tropical forests that do not enjoy protected-area
status ("working forests"). This IGERT builds on strengths at the University of
Florida to construct a cutting-edge program that will serve as a model for how
doctoral research and training can effectively and ethically contribute to
solving critical problems facing tropical working forests. The research goals
are to (1) analyze tradeoffs and complementarities among working forest options;
(2) clarify how biophysical, social, economic and political constraints and
their interactions influence the effectiveness of different kinds of working
forests for conservation and development; and (3) measure the impacts of
capacity-building interventions designed to improve forest management and
promote conservation. The methods will be integrative across a wide range of
disciplines and explicitly comparative across four tropical forest regions
(Lowland Bolivia; Acre, Brazil; Eastern Amazonia, Brazil; and the tri-national
Maya Forest). The training program includes (1) cross-disciplinary requirements,
consisting of courses in ecology and social science, history/culture of the
research regions, and appropriate language proficiency; (2) integrative
coursework, including Interdisciplinary Research Methods, Leadership and
Communication Skills, Tropical Conservation and Development and Land-Use/Land-
Cover Analysis, a Working Forests Clinic, and a Working Forests of the Tropics
seminar and field course; and (3) complementary learning/teaching opportunities,
including site visits within the four regions, annual conferences, retreats and
workshops, an IGERT student group, internships, service as mentors, and sharing
research results with stakeholders. This IGERT will (1) foster research that is
more responsive to real world problems due to interdisciplinary training and
strong partner linkages; (2) provide a better match between knowledge and skills
developed by graduates and job market demands; and (3) develop a network of
effective leaders, trained for the challenges of conservation and intensified
use of tropical working forests.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.