* 0221402
* The Florida A&amp;M University Computer Science, Engineering, Engineering Technology and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Edward Jones, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

The faculty at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University proposes to
continue their NSF Computer Science, Engineering, Engineering Technology and
Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program to provide an additional thirty talented
students, who are majoring in these disciplines, with individual scholarships of
up to $3,125 per year. Award amounts will be based upon academic achievement and
will provide supplementary income to students with financial need. Their
participating major departments are electrical, mechanical, civil, chemical,
industrial engineering, electrical engineering technology, construction
engineering technology, computer and information sciences, biological and
agricultural engineering systems and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their
CSEMS program will also provide scholars with the necessary support and
experiences to be successful and competitive in graduate schools or in careers
of the CSEM disciplines. The program will continue to assist the CSEM scholars
for two years following the receipt of the academic degree to assure a
successful transition to graduate programs or career paths. CSEM Scholars will
be selected in Spring 2002 and will commence activities in Fall 2002. Their
program includes faculty advising mentoring as well as technical professional
development seminar series. In addition they provide summer internships in
industrial or governmental setting and graduate school/career counseling and
placement. These program enhancement activities and scholarship funds are
expected to enable their CSEMS Scholars to complete the degree requirements
within the appropriate time frame as determined by the academic level, up to
four years.&lt;br/&gt;