* 0221908
* BE/CBC: The Vertical Organization of Energy, Carbon, and Nutrient Cycles in an Ultraoligotrophic Ecosystem: A Workshop on Crater Lake, Oregon
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Robert Collier, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2004
* USD 46,540.00

This award will support, under the aegis of the Biocomplexity in the Environment
initiative, a conference at Oregon State University to examine the vertical
organization of energy, carbon, and nutrient cycles in Crater Lake, Oregon. The
unusual properties of this ultra-oligotrophic lake result in the vertical
stratification of the ecosystem reminiscent of pelagic marine systems. Crater
Lake provides a natural laboratory to study the coupling of biological
processes, element cycles, and the physics of the environment.

Specifically, the award will provide some organizational support for the
workshop and travel and subsistence support for experienced and new
investigators, as well as students, to participate in presentations and
discussions that synthesize the latest scientific understanding of Crater Lake
and nutrient cycling. Discussions will also involve how best to proceed in the
future to increase our knowledge of such ecosystems.

Crater Lake, the deepest lake in the United States (i.e., 590 m), is a closed-
basin caldera lake formed after the explosive eruption of Mt. Mazama, ~7700
years ago. The lake, which rests at an elevation of 1882 meters in the Cascade
Mountains of south central Oregon, is surrounded by steep caldera walls and has
a very small watershed. There are no major inlet streams and no surface outlet.
External inflows of nutrients to the lake are low and dominated by precipitation
and dry deposition from the atmosphere. Thus, the lake is ultra-oligotrophic and
one of the clearest bodies of water on the earth. In spite of its great depth,
vertical mixing is relatively rapid (i.e., 3-5 years) and recycled nitrogen is
mixed upwards from the hypolimnion representing the largest source of this
limiting nutrient.

Crater Lake is the centerpiece of one of the premier National Parks in the
United States and it provides a unique setting to directly engage the public
with compelling educational experiences demonstrating the function of complex
aquatic ecosystems and the methods of interdisciplinary field research. It
offers a unique resource for the study of the interaction of atmospheric forcing
and land surface hydrology with biogeochemical cycles in aquatic ecosystems.