* 0221161
* Collaborative Research: A Multiple Tracer Approach to Evaluate Groundwater Discharge into River Dominated Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Brent McKee, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2006
* USD 129,604.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0220215 / OCE-0221161 / OCE-0217164

In this project researchers at East Carolina University, Tulane University, and
the University of Miami will attempt to a comprehensive approach to allow a
quantitative estimate of groundwater discharge and associated dissolved
constituents to continental shelf waters. A number of recent studies have shown
that he transport of groundwater into coastal zones may be a significant process
in the geochemical, nutrient, and carbon budgets of many marine nearshore
waters. This project will address the manner in which we may evaluate
interactions between groundwater and surface water a major river-dominated
margin, the Mississippi River delta.

The research team will develop and apply a novel multiple-tracer approach
involving the use of 222Rn/ 226Ra, 4He/3He/tritium, and short-lived radium
isotopes as natural tracers of groundwater flow to examine the margin adjacent
to the Mississippi River. Water samples will be collected from land-based
groundwater wells near the Louisiana coast, deep porewaters via Kasten core, and
surface waters from the lower Mississippi and adjacent continental shelf
throughout the project. To evaluate the connection between groundwater inputs
and surface water tracer inventories, we team will construct a balance of all
possible inputs and outputs of these natural tracers.. This field-based research
will be used to develop and constrain a numerical hydrologic model for the study
area. Model results will be compared to estimates of groundwater flow obtained
from geochemical modeling.

