* 0221265
* STEMTEC II - Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Teacher Education Collaborative FollowOn Grant
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Morton Sternheim, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2006
* USD 705,000.00

The Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Teacher Education
Collaborative (STEMTEC) is an NSF Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher
Preparation (CETP) involving the University of Massachusetts-Amherst in
partnership with Amherst, Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, and Smith Colleges,
Greenfield, Holyoke, and Springfield Technical Community Colleges, and local
school districts. STEMTEC accomplishments include the revision of mainstream
courses for science and math majors who are potential teachers, faculty
development to enable the adoption of student-active teaching strategies,
alternative assessment, and collaborative group work, and early teaching
experiences for preservice students. New science and mathematics teacher
preparation transfer programs were developed for community college students and
a post-baccalaureate summer/fall secondary certification option was created. A
follow-on project is supporting a comprehensive summative evaluation of STEMTEC,
emphasizing the outcomes of STEMTEC efforts in K-12 schools. The evaluation
effort focuses on the extent to which STEMTEC has improved the preparation of
K-12 math and science teachers, recruited students into math and science
teaching, and supported new math and science teachers. The project provides an
induction program for new teachers coordinated with district programs and state
and national certification requirements. It includes a teacher collaborative
group, STEM Education Institute programs including Science and Engineering
Saturday Seminars, and a redesigned UMass Teacher Education Program that
features an online seminar and a master's program with a discipline research
experience. The project is contributing data to the CETP Core Evaluation effort.