* 0221100
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organizational Responses to State Failure: Small Russian Firms and Their Attempts to Cope with the Strange New World
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Meyer Kestnbaum, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2003
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0221100&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Meyer Kestnbaum&lt;br/&gt; Elena
Vinogradova&lt;br/&gt; University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major most profound changes to
occur in Europe or Asia in the past century was the fall of communism and the
subsequent transition to capitalism of the former Soviet countries. This
Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant examines organizational adaptation and
change in business practices resulting from the changing role of the Russian
state in its economy. The project focuses on small individual enterprises, and
in particular on relationships between Russian small firms and their trading
partners and the Russian state. In western countries the legal system and public
authorities guarantee property rights and contracts, but in Russian state
enforcement institutions are unable to provide these same protections. The goal
of the study is to specify how the inadequacies of state enforcement affects
business practices among small and medium sized privately owned business firms
in contemporary Russia, what kind of informal enforcement strategies develop,
and to trace the roots of these strategies and the implications they may have
for the building of capitalism in Russia. The dissertation candidate will
interview owners and managers of 72 small and medium-sized firms in St.
Petersburg, Russia. Structured interviews will be used to gather information on
views and practices. This data will be integrated with similar interviews
conducted with owner and managers of 18 small private firms in St. Petersburg as
part of a pilot study.&lt;br/&gt;