* 0221798
* BE/GEN-EN: Genome Sequence and Functional Analysis of an Uncultured Bacterium
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Karen Nelson, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 862,958.00

ABSTRACT

At 80 by 600 microns, Epulopiscium is the largest heterotrophic bacterium that
has been identified to date. It also has the unusual ability to produce multiple
live offspring internally. This project takes an aggressive approach to increase
our understanding of the biology of this organism by determining the complete
genome sequence, and identifying the unique features of Epulopiscium that have
allowed these exceptional bacteria to attain cellular sizes that are orders of
magnitude larger than most bacteria. These analyses will identify genomic and
cellular modifications that may have been employed in the progenitor of all
eukaryotes as a first step toward the development of the contemporary eukaryotic
cell. Comparative analyses with the complete genome sequences of endospore-
forming bacteria will identify sporulation gene homologues in the Epulopiscium
genome that can serve as targets of future analyses to determine the role of
these genes in intracellular offspring production. Finally, this project will
generate a physiological profile of Epulopiscium sp. based on the complete
genome sequence. This component will address how the normal environment of this
species (the guts of surgeonfish) may have enabled the evolution of these life-
style novelties, and serve as a framework for developing culture media to grow
Epulopiscium in the laboratory so that more detailed experiments on this species
can be conducted.

Collaborations, discussions, and data exchange with both domestic and
international groups that are studying Epulopiscium biology, spore-forming
bacteria, and extremely large bacteria will be encouraged. Training and
educational workshops will be held at The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR)
in Rockville, Maryland for these biologists. The project team will make every
attempt to ensure that underrepresented groups are included in the students and
post-doctoral candidates who will be involved for the duration of the proposed
study. Sequence and microarray data will be continuously posted and updated on
our public web site (www.tigr.org).