* 0221968
* Novel Remote Measurements and Analysis of Continuing Lightning Current
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Cummer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 07/31/2006
* USD 280,229.00

This grant enables the installation and operation of equipment at Duke
University for measuring the ULF (ultra low frequency) magnetic field associated
with certain lightning discharges. A strong and long-lasting current sometimes
flows after lightning strokes in the conducting channel they leave behind.
Called the continuing current, it is not well understood but is a detail of the
physics of lightning that is thought to be related to cloud electrification and
to phenomena in the high atmosphere such as sprites and elves. Continuing
currents produce signals in the ULF magnetic field that can be detected as far
as 2000 km from the lightning source. Methods will be developed on this project
to detect continuing currents remotely and infer their duration and waveform
from ULF measurements. The data interpretation will be validated by comparing
measured waveforms of the continuing currents associated with triggered
lightning at a field station in Camp Blanding, Florida, with the waveforms
inferred from ULF measurements. A goal is to continuously record the magnetic
fields from lightning discharges detectable at the Duke ULF station and relate
the measurements to storm structure and meteorological conditions. If the
continuing current turns out to be related to storm severity or stage of
evolution, it may be a useful tool for the study and forecasting of storms.