* 0221053
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Designers and the Production of Public Space in Belleville, Paris, France
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Donald Mitchell, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,585.00

Although community and government leaders often promote programs that can lead
to significant transformations of major parts of cities with terms that use the
word "public" as an adjective, there is not one public but rather many different
groups who have interests in "public space," "public works," and other
manifestations of "public" activity. These different groups can have
fundamentally different views of what is best for "the public," and the ways in
which they organize space and interact with each other can have profound
consequences for the groups individually and for the overall cumulative product.
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award proposal outlined plans
for a doctoral student to examine the transformations of public space in
Belleville, a community in northeastern Paris, France, that now is dominated by
relatively poor, recently arrived immigrants. The student will use ethnographic
approaches to assess how the quarter's public spaces have developed as a result
of the struggles between urban designers and local residents during the major
redevelopment of the quarter in the 1990s. The study will focus on the urban
development process itself, paying particular attention to the determining if
and how immigrant struggles for political and representation have influenced the
design process. The student will conduct archival research and use participant
observation of both local residents and the design offices engaged in
redevelopment efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide valuable
new insights into the ways that different groups conceive of and deal with
public spaces. In particular, it will shed light on the varying ways that urban
designers, who often are situated far away from the sites where their designs
are to be implemented, and residents based directly in affected communities
participate in debates on the political economy of public space. The study will
provide useful information to residents and designers in the study area, and its
insights may have practical benefits for comparable actors in other communities.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;