* 0221837
* BE/GEN-EN: Development of Methods Linking Genomic and Ecological Responses in a Freshwater Sentinel Species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Michael Lynch, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,000,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies assessing the impact of
environmental stresses on ecosystems have typically focused on either the
individual or population level. However, there is growing awareness that to more
fully understand and predict environmental impacts on natural systems, one must
link biological responses to environmental challenges across different levels of
biological organization. The overall goal of this study is to integrate the
genomic and population-level responses of a model sentinel species in aquatic
systems (Daphnia pulex) to specific environmental stresses by developing and
applying genomic tools to ecological studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural
populations of aquatic organisms are known to survive and even adapt to sub-
lethal metal exposures, but little is known about the genomic basis of this
response. Metal exposures typical of those encountered in aquatic environments
will be studied to characterize the physiological, demographic, and adaptive
responses of Daphnia in naive and metal pre-conditioned populations. This
project has the following specific aims: 1) identification and characterization
of the expressed genome of D. pulex and development of genomic resources for
application in ecological studies, 2) characterization of the genomic and
population-level responses of D. pulex to a range of exposure conditions studies
using individual metals as model stressors, 3) assessment of whether the effects
of metal combinations on genomic and population level responses combine in a
linear or non-linear fashion, 4) characterization of genetic and ecological
variation in response to metals among natural populations of Daphnia. A strong
interdisciplinary team of researchers including specialists in ecology,
toxicology, genomics, evolution, and statistics will conduct this research. The
anticipated benefits of this research will be to provide tools for rapid,
sensitive and specific assessment of environmental effects in natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;