* 0221292
* Satellite Remote Sensing of Glaciers and Ice Caps in Svalbard, Eurasian High Arctic
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Gordon Hamilton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/2006
* USD 182,397.00

Hamilton 0221292

Recent compilations of climate-related observations show that important changes
are now underway in the High Arctic, probably as a response to anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions over the last approximately 250 years. These changes
include warming of the troposphere, reductions in sea ice cover, decreases in
snow cover area, warming of tundra permafrost, and negative mass balances of
glaciers and ice caps. In many instances, observations of change are relatively
short in duration or sparse in spatial extent. The Principal Investigators will
study glacier and ice cap variations over the approximately last 80 years and at
a large scale on Svalbard. The islands contain the largest extent of glacier ice
in northern Eurasia, amounting to about 0.03 meters of sea level equivalent
water in storage. Measurements of glacier variations and mass balance have been
conducted continuously on Svalbard since 1966, but most investigations are
restricted to small glaciers in northwestern Svalbard. The behavior and current
status of most large glaciers and ice caps is largely unknown. The work
contained in this proposal involves using high resolution, modern satellite
imagery to map current glacier and ice cap extents. These maps will be compared
with archival information to assess rates and styles of change. The primary type
of modern imagery to be used will be from the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal
Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) instrument carried onboard Terra.
Archival sources of information include geodetic maps, Declassified Intelligence
Satellite Photography (DISP) imagery and Landsat MSS (Multi-spectral Scanner)
imagery. The overall aim of the proposed work is to understand the current mass
balance of ice masses in Svalbard and their current and future contribution to
sea level change. There are several objectives: 1) mapping modern boundaries of
glaciers and ice caps in Svalbard using satellite imagery and comparing those
with archival information to assess changes over a 50 or longer year period; 2)
constructing time series of snow facies extent and late summer snowline
positions using remotely sensed data to determine short- and medium-term
variability; 3) mapping changes in ice flow to determine the importance of flow
instabilities; 4) using observed changes to assess spatial variability in
glacier and ice cap mass balance across the archipelago; and 5) interpreting the
causes of observed changes.