* 0221763
* BE/GEN-EN: Marine Viromics: The Interaction of Viral Genomes with the Marine Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Anca Segall, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,006,555.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Marine viruses (principally bacteriophages) are
perhaps the most abundant form of life on the planet. Active (lytic) viral
infections cause cell to lyse and thus control carbon flow through marine
microbial food webs, in some cases initiating the collapse of algal blooms. In
contrast, inactive (lysogenic) infections confer immunity to superinfection and
cause conversion to a diverse array of phenotypes. The majority of marine
bacteria in culture produce some type of virus-like particles (VLP.s),
indicating that the occurrence of lysogeny is widespread. Marine viral genomes
are economical to study because of their small size (usually 50-100 kb).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biocomplexity of viromics arises from the interaction
and response of viral genomes to environmental cues. This project will focus on
lysogeny, whereby a viral genome establishes a stable interaction with its host.
The occurrence of lysogeny in the marine environment is complex, as indicated by
the seasonal distribution of lysogens observed in estuarine environments. The
lytic-lsyogenic shift is hypothesized to occur when viral genes respond to
environmental cues, and preliminary evidence suggests that phosphate levels and
the pho genes may play a role in this interaction. Specific research objectives
are to: 1) determine what physiological and environmental cues catalyze the
shift from lysogenic to lytic lifestyles in cultures and natural microbial
populations, 2) sequence the genomes of several temperate phages, 3) determine
how phage genes work together to confer lytic or lysogenic existence in marine
bacteria, and 4) incorporate the effects of temperate phage into models of the
marine microbial food web. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective will be
addressed by employing cultures (cyanobacteria and heterotrophic
&lt;br/&gt;bacteria) and natural populations to investigate cues that might
control the "lysogenic decision". &lt;br/&gt;Cultures and natural populations
will be exposed to shifts in temperature, nutrients, sunlight,
&lt;br/&gt;salinity, and exposure to xenobiotics to elicit shift from lytic to
lysogeny and vice versa. For the second objective, five of these phage-host
systems will be sequenced. Comparative genomics will be used to identify common
genes and modules. For the third objective, prophage gene expression will be
quantified by northern analysis. Differences in patterns of expression will
yield information on genome response to shifting environmental conditions. If
conserved lysogeny genes are found in cyanophage, their expression in natural
bacterial populations of Tampa Bay will be measured. Finally, a computational
model will be developed to describe the interaction of temperate phage with
marine microbial food webs, based upon a 13 month seasonal study of lysogeny in
Tampa Bay. The broader impacts of this research include educational outreach in
the form of undergraduate workshops at San Diego State University, and
participation in Oceanography Camp for Girls and Project Oceanography at the
University of South Florida. &lt;br/&gt;