* 0221926
* CMG:  Collaborative Research on Multi-Scale Predictions of Arctic Ice
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Ronald Kwok, Jet Propulsion Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2005
* USD 0.00

Increasing our understanding of sea ice dynamics is vital because of the role
sea ice plays in global atmospheric and ocean dynamics. In particular, the
ability to better predict the opening of cracks in the ice, or leads, will
improve our understanding of the Earth's weather, climate and ecology, as well
as our ability to navigate Artic waters. Existing ice models have been of
limited usefulness for forecasting the location and orientation of new leads and
make no attempt to calculate the degree to which any given lead will open for
predicted, or even observed forcing conditions. Even if effective models
existed, until recently, there have been no data available for verification. We
propose research that will exploit two significant developments and will
ultimately allow accurate predictions of lead opening and orientation. First,
motion of material points on large-scale regions of the Arctic ice cover have
been recorded and are now available for complete winter seasons. Second,
theoretical and numerical procedures have been recently developed for describing
crack formation through the use of cohesive crack models. The proposed research
is to develop a multi-scale, computational procedure to predict crack
initiation, orientation, and width, in sea ice, under an observed set of loading
conditions, and to verify the procedure using the newly available data. The
successful completion of the research will set the stage for the next generation
of models and numerical procedures in which realistic geophysical forces can be
used to predict the detailed behavior of the Arctic ice cover.

For the first time, large-scale motion data are available for points on the
Artic ice cover. This unique dataset, produced by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL), is derived from high-resolution, spaceborn, Synthetic Aperature Radar
(SAR) imagery, acquired by the RADARSAT satellite. These data are exactly what
is needed to form a complete picture of ice deformation. A striking aspect of
these images is linear features indicating the formation of leads, or openings
in the sea ice. The ability to better predict the opening of leads will improve
our understanding of the Earth's weather, climate and ecology, as well as our
ability to navigate Artic waters. Existing ice models have been of limited
usefulness for forecasting the location and orientation of new leads and make no
attempt to calculate the degree to which any given lead will open for predicted,
or even observed forcing conditions. Even if effective models existed, until
recently, there have been no data available for verification. We propose to use
the JPL data to develop and verify new material models for sea ice in order to
predict crack initiation, orientation, and width. The successful completion of
the research will set the stage for the next generation of models and numerical
procedures in which realistic geophysical forces can be used to predict the
detailed behavior of the Arctic ice cover. Moreover, sea ice is a central
element in the Earth's climate system. An accurate ice model will benefit our
ability to understand past climatic variability and to improve predictive
capabilities through its inclusion in global ocean and climate models.