* 0221532
* TBC Bond Coat Properties and Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2007
* USD 183,940.00

This grant undertakes an experimental study to elucidate and model the
mechanical behavior and thermal stability of a new class of bond coat materials
for thermal barrier coatings (TBCs). One of the key components of a TBC is its
bond coat, and there is clear empirical evidence that platinum additions to
aluminide bond coats enhance the overall performance and reliability of these
coatings. Other platinum group metals (Pd, Ru, Ir, Rh, and Os) are believed to
provide similar or even greater benefits, but the mechanisms that govern bond
coat performance are currently not well understood. The proposed study will
parallel and compliment a larger NSF-EC collaborative program on the dynamics of
layered multifunctional surfaces. One aspect of the NSF-EC study involves
processing and phase equilibria aspects of platinum group metal bond coats, and
the current study will be conducted in close collaboration with the NSF-EC team
to characterize the mechanical behavior and microstructural evolution of Ru-
based alloys and bond coats. The grant supports for the principal investigator
and graduate students to participate in annual workshops and collaborations with
the NSF-EC team with extended reciprocal visits of students between European
Countries and US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall focus of this research
program will be to measure single-phase Ru-Ni-Al-Xn and ruthenium modified bond
coat properties, to develop a fundamental understanding of the substrate-bond
coat interactions that occur during thermal cycling (inter-diffusion,
viscoplasticity, morphological evolution, crack formation, etc.) and to derive a
science-based protocol for assessing the potential and assisting in the
development of ruthenium modified bond coats. The microsample tensile testing
approach to be used in this study permits characterization of small-scale and
highly scale-specific coatings and properties (elastic modulus, yield and creep
strength) in a way not possible by conventional means. The technological
motivation for this proposal is rooted in the fact that TBCs offer tremendous
opportunities for increasing the temperature capabilities and durability of gas
turbine engines. Through the proposed participation in annual workshops and
extended reciprocal visits, the students working on this project will gain
valuable experience into how research is conducted in both the U.S. and
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;