* 0222991
* VISUALIZATION:  A Metadata-Driven Visualization Interface Technology for Scientific Data Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Kwan-Liu Ma, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2007
* USD 265,054.00

This project lays out our plan for research and development aimed atdramatically
improving the process and outcome of scientific data analysis and visualization.
The improvement will be achieved by coupling an expressive and extensible
metadata management framework with novel visualization interfaces that
facilitate effective reuse, sharing, and cross-exploration of
visualizationinformation and thus will make a profound impact on a broad range
of scientific applications. The process of scientific visualization is
inherently iterative. A good visualization comes from experimenting with
visualization and rendering parameters to bring out the most relevant
information in the data. This raises a question. Considering the computer and
human time we routinely invest for exploratory and production visualization, are
there methodologies and mechanisms to enhance not only the productivity of
scientists but also their understanding of the visualization process anddata
used? Recent advances in the field of data visualization have been made mainly
in rendering and display technologies (such as realtime volume rendering and
immersive environments), but little in coherently managing, representing, and
sharing information about the visualization process and results (images and
insights). Naturally, the various information about data exploration should be
shared and reused to leverage the knowledge and experience scientists gain from
visualizing scientific data. A visual representation of the data exploration
process along with expressive models for recording and querying task specific
information help scientists keep track of their visualization experience and
findings, use it to generate new visualizations, and share it with others. While
previous research has addressed some related issues, a more comprehensive study
remains to be done. Thus, we propose two complementary avenues of research: (1)
new user interfaces for data visualization tasks, and (2) expressive metadata
models supporting the recording and querying of information related to data
exploration tasks. In addition, a set of user studies will be conducted on a
Web-based visualization testbed realizing (1) and (2) in order to refine the
proposed methodologies and designs. Traditional user interfaces cannot support
the increasingly complex process of scientific data exploration. A fundamental
change in the conventional designs and functionality must be made to offer more
intuitive interaction, guidance, and enhanced perception. We will begin our
study with enriching the graphbased and spreadsheet-like interfaces we have
developed, and also investigate alternative designs. An expressive and
extensible metadata model representing the data exploration process and its
embedded data visualization process is needed. Such a model along with an
appropriate user interface makes it possible to manage diverse information about
the input and results of the visualization process, analyze parameter coverage
and usage, identify unexplored visualization spaces, and incorporate findings on
the process and results in form of visualization metadata. The model is
independent of the actual visual interface used and is open in that its
realization in form of a metadata repository can be loosely coupled with a
variety of different visualization tools. A set of interfaces and protocols to
the repository will be designed to manage, query, and analyze visualization
metadata gathered from and utilized by different visualization tools. Our goal
is ambitious and can only be accomplished by working closely with application
scientists. They will help us understand application-dependent and independent
visualization requirements, processes, and information. In return, we will offer
them a new and greatly improved way to understand their scientific data, which
will help them lead to new discoveries quicker, likely with reduced cost.

