* 0222742
* High-Risk Survey For The Earliest Agriculture In North China
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Robert Bettinger, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 23,140.00

The invention of agriculture is one of humankind's greatest achievements and
archaeology's greatest challenges. Despite great strides in archaeological
understanding, archaeologists still do not fully grasp why the first experiments
with agriculture began so late in time (10,000 BP) and in only a handful of
centers (Near East, Mesoamerica, South America, North China, South Asia,
Africa). Of this handful, the North China center is the least known and most
likely to shed new light on these questions. The problem in North China is that
the archaeological hunter-gatherers whose knowledge of plants laid the
foundation for agriculture are well removed in time and space from the oldest
presently known agricultural cultures (Cishan, Peiligang, and Dadiwan), which
are too highly developed to represent the first stages of agriculture. The
transitional groups that connect the two, North China's earliest
agriculturalists, are missing. For the Dadiwan culture (7000 BP) in western
North China, the antecedent hunter-gatherer complex is found 250 miles (400 km)
due north, in the Helan-Tengger sequence (12,700 - 10,000 BP) documented in
surveys and excavations by a team of Chinese (Chen Fahu) and US scholars (R.
Bettinger, R. Elston, P. J. Brantingham, and D. B. Madsen) have been conducting
in Nei Mongol Autonomous Region and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region since 1989.
The research suggests that early Holocene plant intensification began in the
Helan-Tengger study area but that the earliest agricultural experiments were
somewhat further south, toward Dadiwan. These probably began during a warm-wet
episode about 9300 BP that encouraged northern hunter-gatherers to intensify
plant use and experiment with plant propagation in a limited way to augment more
favored food sources, mainly game. A severe, cold-dry climatic reversal
documented around 9000 BP forced this pattern further south, to the Dadiwan
area, where agriculture became established on a small scale and then expanded
dramatically when climate turned warmer and wetter around 8000 BP. Plainly, the
early agricultural sites that connect the hunter-gatherer Helan-Tengger complex
in the North to the developed agricultural Dadiwan complex in the South must lie
in the area between. The proposed survey will use substantial vehicle travel to
locate, and foot travel to reach, likely site locations in this intervening
area. Archaeological charcoal suitable for radiocarbon dating will be obtained
from sites whose stone tools and ceramics place them within the Helan-Tengger to
Dadiwan gap. Our research team of US and PRC scholars has extensive experience
with this sort of survey north of the Yellow River but none in the proposed
study area to its south, where site locations should be different and perhaps
more difficult to detect. Success in finding and dating these sites is not
assured but would surely be of great significance. It would articulate the first
continuous record of the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture in
China - and in so doing document this first critical step in the development of
one of the world's greatest civilizations.