* 0222176
* Makapansgat Interdisciplinary Paleoecology Project
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Matt Sponheimer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 134,883.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Matt Sponheimer and his colleagues
will investigate the ecology of the early human ancestor Australopithecus
africanus and associated mammals from Makapansgat Limeworks, South Africa. The
team brings together specialists in biogeochemistry, dental microwear, and
ecomorphology to provide a more complete picture of the ecological background
for human evolution. No single method of paleoecological research can provide a
complete picture of an animal's ecology, as they all have intrinsic strengths
and weaknesses. By using a variety of techniques in tandem, however, it may be
possible to utilize their respective strengths, while partially overcoming their
limitations. To this end, this team will examine the paleoecology of the
Makapansgat fauna using dental microwear, cranial and postcranial morphology,
carbon isotope, oxygen isotope, and elemental analyses. The initial phase of
this project will be a large-scale modern collection and sampling program in
South Africa and Kenya. This will provide the necessary background for
interpreting data from fossil specimens. Once the modern specimens have been
analyzed, the team will apply these techniques to the three million-year-old
fossils from Makapansgat. The team will focus on the following questions: 1)
What habitats did our early ancestors prefer; 2) What did our early ancestors
eat; and 3) How much competition did they have for these resources. While this
project is ultimately intended to provide information about the ecology of
Australopithecus africanus and its associated fauna, it will also make important
contributions to all of the individual subfields utilized, as the team will
analyze a larger and more diverse African fauna than previous efforts. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide data on early human
diets and habitats of long-standing interest to archaeologists and physical
anthropologists. Moreover, it will provide a sound multidisciplinary basis from
which the ecology of other extinct animals can investigated. This will shed new
light on the ecological background of mammalian evolution in
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;