* 0222710
* ViDe.Net: Middleware for Scalable Video Services for Research and Higher Education
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Samir Chatterjee, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2004
* USD 550,000.00

The multi-institutional project focuses on a novel integration of video
conferencing clients and services with NMI Middleware standards, functions and
services. The outcome will be a videoconferencing application directory enabling
secure, inter-domain authentication for calls that transit institutional
organizational boundaries. A testbed for video middleware will be established to
test the architecture, its implementation using multiple products, and the
interoperability of these products. Testbed results will be provided to the
higher education and research community in the form of a video middleware
"cookbook". The project has identified 4 goals.&lt;br/&gt; - develop the NMI
Release 1 communications object class for use in H.323, SIP, MPEG2, VRVS and
Access Grid implementations&lt;br/&gt; - develop a framework for specification
of videoconferencing security requirements&lt;br/&gt; - develop a testbed to
deploy and test middleware-ware, inter-operable videoconferencing
services.&lt;br/&gt;- disseminate the results through conferences, publications
including a Video Middleware Cookbook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is based
on substantial experience building ViDe.Net, the international videoconferencing
service for higher education. As the global internet becomes a true multi-
service infrastructure, use of internet videoconferencing will increase
throughout education, including K-12. The ability to look up and connect to
resources through secure, easy-to-use interfaces will enable greater use of this
technology to enhances classroom instruction and overcome geographic and
economic disadvantage.&lt;br/&gt;