* 0222909
* VISUALIZATION:   Effective and Efficient Segmentation Frameworks for Scientific Data Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Kenneth Joy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 250,000.00

Rapid and substantial improvements in computing power and sensor and imaging
technologies produce data sets of ever increasing size. No longer is it possible
to rely exclusively on traditional approaches to interactive data exploration
and visualization. It is becoming increasingly important to provide technology
that enables scientists to analyze their data interactively at higher levels of
abstraction. Two approaches are crucial to making possible higher-level data
exploration: (1) hierarchical data exploration relying on a data format
representing a data set at multiple approximation levels and (2) segmentation-
(or feature-based) data exploration. Approach (2) as becoming increasingly
important as it allows scientists to study qualitative behavior of their data,
which, in turn, can lead to significant compression of data, i.e., the
geometrical representations for extracted segments or features are typically
much more storage-efficient than original data. We will do research based on
approach (2), and our goal is to devise an entire new framework supporting more
efficient and effective data exploration via segmentation. Complex scientific
data sets represent physical phenomena with billions of elements. These data
sets are multi-valued, muti-dimensional and time-varying, and we are no longer
able to fully analyze them with merely traditional visualization technology. One
can consider various paradigms when developing tools for the exploration of such
data sets, and one must consider that scientists rarely needs to examine entire
data sets. Typically, the interest is in particular regions where certain
properties hold. Tools should therefore be developed that allow a scientist to
specify the properties of interest, and to segment data sets accordingly. The
proposed approach supports the definition of higher-level data properties, the
efficient extraction of the implied data, and the effective visual
representation of the extracted data. Our framework is aimed at multi-valued
time-varying data sets, where, for example, grid vertices might have multiple
associated scalar, vector and tensor quantities. Our goal is to devise new
algorithms that support the numerically robust extraction of regions (or
boundaries of these regions) that represent similar qualitative behavior. We
propose this ''segmentation'' approach to massive data set exploration as we
believe that it is a necessary to provide scientists with exploration technology
that supports higher-level data representation coupled with real-time system
behavior. The challenge is to generate ''segmented data'' from given multi-
valued data sets, store the segmented data efficiently, generate the boundaries
of segment boundaries, and display these boundaries. We propose an integrated
scheme that supports common data presentation for segmentation and that can be
applied to a number of data types (scalar, vector or tensor). In addition, we
will combine the segmentation framework with new multiresolution techniques---
multiresolution techniques that shall support the extraction and visualization
of segmented data and extracted segment boundaries at multiple resolution
levels. The need for new tools to explore multi-valued time-varying data sets is
paramount. The innovative framework we propose to develop will augment current
data exploration paradigms. The new framework will allow scientists to define,
segment and track meaningful derived data regions. Scientists will be able to
focus attention to those areas in a data set that carry largest information
content, and the power of our framework lies in the fact that it will be
possible to more effectively define and extract these area.

