* 0222749
* Collaborative Research: Resource and Data Management for Virtualized End-resources in Computational Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2002
* Renato Figueiredo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Blatecky
* 08/31/2002
* USD 523,716.00

This is a Collaborative Proposal between Northwestern University and University
of Florida which addresses the key research challenges associated with
management of dynamic Virtual Machines (VM) and interfacing these mechanisms
with existing grid middleware techniques. The project will develop novel
solutions that will address&lt;br/&gt;- resource management for distributed
virtualized end-resources that can be created dynamically,&lt;br/&gt;- image
management for the on-demand transfer of data representing the entire state to
create a dynamic VM instance, and&lt;br/&gt;- data management for the on-demand
transfer of user and application data between decoupled compute and data servers
on the grid.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach will lead to middleware solutions
that will form an information processing foundation for grid computing. The
software generated in this project will be sued to implement the next generation
of network computing hubs currently being used to support simulation needs in
nanotechnology, electronics CAD, computer architecture and parallel
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses key research challenges
to allow the management of dynamic instances of virtual machine middleware and
will lead to solutions that will form an information processing foundation for
grid computing on virtualized end-resources. In particular, the software
generated in this project will be used to implement the next generation of
network computing hubs currently being used to support simulation needs in
nanotechnology, electronics CAD, computer architecture and parallel
programming.&lt;br/&gt;