* 0222002
* CAREER: Electrochemical Ceramics - Understanding the Gap between Localized and Collective Viewpoints of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Stuart Adler, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 312,353.00

Electrochemical ceramics encompass a variety of present and emerging
technologies, including gas sensors, fuel cells, gas-separation membranes, and
membrane reactors. Of critical importance to modeling the properties of
electrochemical ceramics, and developing new materials with improved
performance, is a strong understanding of electronic structure. Since most
electrochemical ceramics possess complex intermediate-length scale order, their
properties often defy explanation when viewed from traditional paradigms
invoking localized or collective viewpoints of electronic structure. In order to
gain a more complete understanding of electronic structure in electrochemical
ceramics, we propose to measure the populations of localized and delocalized
electrons in transition metal perovskites having general composition LaSrCoFe
oxides (LSCF) using a novel high-sensitivity Faraday balance. These measurements
will be used to interpret parallel studies of electrochemical properties,
including electron transport, ionic defect structure, chemical expansion and
stress, and catalytic activity. In addition, the PI is currently developing a
new program of undergraduate laboratory experiments that integrate research and
teaching. This program provides undergraduates with formal opportunities to
contribute to Ph.D.-level research in modern growth areas of chemical
engineering, producing real data that will be published (not just put into a lab
report). In this way research and undergraduate education are on the same track,
with a complementary agenda. The proposed project will contribute one experiment
to this educational program, which is linked (and feeds directly into) our
research program in electrochemical ceramics. Students will screen new materials
for electronic structure using high-temperature magnetic susceptibility
measurements and Taguchi analysis methods.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute broadly to our understanding of electronic structure in complex
materials. The results are of general interest to all branches of materials
science, including solid-state electrochemistry, electronic materials, ceramics,
as well as inorganic chemistry and physics. This project will also provide
specific information about electronic structure in one class of materials, of
immediate value to workers developing reaction/separation membranes and solid-
oxide fuel cells. The principal investigator has 8 years academic and 4 years
industrial experience in this field, bringing a strong mix of fundamental and
practical perspectives. This work is highly original, and contributes several
novel advances to proven experimental techniques. The experimental plan is well
organized, and the proposing institution has a world-class infrastructure for
work in this cross-disciplinary field. In addition, the career development plan
of the PI will help establish a strong fundamental research and educational
program in a new, exciting, area of technology. This program will not only
educate individual scientists in its field, but will also tightly integrate
research and teaching in a way that benefits both, and opens new opportunities
for undergraduates (many of whom, at CWRU, are women and minorities) to
participate in cutting-edge research on a broad scale. This approach provides a
new template for teaching that other higher-educational institutions may benefit
from. Knowledge gained from both research and educational development will be
disseminated broadly through the literature, and directly through strong ties of
the PI to industry and the American Society of Engineering Education.
&lt;br/&gt;