* 0222107
* CAREER:   Studies of Investor Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Terrance Odean, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 252,402.00

Increasingly, households are investing in common stock-from 1995 to 1998 the
number of households investing directly in equities grew by over 30 per cent. At
the same time many investors are eschewing professional advice--from 1995
through mid 2000, investors opened 12.5 million online brokerage accounts. The
importance of self-directed investing will only grow in future years as more and
more households are handed responsibility for their own retirement investments
through defined contribution plans and, possibly, through discretionary personal
social security accounts. Individual's trading decisions affect not only their
own welfare but, through their influence on market prices, the welfare of
others. Yet little is known about what motivates the trading decisions of
individual investors. The goal of my research is to increase our understanding
of individual investors and of their influence on markets. I have obtained from
various brokerage houses anonymous trading records for over one million
individual investors. With these records, I can document how investors behave in
real life investment situations and I can test theories of investor behavior.
For example, I can test the hypothesis that investment success leads many
investors to become overconfident. Based on the trading records in my databases,
I plan to develop a computer simulation of financial markets in which individual
investors interact with institutional investors and market-makers. The
individual investors in this simulation will follow rules estimated from the
databases. This simulation will model how the trading of individual investors
changes stock prices and how this process affects investor wealth. I will also
run experiments that test whether access to more information leads investors to
become overconfident and, as a result, to trade excessively. Finally, I will
survey investors to see whether aggressive trading by individual investors is
more often the result of unrealistically optimistic beliefs than high tolerance
for risk. In addition to increasing academic understanding of individual
investors, these studies will provide guidance for investor education efforts.