* 0222847
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL:      Semantic Map of Biological Data Sources:     Entity Identity and Path Characterization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 224,727.00

Collaborative Research: Semantic Map of Biological Data Sources: Entity Identity
and Path Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental problem facing the
biological researcher today is correctly identifying a specific instance of a
biological entity, e.g., a specific gene or protein, and then obtaining a
complete functional characterization of this entity instance by exploring a
multiplicity of inter-related sources. While the diversity of available data
presents an opportunity to attack this problem, it is accompanied by
difficulties in harnessing and exploring data. This collaborative
interdisciplinary, inter-institutional research project exploits the
researchers' prior expertise on wrapper and mediator technology and apply domain
specific semantic knowledge to this problem. The goal is the correct
identification and complete characterization of scientific entities by exploring
multiple data sources. This project will address three tasks: (1) Construction
of a Semantic Map of biological data sources including unique identifiers; links
between sources; attributes; and search and query; (2) Learning at the data
source, schema, domain and instance level uses the concept of Identity Link to
identify equivalent identifiers for the same instance, and (3) Learning the
properties of physical links and paths that are implemented among multiple data
sources. The topology of links (paths) based on their properties, and Link
(Path) Equivalence is applied to the tasks of entity identity and
characterization. The tools developed in this project will be accessible via the
project Web site (http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/research/CLIP/BFEnt02/), and can be
applied by biologists to support ongoing scientific investigations in cancer
research and diabetes, resulting in a broad impact in medical research and
treatment. The educational impact includes a course on data management solutions
for bioinformatics researchers and a workshop on experiment planning using data
sources for biologists.