* 0222334
* CMG Research: Collaborative Research: Models of Sub-Grid Scale Turbulence in Earth's Core and the Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Paul Roberts, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 534,583.00

EAR-0222334 Paul H. Roberts

Earth's dynamo, which is responsible for the geomagnetic field, is a geosystem
involving a broad range of interacting scales, a complex geometry and a rich
variety of physical processes. Numerical simulations resolve only the largest-
scale features; most parameterizations of the smaller, subgrid scale processes
simulate dissipative processes only, and are incapable of simulating non-
dissipative processes which affect transfers of energy among differing spatial
scales. Exceptions to this statement are the recently developed similarity and
Navier-Stokes-alpha models. Core dynamics is strongly affected by the action of
the Coriolis and Lorentz forces, making the fields both anisotropic and non-
local. Recent studies have provided valuable insight into these processes, which
will help motivate generalized models that accurately account for these forces.
This project will develop better parameterizations of subgrid processes in
Earth's core by incorporating into the similarity and Navier-Stokes-alpha
models, knowledge of the structure of the small-scale fields. The project will
involve a combination of numerical simulation and theoretical analysis employing
not only simplified models that isolate physical processes and analytical
issues, but also realistic geodynamo models. The research will be undertaken by
a group of mathematicians and geoscientists from US institutions and from abroad
under the supervision of a management group. The project will foster
interactions between members of the dynamo collective, and it is expected that
further collaborations will result from the annual workshops that will be
organized and partially supported by the project. It is anticipated that
improved parameterization of subgrid processes in rotating magnetoconvection
will interest all who wish to study magnetism and dynamos in other planets and
in stars. It is believed that many of these people will wish to participate in
the planned workshops. An improved numerical model of the geodynamo will be of
interest to a second group of geoscientists and mathematicians who seek to
quantify the structure, dynamics and history of the interior of our planet. --

