* 0222511
* CAREER: Career Development Plan: Integrated Research and    Education Activities
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2001,06/30/2004
* G. Tayhas Palmore, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2004
* USD 69,766.00

The focus of this research is to design molecules to self assemble into one- and
two-dimensional supramolecular motifs or aggregates that will serve as scaffolds
with which to control three-dimensional structures. Cyclic diamides are targeted
as the molecular building blocks . Among those to be studied are
2,5-diketopiperazines, 3,6-dioxo-1,2,4-triazines and
3,6-dioxo-1,2,4,5-tetrazines. The robust one-dimensional `tapes` obtained from
these building blocks will then be used as precursors of interesting solid state
materials. The educational focus of the project is the integration of
supramolecular chemistry into the undergraduate curriculum. With this Faculty
Early Development (CAREER) award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program is supporting the research and educational activities of Dr. G. Tayhas
R. Palmore of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California,
Davis. Professor Palmore will focus her research efforts on understanding how
the self assembly of molecules into supramolecular motifs can be used to control
solid state structure. Self assembly of nanostructures promises to be one of the
most powerful approaches to device miniaturization. The aim of the proposed
educational activities is to stimulate interdisciplinary discussion and research
in supramolecular chemistry and to integrate supramolecular chemistry into the
undergraduate curriculum.