* 0222033
* The Role of Ecosystem Dynamics on the Global Ocean Carbon Cycle: A JGOFS Model-Data Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Scott Doney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2006
* USD 430,008.00

This project seeks to better quantify the role of marine ecosystem dynamics on
the global ocean carbon cycle, focusing in particular on air-sea CO2 exchange,
net community production, and vertical export. The research is motivated by two
related hypotheses: multi-nutrient limitation (N, P, Si, Fe) modulates
phytoplankton biomass and primary production, community structure, and biogenic
carbon export, community structure governs the elemental composition of the
exported dissolved and particulate material, major determinants of subsurface
biogeochemical transport, remineralization, and sequestration. In this project a
carefully designed set of numerical experiments will be run using a global 3-D
coupled ecological-biogeochemical-physical model. The project directly builds
upon recent progress and specific findings/questions from a global mixed layer
ecosystem model that includes explicit iron limitation and community structure,
a full depth 3-D ocean carbon cycle model, and historical hind-cast simulations
(1958-1997) of ocean physical circulation Specifically, the goals of the
activity are to: &lt;br/&gt;o Complete development of a next generation, global
3-D ecological-biogeochemical-physical model that includes multi-nutrient
limitation and explicit geochemical functional groups (picoplankton, diatoms,
Trichodesmium, and coccolithophores).&lt;br/&gt;o Evaluate and iteratively
improve on the simulated upper ocean ecosystem dynamics against regional JGOFS
data sets, large-scale surface pCO2 and nutrient fields, and satellite ocean
color data using retrospective, historical simulations for the period
1988-2000.&lt;br/&gt;o Assess the skill of the resulting model in replicating
the full depth, equilibrium distributions of carbon, oxygen and nutrients
against the WOCE/JGOFS global survey data.&lt;br/&gt;o Test the ecological and
biogeochemical impact of dust deposition, calcification, nitrogen fixation, and
silica production by selective modifications to the base coupled
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study directly addresses the overall goal of
the U.S. JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Project (SMP), to synthesize present
knowledge into global numerical models that can be used for prediction, as well
as two of the major research trajectories highlighted in the SMP program
announcement: "global and regional studies that link together the biological,
physical, and chemical components of the marine carbon cycle" and "synthesis and
modeling efforts that effectively combine field data sets and diagnostic and
prognostic (forward) models".&lt;br/&gt;