* 0222628
* Research Resources:  Computational Science and Engineering: Intelligent Information Acquisition and Management Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Krishna Kavi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

EIA 02-22628 Kavi, Krishna M. Mikler, Armin R.; Swigger, Kathleen M.; Wilson,
Angela K. University of North Texas

CISE RR: Computational Science and Engineering: Intelligent Information
Acquisition and Management Infrastructure

This proposal, addressing multithreaded computer architectural and sensor-
network simulations, concurrent analysis of multiple flight data recorders, and
computational chemistry, requests a Beowulf cluster, a Sun multiprocessor, and a
1.3TB storage device to enable research in the following four projects:

1. Scalable Clustered Multithreaded Architecture for Embedded and DSP
Applications, 2. SensorNet, 3. Analysis of Flight Data Recorder (FDR)
Information, and 4. Computation Chemistry: Quantum Chemical Functional Group
(QCFG) approach.

The first project evaluates the suitability of multithreaded architectures for
embedded and DSP systems developing customizable and scalable implementations to
meet the performance and energy requirements of future embedded and DSP
applications. The second designs and implements an agent-based monitoring
infrastructure to facilitate data-acquisition and event-correlation for large
number of widely distributed environmental sensors of different types. This
project aims at integrating the Leibniz system for computation based on
prepositional logic. The third project concentrates on problems related to the
organization and management of large, real-time distributed knowledge
investigating various architectures and systems for real-time transmission of
flight data to insure more accurate and reliable information. Looking into real-
time collaborative interfaces that can support distributed communications and
collective decision-making, this projects examines data mining techniques that
can be used to aid in post-mortem analyses of accidents. The last project
enables an approach to obtain quantitative descriptions of structures,
energetics, and other properties for intermediate- to large-sized molecules. The
equipment is expected to lead to new research in Intelligent Information and
Intelligent Resource Management.