* 0222109
* Collaborative Research:  CMG--Anti-Turbulence, Horizontal Convection and Thermalence
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Neil Balmforth, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 223,820.00

Horizontal convection refers to horizontal motions in a fluid slab caused by
spatial gradients of fluid density. Rather surprisingly, theoretical arguments
show that nonuniform heating or cooling at the top surface of a fluid layer is
ineffective in driving the circulation. More specifically, if the only force
acting on the fluid is nonuniform surface heating, and if the kinematic
viscosity and thermal diffusivity are allowed to approach zero with their ratio
fixed, then it can be shown that the energy dissipation per unit mass,
determined by integrating over the whole volume of the fluid, goes to zero.
Because no energy dissipation implies no turbulence, this is sometimes called
the "anti-turbulence theorem." This result is counterintuitive. In fact, it has
been thought that the main features of the global-scale ocean circulation might
be accounted for by the pole-to-equator temperature gradient, but the anti-
turbulence theorem seems to imply that differential heating of the surface
cannot by itself drive the circulation. This proposal is motivated by the need
to understand the physical processes that account for the anti-turbulence
theorem and other purely mathematical constraints on horizontal convection.
Implications of these constraints are that fluid motions on the smallest scales
must be closely coupled to larger-scale motions as part of a linked, multiscale
system. The goal is to relate the improved understanding of horizontal
convection to the problem of ocean circulation. The approach consists of a
combination of analytical and numerical techniques such as upper bound theory,
numerical computation of equilibrium solutions using continuation methods,
linear stability analysis of these equilibria, multiscale asymptotic methods,
and direct numerical simulation. The work will contribute to improved modeling
of the ocean circulation and hence climate. It is supported jointly by the
Division of Ocean Sciences and the Division of Mathematical Sciences through the
NSF Program, Research Collaborations between the Mathematical Sciences and the
Geosciences (CMG).