* 0222063
* Behavioral Carryovers, Tradeoffs and Performance Correlations Across Situations
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Andrew Sih, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 277,653.00

The central goals of this project are to develop and apply new statistical
techniques to examine behavioral correlations across different contexts, and
their effects on individual performance (survival, feeding rate, mating success)
across contexts. For example, for aggression level, although all individuals
alter their aggression levels depending on the situation, do the same
individuals tend to be more aggressive than others across a range of situations?
If so, how do these consistent aggression levels influence performance in the
different situations? Experiments will examine behavioral and performance
correlations: 1) across social and ecological contexts (different densities, sex
ratios and levels of predation risk); 2) over a lifetime (correlating juvenile
versus adult behavior); and 3) across genders (between male and female
siblings). Experiments will focus on an insect, Aquarius remigis, that is ideal
for generating the large amounts of data required to illustrate the new methods.

Although it is clear that humans and some well-studied mammals exhibit
correlated behaviors across contexts (i.e., personality types or behavioral
syndromes), it is only now becoming clear that parallel behavioral correlations
occur in other animals. The techniques and insights generated by this project
should advance our understanding of the ecological and evolutionary significance
of behavioral correlations.

