* 0222675
* VISUALIZATION:  Advanced Weather Data Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,11/30/2004
* David Ebert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 11/30/2004
* USD 298,311.00

The atmospheric science community requires visualization of observed, measured,
and simulated data for accurate analysis of the atmosphere and improved weather
prediction. Unlike many scientific communities, weather observers and
atmospheric scientists rely heavily on important visual cues in the atmosphere
to determine the potential severity of many storms.&lt;br/&gt;However, the
current state-of-the-art in weather visualization from systems such as Vis5D,
VisAD, or D3D, lack important visual information that is crucial for atmospheric
scientists to fully understand the development and evolution of weather
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the importance of these visual cues, this project
will significantly enhance the visualization of weather data through the
development of innovative software techniques that will provide more accurate
and effective visual representations of weather data. Simple visualization
practices, such as depth cueing, isosurface texturing, volume shading, shadows,
and correct natural color effects (such as sunlight) are absent in current
weather data visualization software. While advanced computer graphics
applications (e.g., movie production) have effectively used these techniques for
some time, they have yet to be applied in a robust way to weather data. In this
project, we will not only fill this gap to create improved, visually accurate
weather data visualization, but also increase the quantity and clarity of the
information conveyed from the resulting visualizations. Using mature numerical
weather prediction software, the Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS), to
generate numerically simulated severe weather events, new software techniques
will be developed to enhance the visualization of this data and begin a new era
in weather data visualization.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond current capabilities of standard
isosurfaces, scalar volume renderings, and two-dimensional images lies important
rendering capabilities for weather visualization, such as shaded volumes,
shadows, light-transport, and simulated natural cloud modeling. In this project,
we will develop, enhance, and apply these techniques to atmospheric data in ways
which have yet to be attempted.&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of our research is to
produce visually accurate images of weather model data that will provide more
accurate information than current methods and use the same cognitive model and
analysis process as the forecasters already use, allowing them to increase their
effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;We will additionally develop techniques to effectively
incorporate non-visual data and allow the selective visualization of the visual
/ non-visual weather data to enable better understanding of the relationships
between these variables and quantities. Our goal is to develop these improved
techniques, while also allowing interactive exploration of the observed,
measured, and model data.&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of programmable graphics
hardware with three-dimensional texture-mapping, we will implement techniques
for interactive visually accurate weather visualization with low-albedo
illumination, physics-based atmospheric scattering and attenuation, and
volumetric shadowing. &lt;br/&gt;We will also implement slower high-albedo
illumination models at coarser resolutions to give approximate multiple
scattering effects and utilize this scattering information in the illumination
calculation per-pixel fragment through three-dimensional texture mapping
hardware. We will use perceptually motivated mapping of non-visual weather
quantities (e.g., temperature, dewpoint, wind, atmospheric pressure, vorticity)
to glyphs, particles, and isosurfaces to provide more information in an easily
understandable manner, extending on our previous work in rceptually-motivated
glyph rendering, fast isosurface rendering, and volume illustration. Given the
capabilities of current graphics hardware, we won't be able to produce truly
visually accurate images and animations of time-varying atmospheric data for at
least the first half of the project, although we expect to be able to produce
good approximations at interactive rates. We also plan to incorporate simple
key-frame recording tools into the visualization system for off-line generation
of atmospheric visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;The weather models produced contain
multiple variables at each spatial location. By employing scientific-based
combinations of these variables, it is possible to localize specific features
contained in these models. We will extend our preliminary work in the
development of multi-dimensional transfer function methods for multivariate data
to effectively convey information from this complex model data. This improved
interactive weather visualization system will increase the effectiveness of
atmospheric analysis, improve severe storm forecasting, and enhance the
formulation, parameterizations, and physics of numerical weather prediction
models. &lt;br/&gt;Additionally, it will improve the training of weather
observers and atmospheric science students (both undergraduate and graduate),
and provide understandable animations to help in basic weather education at the
K-12 level. &lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research is to produce a
visually accurate, interactive rendering of a numerical severe thunderstorm
simulation, thereby enhancing the ability of both the scientist and general user
to discover and explore atmospheric processes in an unprecedented
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;