* 0222927
* NEAR: NEtwork of Autonomous Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 08/31/2006
* USD 453,799.00

The proposed project addresses the development of a NEtwork ofAutonomous Robots
(NEAR) with sensors and wireless network cardswith the goal of developing a
distributed implementation of arobotic assistant. The key applications of
NEARinclude: (a) transportation and retrieval of objects in asemi-structured
environment; (b) organization and reconfiguration ofsensors for observations in
dynamically changing environments; and (c) coordinated motion of multiple
vehicles for cooperative manipulationor for efficient group locomotion. The NEAR
robot network isalways "near" the human user, interacting with the user,
andaugmenting her skills, providing a natural synergism.Our focus in this
project is to leverage advances in automation andaugmentation and steer them in
the direction of autonomy for servicerobotics. We will develop a network of
simple mobile robots serving ahuman being. Each robot has some basic sensing
capability (vision inour case) and the ability to communicate with other
mobilerobots. Robots can be programmed to exhibit simple behaviors:controllers
and estimators and policies that couplessensing/perception at a very low level.
The ability to use multiplerobots enables autonomy without increasing the
complexity ofindividual robot behaviors but by instead exploiting the
distributedexecution of these behaviors in a network. Since the human
isexplicitly involved in programming and commanding the robots, it ispossible to
exploit this natural synergy by allowing humans toinfluence the assembly of the
behaviors and the organization of theteam in a top-down fashion.