* 0222383
* CMG: Statistical Analysis of Nonstationary and Nonlinear Paleoclimatic Time Series
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Ana Ravelo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2005
* USD 116,302.00

Quantities that serve in paleoclimatology as proxy data for temperature, such as
oxygen isotope ratios measured in seabed cores, reveal periodicities ranging
from about 1000 to 100,000 years. These cycles are caused by a combination of
external forcing by known changes in the Earth's orbital parameters (so-called
Milankovitch forcing) and by little-understood, complex, nonlinear, and usually
nonstationary interactions of different atmospheric and oceanic processes. To
now, the statistical tools most commonly employed for analyzing the records have
been spectral techniques and correlation analysis based on the assumption of
statistical stationarity. This project examines the effects of nonlinear and
nonstationary processes on the climate record of the last 5 million years by
employing modern statistical techniques that have not previously seen much use
in paleoclimatology. These include time-frequency analysis to characterize the
non-stationarity in terms of frequency and phase modulation, and bispectral and
cross-spectral analysis to different combinations of climate variables to
recognize nonlinear couplings. One of the objectives of the project, which is
supported jointly by the Division of Atmospheric Sciences and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, is to make these statistical methods available to the
paleoclimate community by offering software to students and researchers and
arranging a workshop devoted to the subject.