* 0222286
* CMG RESEARCH: Numerical and Experimental Validation of Stochastic Upscaling for Subsurface Contamination Problems Involving Multiphase Volatile Chlorinated Solvents
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* David Dean, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2007
* USD 310,000.00

Nonlinear problems with multiple scales, heterogeneity,
and&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty are pervasive in science and engineering. In
this&lt;br/&gt;context, analytical theories are limited by unrealistic
modeling&lt;br/&gt;assumptions, and extensive large-scale physical experiments
are&lt;br/&gt;impractical. Computational modeling and experimentation,
the&lt;br/&gt;"third methodology" of science, has a critical role to play
in&lt;br/&gt;conjunction with theory and physical experiments. This
project&lt;br/&gt;combines the three methodologies to study multiphase flow
in&lt;br/&gt;porous media, specifically the remediation of
groundwater&lt;br/&gt;contaminated by dense nonaqueous-phase liquids (DNAPLs).
Field&lt;br/&gt;scales are much too large for small-scale effects to be
directly&lt;br/&gt;representable in practical computations. Multiphase flow
in&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous subsurface formations involves local phenomena
at&lt;br/&gt;material interfaces whose valid effective representation
at&lt;br/&gt;larger scales is not understood. Uncertainty is central,
because&lt;br/&gt;of the lack of complete or precise data, and because of
the&lt;br/&gt;randomness of small-scale properties and flows when viewed from
a&lt;br/&gt;larger scale. The project develops a nonlinear
upscaling&lt;br/&gt;methodology based on a macro-scale stochastic theory of
multiphase&lt;br/&gt;flow and transport that accounts for local phenomena
at&lt;br/&gt;micro-scale material interfaces. The theory is
applied&lt;br/&gt;numerically, so that limiting theoretical assumptions are
local&lt;br/&gt;in space and time. The model is validated by multiple-
scale&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous laboratory experiments, using realistic
chemicals&lt;br/&gt;and soil properties, that creates a "physical Monte
Carlo"&lt;br/&gt;database for comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental
restoration is important to society. Remediation&lt;br/&gt;of contaminated
groundwater often requires the study of the&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous flow of
multiple non-mixing fluids through porous&lt;br/&gt;subsurface soils and rocks.
These aquifers consist of many&lt;br/&gt;different materials and exhibit
features such as layers and&lt;br/&gt;faults on a multitude of scales, all of
which affect the fluid&lt;br/&gt;flow. In small-scale detail, these effects are
uncertain in&lt;br/&gt;practical situations, because available data are
insufficient&lt;br/&gt;to describe the subsurface precisely, and because these
details&lt;br/&gt;are quite random from the standpoint of the larger field
scale&lt;br/&gt;at which a hydrologist wants to analyze the appropriate
strategy&lt;br/&gt;for a remediation project. This project develops a
methodology&lt;br/&gt;that enables a scientist to describe the aquifer at the
field&lt;br/&gt;scale, so that strategies can be formulated and tested in
the&lt;br/&gt;setting where they will be applied. This "upscaling"
methodology&lt;br/&gt;based on probabilistic concepts is an advance with
wide&lt;br/&gt;implications beyond environmental restoration itself, important
as&lt;br/&gt;it is, because similar issues arise throughout science
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. The project's combination of theory,
computation,&lt;br/&gt;and physical experiments requires the close
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;collaboration of a mathematician and a
geoscientist.&lt;br/&gt;