* 0222282
* CMG RESEARCH:  An Adaptive Mesh, Spectral Element Formulation of the Well-Posed Primitive Equations for Climate and Weather Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2002,09/30/2005
* Henry Tufo, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2005
* USD 501,006.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0222282 PI: Thomas, Stephen Institution: University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research Program: Collaborations in Mathematics and
the Geosciences (CMG) Program Manager: Catherine Mavriplis

Title: CMG RESEARCH: An Adaptive Mesh, Spectral Element Formulation of the Well-
Posed Primitive Equations for Climate and Weather

Climate simulation is a grand challenge problem requiring multiple, century-long
integrations of the equations governing the Earth's atmosphere. Recently, it has
been recognized that localized flow structures may play an important role in
obtaining the correct climate signal. Higher-resolution climate simulations may
be required in the near future at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR) and other climate modeling centers in convergence studies and to assess
model uncertainty. Rather than increase resolution uniformly over the entire
sphere, recent developments in adaptive mesh refinement techniques may be
applicable to atmospheric general circulation models. High-order polynomial
based spectral element and discontinous Galerkin methods offer the geometric
flexibility required to implement adaptive methods and also exhibit the
exponential convergence of the traditional spectral transform approach. The
spectral element dynamical core is ideally suited to high-performance parallel
computers based on microprocessors and a team at NCAR was awarded second place
in the 2001 IEEE/ACM Gordon Bell competition for achieving 370 Gigaflops,
representing a sustained climate simulation rate of over 100 years per day. This
work represents a major advance in geophysical fluid flow simulations. By
implementing an adaptive non-conforming spectral element dynamical core for
atmospheric general circulation models, we propose to study how small scale flow
features develop and feedback to larger scales. We also plan to study simple
idealized physical forcings in this context and explore, with NCAR and
university researchers, how adaptive multi-scale physical parameterizations can
be implemented.

Weather and climate simulation is an extremely complex problem that requires
many long time computer modeling runs for the Earth's atmosphere. Recently, with
the advances in computer power and with advances in the understanding of the
dynamics, it has been recognized that local flow structures can play an
important role in determining specific weather and climate conditions. Computer
models should thus advance to fully resolve these structures in an efficient
way. This project is concerned with the development of new, efficient computer
models that will automatically resolve local features while providing overall
accuracy. The impact on the next generation of weather and climate models should
be significant.

Date: June 28, 2002