* 0222504
* Thermal Modeling of Head and Neck
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Yildiz Bayazitoglu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 01/31/2005
* USD 104,845.00

The proposed project is to initiate a fundamental heat transfer study of the
head and neck system to predict the brain temperature. The research will involve
the collaborative efforts of an engineering research at Rice University and a
medical researcher at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. There
is considerable data at present to justify the need to know the brain
temperature in infants who have suffered hypoxia-ischemia, or are at great risk
for hypoxia-ischemia. Similar considerations extend to other patient age groups
including children and adults with head trauma, surgical correction of
congenital heart disease, and adults with stroke. A thermal model for head and
neck will be initiated by incorporating the relation between metabolic heat
generation and temperature, the effect of physiological parameters and
regulatory mechanisms on the cerebral blood flow and the countercurrent heat
transfer in the neck's vessels. As a component of Dr. A. Laptook's ongoing
investigations on newborn miniature swine brain at UTSMC, additional
measurements will be made available to Dr. Y. Bayazitoglu at Rice to include
them in her head and neck thermal modeling, to determine how brain temperature
is affected by acute alterations in arterial oxygen tension, arterial carbon
dioxide tension, brain metabolic rate, and brain ischemia.&lt;br/&gt;The
initiated research will provide foundation of important future contributions in
understanding the pathogenesis of brain injury, and in monitoring of brain
temperature during therapeutic interventions. In addition, the created
mathematical models will eventually be used as teaching tools to search for
optimal treatment by incorporating temperature as another
variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;