* 0222001
* Chemical Expansion of Mixed Conducting Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Stuart Adler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 166,575.00

0074539&lt;br/&gt;Adler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceramics used in high-temperature
applications must match closely in coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) to
avoid excessive stress associated with strain differences over large changes in
temperature. Electrochemical ceramics (used as ion-transport membranes or in
solid oxide fuel cells) present yet an additional challenge. These materials not
only expand with temperature, but also with changes in chemical oxidation state.
The majority of expansion at high temperatures in these materials may result
from chemical rather than thermal effects. Yet today there is little knowledge
or understanding of chemical expansion, or its consequences and technological
applications. This project will enlarge our understanding of expansion in
ceramics to include these chemical effects. A new continuum theory that defines
expansion thermodynamically in terms of temperature and oxygen content will be
presented and then an experimental study of expansion in several mixed
conducting oxides as a function of cation stoichiometry, temperature, and oxygen
partial pressure will be performed. By examining this data in the framework of
the theory, a more complete and general understanding of expansion in ceramics
will be gained, as well as into how expansion relates to electronic and defect
structure. As a secondary goal, new experimental techniques will be developed
involving non-equilibrium expansion for directly measuring oxygen surface
exchange kinetics and chemical diffusion. The material systems under study
include lanthanum-strontium-cobalt-iron-oxide (LSCF) and strontium-iron-cobalt-
oxide (SFC). LSCF is of direct relevance to solid-oxide fuel cells and
electrically driven air separation, while SFC is of particular interest to
workers developing dense membranes for partial oxidation of methane to syngas.
LSCF is also a good model material system because its defect thermodynamics are
well understood, and its cation composition covers an enormous range of defect
and electronic structure (both ionic and electronic).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical ceramics are of importance in a broad
spectrum of applications, including fuels processing, electricity production,
and air separation. A full understanding of expansion in is critical to
advancing knowledge and application of electrochemical ceramics. This project
will also provide a framework for approaching chemical expansion in all solids,
thus extending the impact of it much further. &lt;br/&gt;