* 0222115
* CMG RESEARCH:    Wavelet-Based Statistical Analysis of Multiscale Geophysical Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Peter Guttorp, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 649,999.00

Wavelets are a relatively new - but increasingly popular - mathematical tool for
analyzing data in the geosciences. Wavelets reexpress data collected over a time
span or spatial region such that variations over temporal/spatial scales are
summarized in wavelet coefficients. Individual coefficients depend upon both a
scale and a temporal/spatial location, so wavelets are ideal for analyzing
geosystems with interacting scales. In this project, the investigators develop
wavelet-based statistical methodology to address three multiscale geophysical
problems. The first is to characterize scale-specific variances/covariances of
atmospheric pressure time series from NOAA's Tropical Atmosphere Ocean buoy
array. Because these series have gaps in them, the investigators construct
special wavelets for computing statistically tractable wavelet coefficients. The
second problem is to analyze atmospheric turbulence measurements collected by an
aircraft. The investigators use statistical methodology to combine wavelet
coefficients with aircraft heights to determine scale/height variations of
winds. The third problem is to assess spatial/temporal variations in ground-
based radar rainfall measurements. Here the investigators use wavelets to
extract spatial gradients, to assess variations in area-mean precipitation, and
to determine the variability in the estimated quantities using wavelet-based
bootstrapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation behind this project is to
further a scientific understanding of how the atmosphere changes over time, over
heights and over different areas. A better understanding of the atmosphere is
important for mankind because of the key role that the atmosphere plays as part
of the climate of the earth. Federal agencies such as NOAA and NASA (in
cooperation with its Japanese counterpart NASDA) are actively collecting sets of
data that directly measure how the atmosphere changes. These data sets, along
with others collected under NSF sponsorship, are inherently complex to
interpret. In this project, the investigators study these data sets using
wavelets, which are a mathematical microscope for interpreting changes in
complex data sets. The investigators develop new methods for using wavelets to
study atmospheric changes. In the future, other investigators can apply these
new methods to data sets collected in other areas of science such as
oceanography, astronomy, agriculture and forestry.&lt;br/&gt;