* 0222728
* Conference on the Behavioral Neurobiology of Bird Song
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* H.Philip Zeigler, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

The topic of this conference is the neurobiology of bird song. Many features of
bird song have made it a useful model for research on important problems in
behavioral neurobiology and have engaged the attention of researchers on
species-typical behavior, communication, behavioral development, central sensory
processing, motor learning, sensorimotor control, neurogenesis, and neuronal
plasticity. Recent developments involving anatomical, neurophysiological,
neuroendocrine, molecular, and behavioral techniques have further increased
interest in the song system. Because many features of the bird song system also
apply to vertebrate brains, studies of birdsong neurobiology have had a major
impact on neuroscience research and fundamentally altered concepts of brain
function. There has been no conference devoted to this topic during the past
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Conference on the Behavioral Neurobiology of Bird
Song will take place at Hunter College, New York City, on December 12-14 th ,
2002. The Conference's objectives are (a) to provide a venue for interaction
among several generations of researchers, including both domestic and foreign
workers, (b) to present a program of sufficient breadth to reflect major current
issues and indicate future research directions, (c) to provide materials for a
published volume on the topic, (d) to facilitate participation of and
communication among a group of new, young and promising researchers within the
birdsong community and (e) to increase ethnic and gender diversity within this
important field of neuroscience,&lt;br/&gt;Conference participants include
individuals who have made some of&lt;br/&gt;the most exciting advances in the
field during the past few years and who are in&lt;br/&gt;the middle of highly
productive careers. Individuals currently at early stages of their careers, who
are likely to make significant future contributions to the field will also be
participants. The interactions of several generations of excellent researchers
are expected to help advance discovery in this field and enhance the training
and education of the younger researchers. A volume based upon Conference
proceedings will be published, and will have a significant long-term impact upon
a broader scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;