* 0222423
* Digestibility of Ice Algae and Phytoplankton:  The Potential Impacts of Changing Food Supply to the Arctic Benthos
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* William Ambrose, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 90,508.00

0222423&lt;br/&gt;Ambrose&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea ice is a dominant feature of
marine ecosystems in the Arctic. Its presence impacts Arctic marine ecosystems,
especially on the shelves where benthic and pelagic systems are extensively
coupled. If the extent and thickness of sea ice continue to decline, a shift is
predicted in the type of algal material reaching the benthos (from ice algae to
phytoplankton), which will potentially impact the food requirements of the
benthos. Several pieces of evidence show that both types of ice algae (below-ice
ice algae dominated by Melosira arctica and within-ice ice algae dominated by
Nitzchia frigida) presently reach the benthos in significant quantities. This
research effort will investigate the digestibility of ice algae and
phytoplankton-derived organic matter by the Arctic macrobenthos. From the
perspective of a macrofaunal organism, digestibility includes three separate
components: 1) selection (is encountered organic material ingested or
rejected?); 2) absorption (is ingested organic material absorbed during passage
through the gut, or does it get egested in the feces?); and 3) assimilation (is
absorbed organic material assimilated into biomass?). Assessment of long-term
assimilation of the various types of algae (within-ice ice algae; below-ice ice
algae; and phytoplankton) will be conducted by determining lipid biomarkers and
their isotopic ratios, and by determining CHN and protein signatures of
organisms collected during all aspects of the work in both Norway and Kotzebue,
Alaska. Assessment of short-term absorption will first use the ash-ratio method
in a whole-core delivery experiment. Following the whole-core experiments,
dominant taxa from each trophic group will be identified and used in a
comparison of absorption efficiencies as calculated by the ash-ratio method, and
carbon retention efficiencies as calculated using a pulse-chase radiotracer
approach. Finally, the group plans to repeat the dominant taxa absorption
efficiency experiments in both Svalbard, Norway at the Ny Aalesund lab and in
Kotzebue Sound, Alaska. This proposed project compliments, and will derive
synergistic benefits from two projects funded by the Norwegian Research Council
in Norway.