* 0222075
* Conference on Plant Proteomes: Structure, Changes, Interactions, and Functions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Marit Nilsen-Hamilton, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 07/31/2003
* USD 16,000.00

Considering the recent advances in plant genome analysis and functional
genomics, proteomics research in plant systems requires integration of research
activities from different fields. The symposium entitled "Plant Proteomes:
Structure, Changes, Interactions and Functions" is designed as a "fusion
conference" to initiate and foster interactions between proteomics researchers
who are using computational and experimental approaches and plant scientists who
are adopting, or who plan to adopt, proteomics technology in their research. To
our knowledge, this symposium, to be held June 20-23, 2002, is the first to be
devoted specifically to proteomics of plants. Speakers have been invited to
present the results of their investigations of different aspects of proteomics
and plant processes. The list of invited speakers includes a balance among
different areas, backgrounds, career stages and genders. Each speaker will
present cutting-edge research on the structure, function and interactions of
proteins encoded by plant genomes; structural genomics; high-throughput analysis
of protein functions, abundance and interactions; computational analysis of
genome information to predict function and interactions; and functional analysis
of gene families. The talks will cover many areas of plant biology, molecular
physiology, enzymes and catalysis, signal transduction, metabolism, cell
biology, and responses to abiotic and biotic stress conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The
design of the symposium program is intended to: 1) foster collaborations between
participants and speakers; 2) integrate research advances with education at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels; and 3) bring new ideas, new
methods, and materials to researchers who are working in different fields.
Therefore, this conference is inherently different from typical small
conferences in which a group of researchers in one area meets regularly. This is
a fusion conference where investigators in different areas of research will meet
and discuss topics of mutual interest in the fast moving area of functional
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;Attention to the educational impact has been given in the
selection of speakers and during program development. In addition to the
participation of students and postdoctoral researchers, special events during
the conference will address educational challenges during the post-genomic era.
Systematic and focused interactions with historically black institutions and
undergraduate research experience programs will foster the attention of under-
represented and under-served students.&lt;br/&gt;