* 0222247
* CMG Training in Spatio-Temporal Statistical Analysis of Multi-Platform Ocean Optical Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2004
* USD 197,937.00

This project will be a five-week summer school on the topic of spatio-temporal
statistical analysis and its application to multi-platform, multi-sensor bio-
optical oceanic data. The summer school seeks to address some of the analysis
challenges anticipated as the Integrated Ocean Observing System is established.
These are associated with the very diverse range of spatial and temporal
sampling afforded by the different components of such a system and
contemporaneous process experiments. Statistical experts in spatial information
engineering with experience in collaboration with ocean scientists will discuss
some of the modern tools for statistical analysis of such data and associated
challenges, while ocean scientists will introduce students to the data and the
underlying science questions. The primary focus will be on analysis of the
distribution of phytoplankton, which is known to be a patchy and intermittent
field, the interpretation of measurements of which are complicated by advection.
This should serve as a model for the study of statistical techniques that can
then be applied to other environmental fields. An interdisciplinary group of
approximately 16 students will be recruited, half with background in
mathematical sciences and half with ocean science backgrounds. The goal is to
introduce students to interdisciplinary research questions and provide
stimulating ideas that they can subsequently apply in their dissertation
research.