* 0222636
* QSB:  Variability in Cell Populations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Friedrich Srienc, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/28/2005
* USD 337,030.00

The overall objective of this project is to determine the relationship between
phenotypic variations and the associated whole genome transcriptional pattern in
populations of E.coli and S. cerevisiae cells cultivated under well defined,
reproducible conditions. This will be done in three types of experiments
distinguished according to the cultivation mode. The first type of experiments
will involve simple batch cultivation of cells. Samples will be taken from
different growth stages of the culture. The second type of experiments will
involve continuous cultivation of cells in a chemostat operated at different
steady states. The third type of experiments will involve exposure of the cells
to an environmental challenge. Such challenges will include the shifting of a
steady state chemostat culture to a new dilution rate. The response to such a
nutritional upshift or downshift will be analyzed. In all types of experiments
the phenotypic variability of the culture will be determined by flow cytometry
and subpopulations of cells will be isolated via cell sorting. Sorted cells will
be subjected to protocols for microarray analysis to determine the whole genome
transcriptional profile. To make this possible an amplification protocol will be
developed to reproducibly generate a sufficient amount of RNA from only a few
cells to permit quantitative microarray analysis.