* 0222519
* VISUALIZATION:  RUI:  User-Directed Segmentation and Visualization of Volumetric Data Sets in a Collaborative, Remotely Hosted Environment
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Steven Senger, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 189,851.00

By their nature, volumetric data sets, such as CT, MRI and the Visible Human
cryosection &lt;br/&gt;images, are not subject to the same form of visual
inspection and cognitive refinement that &lt;br/&gt;human experts apply when
viewing and interpreting 2D images. &lt;br/&gt;The internal cycle of choices
made by humans as they visually survey an image is disrupted
and&lt;br/&gt;forced into an external process where users must adapt to the
technical requirements of the&lt;br/&gt;visualization system. This project
proposes to continue research into an immersive visualization&lt;br/&gt;system
that is a first step toward creating a user interaction paradigm that more
naturally&lt;br/&gt;allows users to apply their interpretive expertise to the
visualization and segmentation of&lt;br/&gt;volumetric data sets. In this
environment, segmentation, the process of isolating discrete structures within a
data volume, is performed in parallel with visualization. Users have continuous
control of the visualization and segmentation algorithms and can freely exercise
their expert&lt;br/&gt;interpretive knowledge. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
current implementation, called the Immersive Segmentation Environment,
emphasizes the &lt;br/&gt;controlled application of high computational cost
algorithms to local regions of the data volume. &lt;br/&gt;Using stereo
graphics, the user is presented with the illusion that the data volume occupies
&lt;br/&gt;physical space. The user interacts with the system using a 3D space
tracked probe. Visualization &lt;br/&gt;and segmentation algorithms continuously
operate on the data volume within a local &lt;br/&gt;neighborhood of the user.s
position. This neighborhood corresponds to the user.s visual focus
&lt;br/&gt;point. The algorithms initialize themselves based upon an analysis of
the local neighborhood and &lt;br/&gt;heuristics. The system is implemented as a
client/server application and consequently allows a &lt;br/&gt;user at a low-
cost workstation to effectively use remote computational resources to visualize
&lt;br/&gt;large volumetric data sets. The system implements two main classes of
segmentation algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;Both determine initial algorithm parameters
based upon a cluster analysis of the local neighborhood and are characterized by
an iterative refinement approach. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will continue to investigate the capabilities of this unique user interaction
&lt;br/&gt;model for visualizing, exploring and interpreting volumetric data
sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan contained in this proposal is a
natural outgrowth of prior work performed by &lt;br/&gt;the PI. This ongoing
work has had a positive impact on the curriculum, student research projects
&lt;br/&gt;and faculty research within the Computer Science department at the
UW-La Crosse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;