* 0222584
* Age Distribution of the Particulate Organic Carbon (POC) Discharged from Small Mountainous Rivers-- the Influence of Sediment Yield and Soil Residence Time
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Neal Blair, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2007
* USD 480,000.00

Abstract

Short, mountainous rivers dominate the fluvial supply of sediment to the western
margin of North America and to the oceans in general. As a result of rapid rates
of landscape denudation and minimal sediment storage in these active margin
systems, the particulate organic carbon (POC) discharged differs from that
transported by larger rivers on passive margins. Recent investigations of two
rivers in California indicate they carry a bimodal mixture of modern and ancient
particulate organic carbon (POC), derived almost equally from extant vegetation
and from the kerogen of uplifted sedimentary rocks. To a first approximation,
soils are eroded in these systems before significant aging occurs or before the
kerogen can be completely oxidized and replaced by modern material. Based on
these preliminary results, the balance between modern, ancient, and
intermediate-aged POC carried by rivers is hypothesized to depend on the
residence time of particles in the regolith. To test this hypothesis, this
investigation will characterize the suspended POC loads of six rivers that
exhibit a three-order range of magnitude in sediment yield. Four rivers
(Siuslaw, Noyo, Russian, and Eel) drain portions of northern California and
Oregon. The Waipaoa and Waiapu rivers on the north island of New Zealand were
chosen because of their extremely high sediment yields. Bedrock POC will also be
characterized in each of the watersheds. The principle measurements, OC content,
13C/12C(d13C), and 14C/12C (?14C), will be made on bulk samples, as well as
density- and size-fractionated subsamples, to determine the kerogen and modern C
contents. Additional studies of soil profiles in the Eel watershed will be
conducted to further delineate weathering and OC replacement processes in the
regolith. The evolution of the POC pool from bedrock C to modern surficial
material will be studied in thick horizons, to contrast with previous results
from thin soil profiles. The results of this study will further understanding of
the processes that regulate the quantity and character of OC transported from
drainage basins to the ocean. This study also addresses a key issue in the long-
term biogeochemical cycle, namely how previously buried OC is recycled.
Interpretation of the sedimentary organic geochemical record of past
environments, particularly on active margins, could be significantly improved by
this investigation.