* 0222342
* Spatio-Temporal High-Speed Modulation of Semiconductor Optoelectronics by Lateral Electric Fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,08/31/2004
* David Citrin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 08/31/2004
* USD 149,961.00

This proposal addresses fundamental physical issues impacting the growing area
of integration of high-frequency electronics with optoelectronics and photonics.
Our focus is the optical properties of semiconductors (quantum wells, wires, and
dots) in the presence of strong dc and high-frequency (GHz-THz) electric fields.

In particular, we will concentrate on cases where the high-frequency field is
applied capacitively, i.e., it does not introduce additional carriers. The
particular phenomena we will consider involve an interplay of ultrafast carrier
dynamics in high-frequency fields, screening of the field by the spatial motions
of the carrier distributions, propagation effects of the high-frequency field,
and the interaction of the carrier distributions with light. Thus, the work will
unite both micro and macroscopic length scales as well as dynamics on the femto
to nanosecond timescales. Our effort will be primarily theoretical and
computational.

Together with our experimental collaborators, we will study the spatio-dynamics
of carriers in photoconductors, semiconductor optical amplifier, and VCSEL's in
the presence of the high-frequency fields. In the phenomena we will explore, the
spatial aspects play a key role; on the one hand, we will be concerned with how
such high-frequency fields adversely perturb the operation of optoelectronics
and photonics, while on the other, we will explore potential phenomena for
device applications. Potential applications include ultrahigh-bandwidth optical
switching, enhanced photoconductive THz generation, ultrahigh-speed optical
modulators, lateral mode control from semiconductor light emitters, and
ultrahigh-speed beem steering.





