* 0222327
* CMG Research: Experiments Aimed at Improving Global Seismic Tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Rosemary Renaut, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 192,638.00

0222327&lt;br/&gt;Garnero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposed
research is to employ two methods from &lt;br/&gt;the field of applied
mathematics to seismic tomography; each is &lt;br/&gt;focused on the goal of
improved imaging of spatial data. This work &lt;br/&gt;is a collaborative effort
between geophysicist Ed Garnero and two &lt;br/&gt;applied mathematicians, Anne
Gelb and Rosie Renaut. This effort will &lt;br/&gt;train two graduate students
in a cross-disciplinary approach between &lt;br/&gt;the fields of applied math
and seismology. While 3D images of Earth's &lt;br/&gt;mantle have come in
clearer focus over the last 25 years, many &lt;br/&gt;challenges remain, most
notably because of incomplete data coverage. &lt;br/&gt;Inversions of seismic
data require smoothing and damping that &lt;br/&gt;effectively blurs resulting
images. The investigators are motivated &lt;br/&gt;to better resolve the
gradients and shapes of seismic velocity &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity since they
relate to temperature and/or compositional &lt;br/&gt;changes in Earth's
interior. The project will employ the following &lt;br/&gt;two methods. (1) Data
reprocessing and inversion methods: &lt;br/&gt;deconvolution methods will be
used to intelligently preprocess &lt;br/&gt;differential travel time
computations. Inversion may also be improved &lt;br/&gt;by regularization
through a total variation type penalty term. (2) &lt;br/&gt;Image reconstruction
methods: apply the Gegenbauer reconstruction &lt;br/&gt;method for high
resolution post-processing reconstruction, which has &lt;br/&gt;proven effective
for removing Gibbs oscillations without compromising &lt;br/&gt;the finer image
features even near jump discontinuities in other &lt;br/&gt;applications, such
as magnetic resonance imaging. The tasks can be &lt;br/&gt;summarized as
follows. (1) Pre-inversion processing: travel time &lt;br/&gt;series cleanup
evaluated for blind and knowledge-based deconvolution, &lt;br/&gt;approximated
from structural models of the Earth's interior. (2) &lt;br/&gt;Inversion
experiments: determine effectiveness of a total variation
&lt;br/&gt;regularization model, particularly in conjunction with the impact on
&lt;br/&gt;post-inversion processing. (3) Post-inversion processing: sharpen
&lt;br/&gt;images through removal of artifacts with the Gegenbauer
&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction method. (4) Assess solution images with data: data
&lt;br/&gt;from geographical regions with best data coverage will be analyzed
&lt;br/&gt;and modeled to test solution structures.&lt;br/&gt;