* 0222687
* QSB:  Metabolic Engineering of Quorum Circuitry - A Systems Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Evanghelos Zafiriou, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 07/31/2006
* USD 488,858.00

The long range goal of this project is to develop a computational formalism,
built on stochastic Petri nets (SPN) that will enable accurate and dynamic
calculation of all system variables and their variances. In particular,
computational models of two Escherichia coli genetic circuits (emergence and
decay of heat shock transcription factor, s?32, upon heat shock, and cell-to-
cell communication or "quorum sensing") will be constructed, validated, and
combined, suggesting the incremental assembly of predictive models that will
ultimately predict system-wide behavior. Quorum sensing is known to determine
the virulence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (causative agent for cystic fibrosis),
E. coli O157:H7 (Enterohemorrhagic E. coli), and Salmonella typhimurium (food
poisoning). The focus is on the identification of signature genes that
contribute to the synthesis and perception of autoinducer-2 (the signal molecule
for quorum sensing), as well as the interplay between this circuit and the ?s32
circuit. By assembling combined circuits and by creating an optimization
formalism that captures the stochastic variance, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) will create an approach by which phenotype can be predicted, manipulated,
and ultimately optimized. The specific optimization objective for the proposed
work is to streamline the synthesis process of biologically active recombinant
proteins in E. coli and it provides significant motivation for this work. It is
expected that stochastic variance information is important in understanding
these circuits. However, the approach is intended to evaluate this assertion at
each stage of the work.