* 0222171
* Collaborative Research: CMG: Microstructural Controls on Transport Processes in Geophysical Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 09/30/2006
* USD 383,548.00

A combination of mathematical and numerical modeling, laboratory experiments,
field experiments, and three-dimensional data visualization techniques will be
applied to the problem of determining the influence of the microscale pore
structure of sea-ice on the macroscopic thermodynamic and fluid transport
properties of such ice. The work represents a collaboration between a
mathematician, a glaciologist and a computer scientist. A variety of
mathematical approaches, including both lattice and continuum percolation
representations, to modeling the bulk properties of irregular three-dimensional
media will be applied to ice with varying degrees of connectivity between
microscale brine inclusions. Field and lab experiments, including MRI and X-ray
imaging of ice samples, will be combined with modern three-dimensional rendering
of the resulting data to provide quantitative and qualitative information about
the variability of such connectivity, particularly as a function of ice
temperature. Model predictions of macroscopic permeability and thermal
conductivity will be compared to experimentally measured transport properties.
Through a collaboration with Dr. J. Fry at Victoria University, New Zealand, and
student research projects, the models developed for transport in sea-ice will be
extended to fluid migration through rock and the diffusion of gas through
glacial firn. The latter is an important factor in the interpretation of paleo-
atmospheric composition from bubbles trapped in ice-cores. The project also
includes a substantial amount of training and outreach, with field work for
graduate and undergraduate students, and classroom demonstrations and
experiments in elementary and secondary schools.