* 0222603
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Manufacture of Aluminum and Magnesium Matrix Composites under Industrial Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Pradeep Rohatgi, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 08/31/2009
* USD 39,818.00

0222603&lt;br/&gt;Rohatgi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Pradeep Rohatgi, Professor in the
Department of Materials at the University of Wisconsin- Milwaukee (UWM),
Milwaukee, Wisconsin and Dr. Atef Daoud, Central Metallurgical Research and
Development Institute, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt. The two scientists plan to conduct
research aimed at increased understanding of fundamental phenomena of particle
clustering, settling, nucleation and particle pushing, which control the
distribution of particles and influence the properties in cast metal matrix
composites (MMC). The work should result in a decrease in cost and improvement
in properties of cast metal matrix composites. MMC consist of a metallic matrix
and a reinforcing phase such as fibers and particles. The main function of the
matrix is to transfer and distribute the load to the reinforcement. The
reinforcements impart strength, stiffness and other desirable properties like
wear resistance and a low coefficient of friction to the
composites.&lt;br/&gt;Reinforcements are generally ceramics, including oxides,
carbides and nitrides. These materials are used because of their combination of
high strength and stiffness at room and elevated temperatures. Particles are the
cheapest form of reinforcement materials and they impart isotropic properties to
composites. Among the reinforcements in aluminum SiC, aluminum oxide and fly ash
are attractive materials because of their relatively low costs and interesting
physical and mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;Although the U.S. automotive industry currently manufactures a
limited number of components from cast composites, certain problems, such as
high cost, low ductility and fracture toughness, a scatter in properties and
casting defects, prevent the widespread use of cast MMC. This research will help
overcome these issues. The U.S. PI has experience and a strong background in the
solidification processing of alloys and MMC. He and the Egyptian scientist have
established collaboration in previous joint research activities. In this
project, Dr. Daoud's experience in laboratory-scale manufacturing of MMC
components will complement the fundamental research experience of Dr. Rohatgi.
The project is likely to benefit the U.S. as well as Egypt in promoting the use
of cast metal matrix composites to conserve energy and the environment. The
research is expected to involve a U.S. postdoctorate and a number of U.S.
undergraduate students at UWM. This project is being supported under the US-
Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in
both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;