* 0222831
* Mobile Infospaces:   Mapping Information to Neuropsychological Patterns of Human-Spatial Cognition to Support Wearable, Augmented-Reality Interface Design
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Charles Owen, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2006
* USD 724,777.00

This project will develop a systematic process of mapping Augmented Reality
information organization to the human brain's prodigious capacity for spatial
cognition. Fundamental to human thinking and utilizing much of the brain's
resources is spatial cognition: a matrix for mental imagery manipulation,
mathematical reasoning, spatial mental models of time, certain aspects of
language organization, and memory organization. A neuropsychological human
factors route to AR interface design may produce a solid basis for systematic
theory, research, and guidelines for the design of mobile, AR interfaces. To
accomplish this the research will: (1) extend neurological and behavioral
research on human spatial cognition to systematically map egocentric (i.e., body
centered) spatial perception and object manipulation in AR systems; (2) add new
capabilities to the METLAB's ImageTclAR toolkit in support of this project and
spatial AR interface design, and (3) develop multi-user mobile AR prototypes
with both body and environmentally stabilized components using new hybrid
tracking techniques based on visual tracking and ShapeTape sensors. It will also
systematically conduct Human Computer Interaction experiments to evaluate and
confirm the effect of new Mobile Infospaces interface techniques on: information
object search and perception, tool and data object semantics, ease of object
manipulation and procedural performance, memory for the location and properties
of data tools and objects, group navigation, situational awareness, and
cognitive maps of the environment. Finally, the project will organize and
systematize findings and interface design experience into Mobile Infospaces AR
Design Guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new models and methods developed for
AR system design will impact mobile AR research and development in two main
ways. For research, it will provide a empirically validated theoretical
foundation for augmented reality design using a neuropsychological and
behaviorally valid human factors model of spatial cognition in information
displays. For interface design, it will provide information display guidelines
and ImageTclAR interface development tools that can establish parameters for
optimizing the placement of tools, organization of menus and data, and
clustering of procedures for mobile, augmented-reality and immersive virtual
reality users.&lt;br/&gt;