* 0222392
* National Workshop on Future Sensing Systems to be held August 26-28, 2002
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Steven Glaser, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 111,708.00

A National Workshop on Future Sensing Systems&lt;br/&gt;Summary and
Objectives&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological advancements in material science,
micro fabrication of MEMS, and&lt;br/&gt;bioengineered systems, have made the
dream of inexpensive, powerful, ubiquitous sensing a&lt;br/&gt;readily
achievable reality. With ubiquitous sensing comes extreme amounts of data, when
the end&lt;br/&gt;user actually wants information (decisions and answers).
Integration of distributed computing&lt;br/&gt;and extremely dispersed
networking with new sensor technologies and wireless
communications&lt;br/&gt;innovations, has the potential to overcome barriers of
time, scale, materials and environment.&lt;br/&gt;Sensor informatics has not
been seen as fundamental to the sensor community to date, although&lt;br/&gt;all
experts polled for this document agreed it is central to real-time
usability.&lt;br/&gt;We propose a National Workshop on future Sensing Systems -
a vehicle to start researchers on&lt;br/&gt;the road to integrating the
possibilities being developed by the many interests working in
the&lt;br/&gt;common space. The workshop will focus on exposing future abilities
of various disciplines&lt;br/&gt;working on new sensor science to other
researchers possibly doing similar or complimentary&lt;br/&gt;work in their
local space. Integration of industrial research and application development
will&lt;br/&gt;provide that pull and an avenue to large-scale, inexpensive
production. An example is the current&lt;br/&gt;availability of rugged, highly
accurate, MEMS accelerometers due to their application as&lt;br/&gt;automotive
air-bag triggers. It is hoped, for instance, that the medical researchers will
become&lt;br/&gt;aware of advanced imaging technologies developed by DARPA to
image non-metallic structural&lt;br/&gt;pieces, and can become an improvement on
existing bio-imaging techniques. We hope to push&lt;br/&gt;the community to (1)
move from merely providing data to providing information and answers;
(2)&lt;br/&gt;build road maps for long-term research; (3) build broad
partnerships; and (4) address educational&lt;br/&gt;needs.&lt;br/&gt;These
opportunities and problems are common to many agencies of Government, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;industry and academia, and is to be sponsored by Sensors
Technology, NSF Division of Civil and&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Systems, with co-
sponsorship from Dynamic Systems and Control (CMS), DARPA,&lt;br/&gt;NIH, DOE,
NIST, NASA, AFOSR, ONR, ARO, ARL, and NRL. We are expecting over
100&lt;br/&gt;attendees, with 70 of them university researchers for whom all
expenses will be covered by this&lt;br/&gt;proposal. The hard deliverable to NSF
will be a workshop report which will serve as the leading&lt;br/&gt;edge for
future of sensor-oriented research at the Civil and Mechanical Systems Division,
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;The report will be written by the co-PIs (Glaser and Pister) with
extensive guidance and input&lt;br/&gt;from the steering committee and
participants. The report will be presented to NSF by 15 January,&lt;br/&gt;2003.