* 0222900
* VISUALIZATION:  Feature Driven Simplification and Visualization of Vector Fields
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Suresh Lodha, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2007
* USD 287,255.00

In order to understand large vector fields, scientists typically attempt to
simplify and visualize the data. Broadly speaking, there are two methods for
visualizing vector field feature extraction techniques and general visualization
techniques, that offer complementary advantages. Feature based techniques
extract important features such as topology (critical point and critical
curves), attachment or separation lines, vortices, bifurcations or shock waves,
and attempt to present a simplified view of the vector field. There are two main
dificulties with this approach. First, too many features may clutter the
visualization. Therefore, there is a need to prune spurious and insignificant
features. Second, feature visualization alone may fail to provide a
comprehensive view of the data. This can be remedied by using popular general
visualization techniques such as streamlines, line integral convolution (LIC),
and stream surfaces. However, most attempts using this approach destroy the
underlying important features early in the simplification or compression
approach, as we have demonstrated in our preliminary work. Therefore, there is a
need to tie the feature simplification process with the simplification of the
underlying vector field in order to produce consistent visualization. In this
work, we propose to develop controlled feature simplification and preservation
algorithms for 2D vector fields that remove insignificant features and preserve
important ones by removing noise and by utilizing feature-driven similarity
metrics to measure and control the simplification process. The proposed
algorithms will simplify the features and the underlying vector field
simulatneously in order to produce consistent visualization. We will extend
these algorithms to 3D and ime-dependent vector fields. Additional challenges
include: (i) designing efficient algorithms and structure-similarity metrics
based on the properties of more complex 3D features such as the 3D separation
and attachement lines, vortices and shock wave regions, and (ii) tracking
simplied features over time as bifurcations may take place. We will also
quantify and visualize the uncertainty or loss due to simplification in order to
give a better sense to the scientist as to what is lost or compromised during
the simplification process. We will apply our algorithms to computational fluid
dynamics and environmental data. We expect that the algorithms and techniques
developed in this project will be applicable to a wide variety of disciplines
including aeronautics, meteorology, oceanography, environmental sciences,
astronomy, geographic information sciences, computer graphics, and computer-
aided geometric design.

