* 0223492
* ESS:    Dynamic and Stochastic Network Flow Models for Robust Revenue Optimization in Hotel Service Sector
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Karthik Srinivasan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 02/28/2006
* USD 149,550.00

The research from this project is expected to produce significant methodological
contributions to enhance revenue management practices through reservations
control, in hotels and other service industries. In particular, to increase
revenue potential, this project investigates the possibility of bridging the
revenue gap between ideal revenue solution (if all requests were known ahead of
time) and the current practice of maximizing expected revenue. To enhance the
realism of demand assumptions, a statistical framework for modeling customer
reservation decisions (consumption, cancellation, and duration) will be
proposed. The project will also develop robust initial solutions by determining
ideal revenue solutions for several demand request scenarios. Further, this
optimal apriori solution will be updated over time as current reservation
requests are revealed, thus accounting for discrepancies between forecasted and
actual demands. The research findings and models will ultimately lead to the
development of significantly improved and more robust revenue optimization
practices in a variety of service industry networks, by synthesizing
interdisciplinary principles from networks, reliability, algorithms, simulation,
and forecasting to develop new models and tools for reservations control in the
hotel industry. Benefits to various segments of the society include: (1)
decision support tools for reservations managers; (2) improved revenues and
revenue reliability for hotels and airlines; (3) health care service planning;
and (3) reservations control for special events (e.g. concerts).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In service sector industries such as airlines, hotels and
rental car agencies, simple heuristic and empirical tools have been applied for
reservations control. These current models are too restrictive in their
assumptions, and do not account for the complexity of the revenue management
problem. This project aims to develop methods for realistic modeling of the
reservations problem, thus leading to increased revenue potential and
robustness, through a network flow-based approach. To achieve these objectives,
this project aims to: (1) develop a disaggregate framework to model the demand
for reservations over time; (2) propose dynamic network models to obtain robust
optimal solutions to the real-time reservations control problem; and (3) develop
network-based models to maximize the robustness of revenues under uncertain arc
costs (due to cancellation, no shows etc.). A graduate level course on
'Reliability and Optimization of Dynamic and Stochastic Infrastructure and
Service Networks' will be developed to prepare leaders in research and practice
in various service and infrastructure industries operating complex physical
and/or virtual networks. The project will also aggressively recruit female and
minority students to enhance the diversity of engineers in the service
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;