* 0223421
* Variations in Oceanic CO2 Concentration, Transport, and Divergence in the Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Alison Macdonald, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2006
* USD 242,689.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0223421&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation will focus on the Atlantic, where a large number of the newly
available repeat hydrographic transects which included carbon measurements were
performed, to study temporal variations in total inorganic carbon and
anthropogenic carbon concentrations and the effects these changes could have on
oceanic uptake, transport and storage. Since the carbon cycle is intimately
related to the cycles of other properties within the ocean, other available
hydrographic variables such as temperature, salinity, oxygen, phosphate,
silicate, and alkalinity will be included in the study. Specifically, this
project will&lt;br/&gt; Provide a physical consistent circulation of the entire
Atlantic including transports of total Inorganic Carbon and all other available
properties.&lt;br/&gt;Estimate anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) transport and
storage throughout the basin.&lt;br/&gt;Describe temporal variations in the
carbon cycle within the Atlantic as provided by early 1990's and late 1990's
models.&lt;br/&gt;Determine the validity of the a mean state solution in terms
of these changes&lt;br/&gt; Compare CO2 and anthropogenic CO2 divergences to the
estimates of CO2 air-sea flux of Takahashi.&lt;br/&gt; Compare CO2 and
anthropogenic CO2 results to the CO2 model comparison currently being performed
at NCAR (S.Doney personal communication).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
contribution to NSF Integrated Carbon Cycle Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;