* 0223271
* RUI: Carbon Accumulation in the Fens of Boreal, Western Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* R. Kelman Wieder, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2006
* USD 484,353.00

Boreal and subarctic peatland ecosystems cover about 3-4 % of the earth's land
surface and store about 1/3 of the world's soil C as peat. Peatlands represent a
major global C pool, yet it is unclear whether they function as sources or sinks
of atmospheric C, both today and into the future. Based on a recent inventory of
peatlands in boreal western Canada (Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba),
peatland ecosystems collectively cover 365,157 km 1 of the land surface and
store 42 Pg (10 15 g) of C as peat. Previous research, including our own, has
focused on continental bog, permafrost bog, and internal lawn (areas of recent
permafrost melt) peatland features in boreal western Canada, but we now know
that 2/3 of the peatland area and C storage are not in these types of systems,
but rather are in fens, peatlands hydrologically connected to surface water and
groundwater systems. We propose to use approaches that we have used to study
bogs in boreal western Canada to compare carbon accumulation and carbon cycling
between continental bogs, poor fens and rich fens of boreal western Canada.

We will address three specific objectives: 1) to characterize and compare recent
C accumulation through coring, 210Pb-dating and modeling; 2) to quantify moss
production and decomposition rates and gaseous C fluxes, and 3) to characterize
the long-term historical development of C accumulation through coring,
macrofossil analysis, 14C dating and modeling. Results will test an overall
working hypothesis that net C accumulation is greater in continental bogs than
in poor or rich fens. High accumulation in bogs is attributed to the resistance
of Sphagnum fuscum to decomposition, despite a relatively thick aerobic acrotelm
(upper, aerobic, non-saturated peat layer) in bogs. Although poor fens and rich
fens also accumulate C, they do so at comparatively lesser rates - fen Sphagnum
and brown mosses decompose comparatively rapidly very near the surface, but
because of high water table positions, the acrotelm is thin. It is the thin
acrotelm that promotes C accumulation in fens. Differences in C accumulation
rates are determined more by differences in decomposition than by differences in
NPP. Findings from this research will improve our estimate of the extent to
which peatland ecosystems of boreal western Canada do or do not represent a net
sink for atmospheric CO2.

