* 0223277
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Supply Chain Design for Customer Service, Robustness and Information Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Mark Daskin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 95,646.00

Inventory management has become a major concern in the service industries.
Heightened customer service expectations and reduced product life spans have
complicated inventory decision-making. Firms must decide where to stock
inventory and how much inventory to maintain to satisfy customer demands. We
will develop a new integrated facility location and inventory models that will
allow managers to better decide (1) how many facilities to have, (2) where those
stocking locations should be, (3) how much inventory to stock at each site, (4)
how often to reorder inventory, and (5) which customers to assign to each site
to minimize overall costs while satisfying specified customer service
requirements. The research will build on earlier work of the PIs in which we
have developed an elementary location/inventory model. We will enhance the
modeling approach in a number of different ways to allow the model to capture
actual location/inventory problems more realistically. In particular, we will
incorporate (1) capacity restrictions at the distribution centers (DCs) and in
the various transport channels, (2) more realistic local delivery routing from
the distribution center(s) to the retailers including less-than-truckload (LTL)
shipments, (3) multiple shipment modes from suppliers to DCs, and (4) multiple
classes of inventory and multiple customer types. We will develop models that
consider customer service requirements and that optimize service subject to
resource constraints. We will then develop multi-objective models that explore
tradeoffs between service and cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another significant
task will be incorporating future scenarios in location/inventory models to
identify solutions that are robust with respect to uncertainty about the future.
We also will develop a new class of location models based on concepts of
reliability. A solution is deemed reliable if the system can continue to
function adequately even if parts of the system (e.g., DCs or network links) are
removed. Finally, we will explore the incorporation of information sources into
integrated facility location/inventory models. A variety of solution procedures
will be employed for the models to be developed including optimal, non-linear
integer programming based algorithms when possible and heuristic procedures when
optimal algorithms cannot be devised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;