* 0223724
* Quorum-Sensing and Growth Control in Rhizobium sp. NGR234
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* William Fuqua, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 305,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;Gram-negative bacteria within the Proteobacteria group commonly use
acylated homoserine lactones (acyl-HSLs) as molecular signals in the process of
quorum sensing (QS). Quorum-sensing bacteria release diffusible signal molecules
that accumulate with increasing cell number, eventually triggering adaptive
responses. Regulatory proteins of the LuxI and LuxR families are usually
required for synthesis of, and response to acyl-HSLs, respectively. Diffuse
populations of cells generally produce a constant, low level of acyl-HSLs, and
these rapidly diffuse out of cells down their concentration gradient. Elevated
population density increases the relative acyl-HSL concentration, eventually
fostering interaction of the signals with LuxR-type proteins, which in turn,
control the transcription of target genes. Although this basic mechanism is well
conserved, the context of QS regulation and the cellular functions under its
control are highly variable among different bacteria. This project focuses on
the regulatory context of a LuxI-LuxR-type QS system employed by the nitrogen-
fixing plant symbiont Rhizobium sp. NGR234, its mechanism of action, and its
effect on cellular growth rate. NGR234 incites the formation of nitrogen-fixing,
symbiotic nodules on the roots of a wide range of leguminous plants. The
molecular basis of this promiscuous host interaction has been extensively
studied. Many of the functions that orchestrate the plant interaction are
carried on the 536 kb pNGR234a plasmid. The pNGR234a plasmid also carries a
large cluster of genes homologous to plasmid replication (rep) and conjugal
transfer (trb/tra) genes from other bacteria. The rep/trb/tra cluster includes a
LuxI-LuxR-type regulatory pair, TraI and TraR, and the additional QS regulator
TraM. TraI synthesizes 3-oxo-octanoyl-L-homoserine lactone and TraR interacts
with this acyl HSL to regulate tra/trb and rep operon expression. TraM acts to
inhibit TraR through formation of an anti-activation complex. A molecular
genetic approach is being employed to study the QS mechanism in NGR234. The
regulatory signals and pathways that control traR expression will be
investigated to determine the conditions that foster QS. Based on analogous
systems, the host plant is likely to play a role in this regulation. The QS-
regulated pNGR234a genes under TraR control will be identified and the mechanism
by which TraR controls their expression elucidated. Lastly, control of cellular
growth rate by QS, a common QS regulatory target among several Rhizobium
species, will be examined. Findings generated from the research project will
provide fundamental information on cell-to-cell communication in an important
plant symbiont, and the role of this communication in its highly plastic host
interactions. More generally, these studies will add to the understanding of how
cell-to-cell communication directly and indirectly influences interactions with
host organisms, and enables quorum-sensing microbes to balance their
physiological activity with the host environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
bacterium Rhizobium sp. NGR234 uses cell-to-cell communication during its
symbiotic relationships with higher plants. The research project examines the
biochemical and genetic mechanisms underlying this intercellular communication,
and its influence on the interaction of this bacterium and host plants. The
findings generated from this work will provide fundamental knowledge required to
take advantage of these bacterial communication systems, for combating
infectious disease in plants and animals, as well as promoting beneficial
microbial interactions. &lt;br/&gt;