* 0223894
* MUSES:    Biocomplex Dimensions of Industrial Ecology:  Decision Analysis and Sectoral Trade-Offs in the Management of Toxic Metals Used in the Electronics Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Jean-Daniel Saphores, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2005
* USD 124,978.00

This Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for: Materials Use: Science,
Engineering, and Society (MUSES) project will establish an interdisciplinary
framework for discovering practical generalizable concepts in the interface of
biocomplexity and industrial ecology by focusing on a case study of the
materials cycle of toxic metals such as lead (Pb) used in the electronics
industry. The planned activities include preliminary research on alternative
metal alloys used in the manufacture of solders, and educational workshops in
industrial ecology and biocomplexity to explore the theoretical foundations of
synergistic convergence between these concepts. The educational program will
facilitate the integration of methods and expertise from faculty and students in
materials science, engineering, economics, environmental science, and public
health. Lead is widely recognized as one of the most pervasive toxic metals used
in manufacturing products that are widely disseminated in the public domain. The
use of Pb-solders in the microelectronics industry is undergoing intense
scrutiny. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no uniform policy at the
state, national or international levels for regulating Pb for this purpose, and
there are no specific programs for tracking the fate of Pb after the sale of
products. The situation is changing rapidly as international initiatives in the
European Union and Japan have emerged to limit public exposure to Pb-containing
products. These initiatives threaten current manufacturing practices in the
United States, and they may change the balance of international markets for
electronics products. The proposed research will develop a framework for
decision-making under conditions where multiple datasets in different
disciplines intersect to predict toxic metal flows in the electronics industry
and the consequent societal impacts.