* 0223822
* Upper Troposphere/Lower Stratosphere Water Vapor in the National Center for Atmospheric Research Whole-Atmosphere Climate/Chemistry Model
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Andrew Dessler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2005
* USD 428,015.00

The abundance of water vapor in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere is
an important determinant of the chemical and climatic state of the earth's
atmosphere. The ability to predict water vapor at these high altitudes remains
one of the most important challenges in general circulation models. The PI will
investigate this using the National Center for Atmosphere Research (NCAR) Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM). He will introduce two stable
isotopes of water, HDO and H218O, and the associated physics, into the model. In
addition, medium-lived tracers, such as ozone and carbon monoxide, that do not
condense will be analyzed. The research will be focused in the "tropical
tropopause layer", a transition region between the troposphere and the
stratosphere. Model integrations for several years will be compared with
measurements using traces such as ozone, carbon monoxide, and the isotopes of
water. The results should provide new understanding of the pathways by which air
reaches the stratosphere and of the mechanisms that control the stratospheric
water vapor concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work will be done
in collaborating with the WACCM team at NCAR. The isotopic modules developed
will be made available to the general community and, possibly, be included in
the standard version of the WACCM. The research will also provide good
opportunities for graduate studies.