* 0223097
* Ostracode Mg/Ca Paleothermometry in the Arctic Ocean: A Calibration Study
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Gary Dwyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 12/31/2003
* USD 73,972.00

0223097 &lt;br/&gt;Dwyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator will undertake core-top calibration studies to improve the
applicability, accuracy, and precision of ostracode magnesium/calcium (Mg/Ca)
paleothermometry to reconstruct the late Quaternary temperature history of the
Arctic Ocean and adjacent seas. The existing core-top calibration is limited to
adult shells of one genus, Krithe, and includes sediment core tops that are not
likely to be of modern age. These factors, along with variations in the spatial
and temporal abundance of adult shells of Krithe in the Arctic, contribute to
diminish the accuracy, precision (1 to 20C, depending on number of shells
available), and applicability of ostracode paleothermometry in the Arctic Ocean.
However, studies suggest that the adult shells of other common Arctic genera may
also be used for Mg/Ca paleothermometry, and, furthermore, that eldest juvenile
shells display thermodependent uptake of magnesium identical to that of adult
shells. If so, the combination of juvenile/adult calibrations and calibrations
from multiple genera may provide the improvements necessary to more accurately
and precisely quantify the temperature history of the Arctic Ocean and adjacent
seas. To test this hypothesis, modern adult and juvenile shells of common Arctic
genera Krithe and Cytheropteron will be analyzed from an extensive collection of
existing, high-quality sediment core tops (box cores and multicores) from
Arctic, Atlantic, and Pacific ocean basins at water temperatures ranging from -1
to 120C. A subset of these core tops have been used for benthic foraminifer
Mg/Ca calibration studies. The research will provide for the first comprehensive
calibration-comparison of the two most promising deep-sea paleothermometers
available for paleoceanographic and paleoclimate studies. &lt;br/&gt;