* 0223084
* ESS - Collaborative Research:  Modelling the Patient's Perspective on Organ Acceptance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Mark Roberts, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 02/28/2005
* USD 158,200.00

Funding for this research project is provided under the Exploratory Research on
Engineering the Service Sector (ESS) program announcement. The United Network
for Organ Sharing (UNOS) manages the national organ donation and allocation
system. When UNOS offers an organ to a transplant patient, the patient decides
to either accept it or to continue waiting. The research question at hand is
therefore: if offered an organ, when should a patient decide to accept it? This
question is of great practical importance, as it is a life-or-death decision
faced by thousands of people per year, and growing. This research will focus
only on livers, however the methodology used is applicable to other organs. The
key issue in modeling this decision process is the assumption made regarding the
information available to the patient. In all cases, the pertinent
characteristics of the liver are known at the time an offer is made, as is the
patient's health. What is uncertain is the ranking of the patient relative to
the other patients on the waiting list, and the timing of future offers. The
simplest version of this problem is the case in which a living donor exists.
Typically, however, donors are cadaveric. In the latter situation, liver
offerings occur randomly and patients "compete" with each other for livers
without knowing their relative position on the waiting list.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will formulate mathematical models
for the living-donor as well as the cadaveric-donor situation, in which the
objective is to maximize, for instance, "quality-adjusted life expectancy" or
some other objective. A model will be developed for the hypothetical situation
in which the composition of the waiting list is public information.
Specifically, the reach team will formulate these situations as Markov decision
processes and engage in numerical and analytical study of the resulting optimal
policies. Numerical study will make use of extensive clinical data, identify
patterns that will guide the analytical study, and allow the researchers to
explore the potential value in publishing the waiting list. Analytical study
will determine conditions under which the optimal policies have appealing,
consistent structure. It is interesting to note that most of the existing
literature focuses on modeling the organ transplant problem from UNOS's
perspective, rather than from the patient's perspective as considered here.
Note, however, that the research may have an impact on this policy-perspective
line of research, since one of the objectives is to study the policy change that
involves the publication of the waiting list.&lt;br/&gt;