* 0223364
* Designing an Optimal Financing Mechanism for Dental Care Among the Elderly:   Reducing the Costs Associated with Information Assymmetries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Julie Swann, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 02/28/2005
* USD 144,622.00

In this project, we will document costs and health outcomes associated with
various financing mechanisms for delivering dental care to individuals age 65
and above. In addition we will analyze the cost-effectiveness of existing
financing mechanisms and additional mechanisms developed for this research to
deliver dental care to the elderly. Key to evaluation of financing mechanisms is
an understanding of the roles of information asymmetries, which can drive up
insurance premiums and result in the less than the socially optimal quantity of
insurance purchased and utilization of dental services. The basic framework of
the project is an optimization model that minimizes the total cost of dental
services subject to receipt of primary and secondary prevention equaling its
highest feasible value. We will use this optimization model to compare existing
financing mechanisms for dental care as well as hybrid and new mechanisms
designed in this research.

The delivery of health services in the United States is considered by many to be
at a crisis point due to both the continued rising costs and disparities in the
health status and receipt of preventive care between the poor and wealthy. One
area of health service for the elderly that is often ignored is dental care
where the rate of inflation has recently outpaced the medical care inflation
rate. Approximately $61 billion is spent annually on dental care. In this
research we will estimate the impact that the lack of dental insurance has on
disease, determine how effective various forms of health allocation are, develop
strategies to improve this allocation, and design a framework to analyze costs
which may be generalized to other areas of health care. For example, as health
care costs incurred by the elderly increase, there will be increasing pressure
to extend Medicare coverage, e.g. prescription drugs. However, there are unique
characteristics to the elderly that may make allocation difficult. Many similar
issues exist for the low-income population.