* 0223905
* Genomics of Plant Stress Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Hans Bohnert, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* TEST user
* 10/31/2005
* USD 2,640,643.00

The long-term goal of this proposal is to identify and determine the role of all
the genes involved in a plants response to salt and water stress. Over the last
decade, it has become clear that responses to water deficit and ion imbalance
are governed by complex molecular and biochemical signal transduction processes,
which coordinately act to determine tolerance or sensitivity at the whole-plant
levet. Within the last five years, however, advances in genomics, informatics,
and functional genomics have made it technically feasible to gain a global
understanding of the gene complement or set that becomes integrated to effect
abiotic stress tolerance. To tackle the genetic basis of this tolerance in
higher plants in the most efficient, comprehensive, and integrative way possible
Drs. R. Bressan, P. Hasegawa ( Purdue University), R. Burnap, J. Cushman, R.
Prade (Oklahoma State University) and H. Bohnert, D. Gaibraith, J-K. Zhu
(University of Arizona) have formed a consortium. Each participant has a
documented and extensive experience in this research area with a proven record
of productivity and in many instances past or present collaborations.

This team will employ three distinct, yet complementary approaches to isolate,
characterize, and assess the function of the core set of stress-related genes
that provide the basis for the water and salt stress tolerance phenotype in
plants.

The first approach will encompass the functional identification of genes
important to stress tolerance by random and targeted mutagenesis strategies in
well-studied model organisms (Synechocystis PCC6803, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Aspergillus nidulans, and Arabidopsis thaliana). For Arabidopsis, they will
identify, map and clone genetic Ioci from a large set of mutants defective in
stress tolerance or signaling. The resulting sets of mutants will be used for
complementation studies using genes from higher plant sources.

The second approach aims to define the core set of stress-related transcripts
from both sensitive plants (Arabidopsis thaliana and rice) and resistant plants
(Dunaliella salina and ice plant) using EST sequendng and microarray analysis.
This approach will focus on the comparative study of gene expression patterns in
salt and drought sensitive and resistant organisms, since recent studies of
resistant organisms have revealed the existence of mechanisms of stress
tolerance not present or not appropriately expressed in sensitive organisms.

The third approach will extend the functional analysis of stress-related
transcripts by monitoring in situ Iocalizations by using promoter trapping
approaches and gain-of-function studies.

These approaches represent logical extensions of ongoing work in individual
groups within this center. They will foster interaction and integration of
Consortium activities through daily interactions, workshops/meetings and
extended work periods in member laboratories for their students and postdoctoral
fellows to ensure a new generation of researchers trained in multi-faceted and
interdisciplinary problem solving. The impact of abiotic stress on crop
productivity is remarkable according to USDA statistics and amounts to two-
thirds of all yield reductions in agriculture. This proposal is exceptionally
timely, combines unique expertise, is hypothesis-driven and culminates in a
dearly defined goal - understanding the number, nature and networking of genes
and physiological mechanisms that constitute plant abiotic stress tolerance.