* 0223598
* SGER:  Selfassembly of Heterogeneous Microsystems on ppNIPAM-Coated Microheater Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Karl Bohringer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 03/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Recent research has demonstrated that self-assembly of engineered components,
usually built with silicon micromachining techniques, can be an enabling
technology in the fabrication of powerful complex microelectronic microsystems
that incorporate mechanical, optical, and wireless components. Self-assembly can
produce microsystems containing thousands or millions of parts, eliminating the
reliance on conventional, sequential pick-and-place approaches. A promising
approach towards micro self-assembly is proposed, which employs capillary action
and interfacial energies as its driving force. Parts and substrates with
specially designed hydrophobic 'binding sites' will attach to each other when
immersed in an aqueous medium. The immediate goal of this high-risk, high-
potential-payoff project is a proof-of-concept demonstration of a novel
selfassembly technique using a thin-film biomaterial (plasma polymerized
N-isopropylacrylamide, ppNIPAM, developed at the University of Washington
Engineered Biomaterials Center,) on silicon microheater arrays. This approach
exploits a remarkable property of NIPAM, which reversibly switches from
hydrophilic to hydrophobic at approximately 32C. In this project, ppNIPAM will
be coated onto micromachined heater arrays, effectively creating a
'programmable' surface where self-assembly takes place only on selected, heated
(i.e., hydrophobic) sites. A key point in this project will be the integration
of a biomaterial into a MEMS device. If successful, this technique will provide
a radical improvement over currently existing microassembly approaches, and
could likely set off a larger research effort and numerous practical
applications, e.g. in the next generation of portable communication devices or
distributed microsensor networks. In addition to micro self-assembly, arrays of
ppNIPAM microheaters have other exciting possible applications. In collaboration
with Prof. Buddy Ratner (UWEB), this work will explore possibilities to create
micro arrays for controlled protein adsorption ("protein chips"), and films with
variable permeability for controlled drug release.