* 0223797
* Workshop Proposal: Participant Support for GSA Penrose Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Catalina Luneburg, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2003
* USD 18,950.00

A Penrose Conference entitled "Three-dimensional flow, fabric development and
strain in deformed rocks and the significance for mountain building processes:
new approaches." will be held at Monte Verita, Ascona (Switzerland) on August 18
- 24, 2002. Conveners are John Ramsay (Cratoule, France), Peter Hudleston
(University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, @), Hermann Lebit and Catalina Luneburg
(PI's on this request, State University of West Georgia, GA). The conveners are
using the Alps as a template in which to focus the conference on the spatial and
temporal complexities of defon-nation and defon-nation processes in three-
dimensions. Topics include heterogeneous strain patterns in multiply defon-ned
rocks, shear zone kinematics and dynamics in 2D and 3D, scale dependency of
structural analysis, micro-mechanics and dynamic boundary conditions of defon-
nation systems. A combination of keynote talks and research presentations will
fon-n the framework for six separate sessions representing different approaches
and techniques employed. The sessions will cover a broad range of subjects and
methodology from a large-scale view of lithospheric processes down to the micro-
mechanics at the grain scale of deformation. Of the six conference days, three
will be reserved for field excursions, while the rest will be devoted to
lectures and poster presentations. The PI's also plan an optional pre-conference
field trip that will transect the Western Alps. In this proposal the PI's
request funding to support the participation in the conference of graduate
students, young career scientists and senior scientists. In particular, they
want to give scientists from economically weak countries the possibility to
attend, and a large part of the budget is therefore dedicated to the assistance
of such individuals. The major goal of a Penrose conference is to foster
scientific exchange and discussion on frontier research topics. A good mixture
of young scientists and more established ones will be fundamental to
facilitating integration of new and emerging ideas with present knowledge and
will help ensure stimulating discussion at the conference. Such discussion is a
vital part of scientific progress and a key element of a Penrose Conference. The
budget will support 15 graduate students, 6 young career scientists and 4 senior
scientists, of whom about one third will come from economically disadvantaged
countries.