* 0223495
* Collaborative Proposal: Using Radiocarbon Measurements of Benthic Megafauna as a Tool for Assessing Bentho-Pelagic Coupling in the Marine Organic Carbon Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Craig Smith, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2005
* USD 31,922.00

This project examines the seasonal variation in the nature of the organic carbon
deposited on continental margins. The flux of organic carbon reaching the seabed
can be quantified by using particle traps or by modeling seabed burial and
regeneration rates, but the quality (i.e., its lability) has been difficult to
assess on continental margins because of co-deposition with old refractory
carbon from marine and terrestrial systems. Bomb Carbon-14 (C14) is a useful
tracer of recently produced marine organic matter, but this signal is masked in
continental margin particle?trap samples and surface sediments by the older and
refractory carbon that is re-suspended and reworked from shallower marine
deposits. Surface deposit feeders in continental margin systems have been shown
to sequester the labile fraction of the total organic flux reaching the seabed
as a result of their selective ingestive and digestive processes. Therefore, the
body tissues and the gut sediments of these benthic fauna can provide a record
of the labile material reaching the continental margin seafloor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial C14 data indicate that the body tissues of surface
depositing feeders are enriched in this radioisotope by 100 to 300 per mil
relative to the surface sediments in which they live and feed. Based on
mass?balance C14 calculations, the labile component may comprise only a few
tenths of a percent of the total organic matter in the surface seabed, yet the
surface deposit feeders exhibit C14 signatures in their body tissues (+20 to +80
per mil) dominated by the local bomb?produced signal . Thorium (Th) data from
continental margins suggest that as much as 50% of the recently deposited
organic matter on the continental margin sea floor may pass through the guts of
deposit feeders prior to microbial degradation or burial. Therefore, C14
measurements on benthic fauna can provide a unique tool for assessing the
lability of organic matter reaching the seafloor and for tracking the fate of
this material in the benthic food web. Many existing diagenetic models treat
organic matter regeneration by microbes and deposit feeders as a batch process
with a single carbon degradation constant for the bulk organic matter. The C14
data clearly show that ingestion of organic matter and digestion of this
material are very selective processes. The C14 analyses from the California
Borderland and the Antarctic continental margin have shown the utility of this
approach for documenting variations in the organic carbon lability of surface
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. DeMaster and Smith will expand the initial
studies to enable assessment of seasonal variations in the quality of organic
carbon deposited on the seabed. Particle?trap samples, benthic?faunal tissues,
gut samples and surface sediments have been collected during 6 cruises to the
California Borderland and 5 cruises to the Antarctic continental margin covering
the major seasonal variations in organic carbon supply. Funds are requested for
making 150 C14 analyses (and complementary C13, N15, and C/N measurements) on
these samples so that a time series quantifying the nature and flux of organic
matter reaching the seabed can be determined. They will assess not only seasonal
variations in the nature of particle selection and digestive selection processes
for organic matter, but also the changes in these processes as a result of
feeding strategy (epibenthic surface deposit feeders, vs. subsurface deposit
feeders vs. head?down subsurface deposit feeders) on the seafloor.&lt;br/&gt;