* 0223262
* U.S.-Hungary Statistics Research: Topics in Change Point and Unit Root Analysis; Rates of Convergence, Permutations and Bootstrap
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Lajos Horvath, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 32,450.00

This US-Hungarian collaborative project between Lajos Horvath and Piotr Kokoszka
of the University of Utah and their Hungarian partners, Istvan Berkes and Endre
Csaki of the A. Renyi Institute of Mathematics in Budapest, examines several
statistical and probabilistic problems concerned with the detection and analysis
of nonstationarities of various types of stochastic processes. Emphasis is on
careful analysis of the rates of convergence of the statistics of interest and
on the properties of the associated permutation and bootstrap procedures. Junior
researchers from the University of Utah also
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint research plan includes an
investigation of change point procedures and the properties of unit root tests,
that are to be developed based on resampling and subsampling methods. These are
fundamental questions associated with the detection of time series. Results may
have practical applications in economics and the financial sector by leading to
useful derivations of properties of CUSUM procedures and GARCH models. For
example, findings may improve models for stock returns that can be refined to
accommodate infinite error variance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This statistics
research project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.