* 0223634
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:  Electronic and Magneto-Optic Properties of Rare-Earth and Transition Metal based Materials for Spintronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Walter Lambrecht, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF-02-036. The proposal focuses on the
study of novel magneto-electronic and magneto-optic materials and the
computational methods that need to be developed to understand their properties.
The potential of alternative magnetic semiconductors based on rare-earth (RE)
compounds such as GdN and Transition metal (TM) and/or RE doped semiconducting
ScN. Related metallic compounds, such as Mn-N compounds will also be studied. It
is anticipated that the different nature of magnetic couplings of RE and TM
atoms will enhance the magnetic effects when the two are combined. The main
perceived advantage of the class of materials are: 1) full intersolubility
because of the common rocksalt structure, 2) the complementary character of TM
and RE exchange interactions and magnetic moments, 3) the possibility of n-type
based spintronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterostructures of these materials
with the compatible high temperature semiconductor GaN will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;To develop a better understanding of the origin of magnetism
in these and more traditional magnetic semiconductors, a new computational
approach is proposed, based on the screened exchange method. This
&lt;br/&gt;method will be extended to be capable of dealing with both the band
gap problem of semiconductors and &lt;br/&gt;strongly correlated narrow band
open shell systems and will be implemented within the context of the linear
muffin-tin orbital band structure method. It will further be made compatible
with the non-collinear&lt;br/&gt;magnetism approach based on the rigid spin
approximation within atomic spheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The calculations will
provide information on the electronic structure and on the origin and the nature
of the magnetism in the systems under study. To validate the new method, it will
first be applied to systems for &lt;br/&gt;which experimental data are available
already and subsequently will be used in a predictive character for new
materials. To aid in the comparison with experimental data, magneto-optical
properties will be calculated as well as basic electronic structure and magnetic
exchange interactions. Extensions of currently available optical calculation
methods to incoporate the new screened exchange methodology and its application
to magneto-optical properties such as the magneto-optical Kerr effect and the
Faraday rotation effect&lt;br/&gt;will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;