* 0223570
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Clovis Technological Organization, Understanding Technological Strategies through Cached Assemblages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,215.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Bruce Huckell and David Kilby
will investigate caches of artifacts made by Clovis hunter-gatherers. The Clovis
culture, best known for its large fluted projectile points found in association
with extinct mammals such as mammoth and giant bison, occurs extensively in
North America, perhaps over the entire continent. Reliable dates from Clovis
sites cluster tightly between 13,500 and 13,000 calendar years B.P. Clovis
lithic tool assemblages commonly include fluted projectile (spear) points, large
stone bifaces and bifacial cores, blades and blade cores, and a limited variety
of smaller tools made on flakes and blades. Bone and mammoth ivory tools are
less common, but equally geographically widespread components of Clovis
assemblages. Clovis caches have been found throughout many areas of the United
States Plains and Rocky Mountains, as well as the Great Lakes area and currently
reside in museums and private collections around the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to provide a
comprehensive view of the organization of Clovis lithic technology. Most of what
is known about Clovis technology is derived from artifacts at the end of their
useful lives that have been discarded or abandoned at kill or camp sites.
Current models of Clovis toolkits are largely reconstructed from these discarded
portions of tools and waste material. Caches of Clovis artifacts, however,
provide a unique window into Clovis technology that is not found in other Clovis
assemblages, because artifacts from caches appear to have entered the
archaeological record at some point before their usefulness was depleted. Thus,
they may more directly represent the components and form of the working toolkit
carried by Clovis people. By systemically linking artifacts from caches to those
from kill and camp sites, we can address traditional issues of primary artifact
production, artifact use, and discard, as well as issues concerning maintenance
and storage strategies in between. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 20 Clovis caches
have been identified and reported; however, this designation obscures
considerable variability. It is unlikely that all caches served the same
purpose. Their functions may have included, among other things, artifact and raw
material storage, and ritual abandonment. Deducing the general function of
individual caches is a necessary step in relating them to abandoned artifacts
from non-cache sites. Thus, in addition to understanding technology, this
research will investigate caching as a behavior, and evaluate possible roles
that it played in Clovis technological organization and land use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Caches are discrete assemblages that provide a snapshot of
artifact form at some point along a continuum of stone tool reduction subsequent
to raw material acquisition and previous to discard. Approaching cached
assemblages from this perspective can potentially fill a critical gap in the
available data concerning Clovis lithic technology. In the process we will
gather and make available data that are not easily accessed due to inadequate
publication, dispersed locations, and, in many cases, private ownership.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite roughly six decades of intensive investigation,
there remains significant uncertainty concerning even the most general aspects
of Clovis adaptations. The results of this research will provide insight into
the technology, subsistence, mobility, and ideology of these people who were
arguably the first inhabitants of the New World. More specifically, this
research stands to define and evaluate the role of material caching in the
adaptations of Clovis people, the results of which may be applicable to a better
understanding of all hunter-gatherer groups.&lt;br/&gt;