* 0223434
* Collection and Analysis of Radio- and Stable Carbon Isotopes along Selected CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography Lines
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Ann McNichol, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2010
* USD 358,239.00

&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0223434&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DI14C and DI13C samples will be
collected and analyzed along selected Repeat Hydrography cruises where there has
never been radiocarbon sampling or where 15-20 years have passed since the last
sampling. The isotopic data will be promptly provided to the community; and will
contribute to the establishment of good reference materials for the measurement
of both isotopes. Radiocarbon in DIC has long been recognized and used as an
important tracer in studies of ocean processes and, in particular, of the ocean
carbon cycle. Data collected as part of this study will be used to study mixing,
ventilation rates and residence times in the deep ocean, air-sea gas exchange,
thermocline ventilation rates, and to calibrate ocean general circulation models
(OGCMs). Tracer studies of anthropogenic sources of carbon rely heavily on a
precise knowledge of the oceanic bomb inventory and its changes over time. This
can only be done globally with confidence if there are good datasets with good
spatial representation of the oceans. Direct calculations of the bomb inventory
penetration depth changes on a global basis are only possible with repeated
global measurements over time. The sampled locations have been selected to
reflect both the spatial and the time-series requirements for a successful ocean
carbon study. DI13C tracks the input of anthropogenic CO2 in a complementary
fashion to DIC. The d13C of CO2 added from fossil fuel and biomass burning
(approx. -25 ) is significantly lower than that of atmospheric CO2 (approx. -7 ,
pre-industrial). The atmospheric change can be tracked in the surface ocean
waters with the precise measurements of DI13C proposed here. The samples
collected here will allow the modeling community to combine DIC, DI13C and DI14C
in OGCMs. This will greatly improve the accuracy of the reconstructions possible
and, consequently, increase confidence in the predictions made from these
models. One cannot emphasize enough the importance of conducting these isotopic
measurements in conjunction with the measurement of carbon parameters and other
transient tracers. The combined amount of information possible will be far
greater than that available alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
contribution to NSF's Integrated Carbon Cycle Research Program and the CLIVAR
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;