* 0223611
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Thermomechanical Investigations of High Speed Machining of Aluminum
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Dolbow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 156,074.00

During the machining of metals, plastic deformation and friction lead to the
production of heat in the workpiece, which results in complex deformation in the
cutting zone. Recently, several numerical models of this highly coupled process
have been produced in response to the increased interest in high speed
machining. However, while a small number of researchers, in the past and
recently, have examined temperature fields during cutting at low or traditional
cutting speeds, few if any experimental studies exist that measure temperature
fields in the work piece during cutting at high speeds, i.e. 20-100 m/s. It is
important to characterize the thermal field in the cutting zone during high
speed machining in order to characterize friction and wear characteristics in
this area and to understand the heat generated there, which affects chip
formation and possibly residual stress formation as well. Ultimately, such
investigations should direct further advancement in materials development for
high speed machining applications. In this work, infrared detectors are used to
experimentally measure the temperature distribution at the surface of a
workpiece during high-speed orthogonal cutting, and complex numerical models are
developed to predict and understand the active mechanisms of deformation and
failure. Finally, from these temperature measurements and models, the heat
generated in the primary deformation zone is examined, characterized and related
to the residual stress distribution in the workpiece.&lt;br/&gt; The main thrust
is to better understand, and therefore reduce, the effects of residual stress on
distortion of high-speed machined, thin walled components. The approach draws on
the experience of experimental, numerical and industrial researchers to attack
this difficult, economically relevant problem with a comprehensive experimental,
theoretical and developmental approach. Specific benefits of the proposed work
are: (1) Detailed understanding the interplay between finished product quality,
material behavior and heat generation in high speed machining; (2) New efficient
and accurate computational algorithms to model high-speed machining in order to
facilitate full understanding of the observed interactions between tool,
material and cut quality or residual stress formation; and (3) New directions in
aluminum alloy design for high-speed cutting with emphasis on minimizing the
effects of machining and alloy processing parameters on the formation of
residual stresses in the finished product. Overall, an integrated materials-
mechanics/modeling-experimentation approach to the problem will be used
throughout the work leading to a multidisciplinary solution to the problem of
residual stress distortion of parts machined at high-speed.