* 0223739
* Geoarchaeological Contexts of Human Occupation During Lower Palaeolithic Eurasia: A Micromorphological Study of Sediments from 'Ubeidiya , Dmanisi and Gran Dolina-TD10
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Ofer Bar-Yosef, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,330.00

With National Science Foundation support graduate student Carolina Mallol will
conduct the analytic stage of her dissertation research, which comprises a
geoarchaeological study of three different Lower Paleolithic sites. As the main
focus of the research, the technique of soil micromorphology (the microscopic
analysis of soils/sediments) will be applied to examine the nature of hominid
occupations in the Old World at, Dmanisi (Republic of Georgia) 1.7 million years
ago, and 'Ubeidiya (Israel) 1.4 million years ago, and Atapuerca-TD10 (Spain)
0.3 million years ago. The goal of this work is to identify anthropogenic
remains such as the residues of prehistoric fires, to characterize them at a
high level of accuracy and to associate them with activities that might have
been performed by hominids at these sites. The research is integrated with the
ongoing archaeological projects at each of the above-mentioned sites and
exemplifies a form of successful multidisciplinary effort given that existing
analytic results by other team members from other subdisciplines such as
zooarchaeology and lithic technology are being considered complementary to this
work. Soil micromorphology has been successfully applied to several prehistoric
sites, revealing details of activities and interpretations that escaped field
observation and laboratory analysis. In a geo-archaeological study of this kind,
the first stage entails how the prehistoric deposits accumulated and under what
kind of environmental conditions, followed by their analysis from an
archaeological perspective using data available from the recovered remains. The
high degree of resolution that can be accomplished by this technique will
facilitate testing the currently debated hypotheses in the context of early
hominid behavior, such as the use of fire. Conclusions obtained about the
precise nature of the occupational contexts from 'Ubeidiya, Dmanisi and
Atapuerca will represent a solid background on which to base further
interpretations of early hominid behavior. Particularly significant is the fact
that these three major archaeological sites represent the earliest hominid
occupations of Eurasia containing well-documented lithic, faunal, and
paleoanthropological assemblages. The first migrations out of the African
continent, the colonization of temperate regions of Eurasia, and settlement in
habitats where humankind was unprecedented, are phenomenal events that encompass
morphological and behavioral implications for the hominid populations in
question. While paleoanthropology and archaeology can reveal features of these
events to us, search for archaeological evidence beyond the visibility of the
naked eye, through soil micromorphology can provide reliable information
concerning the natural and anthropogenic contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;