* 0223662
* Conference: 2002 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing, July 6th to 11th, 2002, Saxtons River, Vermont
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Stephen Massey, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Cropper
* 05/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2002 FASEB
Summer Research Conference&lt;br/&gt;July 6th to 11th, Saxtons River,
Vermont&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Massey, Chair, and Marla Feller, Vice
Chair&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the sixth in a series of biannual
conferences devoted specifically to the structure and function of the retina.
The presentations will cover many facets of retinal biology including: the
cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying retinal development; the basis of
neural signaling; the identification of neural circuits by which the retina
processes visual input; the code by which retinal output is conveyed to the
brain; and the resulting abilities and limitations of visual behavior.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This five-day conference will attract approximately 180
participants from around the world. Thirty-five internationally recognized
experts have agreed to present their work in formal talks, which are organized
in nine thematic sessions, chaired by leaders in each field. Furthermore,
emphasis has been placed on the contributions of younger scientists in an early
career stage. In addition, there will be two informal workshops on new
technology. Finally, all participants are invited to display their latest
results during two poster sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference format
is designed to foster direct scientific exchange among participants. Students
and post-docs, particularly from under-represented minority groups, are strongly
encouraged to attend. Many young scientists find new positions from contacts
made at this meeting. There is ample time for discussion at the end of each
presentation, during workshops and poster sessions and there is further free
time for informal exchange at meals, which are
communal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this conference attracts most of the
field's senior investigators, it has been highly successful in disseminating
results, and has significantly affected the course of retinal research.
Furthermore, because the retina is at the forefront of neural circuit analysis
and development, this conference will have far-reaching effects on the
neuroscience community at large. Women are well represented and we have made a
successful effort to attract under-represented minorities to the conference.
However, we are particularly proud of our success in featuring young speakers
and providing travel support for students to attend this
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;