* 0223008
* Transient Rection Techniques to Explore Surface Processes of Photocatalytic Oxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Darrin Muggli, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 04/30/2007
* USD 234,100.00

Photocatalytic oxidation (PCO) surface processes will be investigated using
transient reaction analysis, temperature-programmed desorption/oxidation, co-
adsorbed reactant studies, and isotope labeling. Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy will be linked to these transient reaction methods to monitor
surface species during PCO while a mass spectrometer (MS) will quantitatively
determine products in the reactor effluent. Both in situ DRIFTS and transmission
techniques will be explored. The research will focus on the determination of the
role of acid sites during PCO, examination of the activity of various sites on
titania, investigation of the role of water during PCO, and quantification of
the effect of rate promoters and mixture effects using co-adsorbed reactants.
The research will provide a better fundamental understanding of the nature of
active sites and adsorption on photocatalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will increase the applicability of PCO for the removal of volatile
organic chemicals frequently found in wastewater streams. Impact on the basic
understanding of photocatalyst deactivation is anticipated. Educational aspects
of the broader impacts include the involvement of both graduates and
undergraduates in research activities. Undergraduates will participate in the
project through independent research courses, EPSCoR Advanced Undergraduate
Research Awards, and a recently awarded NSF-REU grant. Because enrollment of
Native Americans is high at the University of North Dakota, the project will
strongly increase opportunities for under-represented groups in the field of
engineering. Women undergraduates and graduate students have also worked on
preliminary aspects of the research. The project will also increase
opportunities to K-12 students through participation in the NSF EPSCoR Outward
Bound program, which provides opportunities for high school seniors to
participate in research activities at the University of North Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;