* 0223509
* Coastal Zone Control of Interacting C-N-P Cycles Under Global Change
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Fred Mackenzie, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 220,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of the global coastal zone, approximated
by the continental shelves, is about 7% of the surface area of the ocean, and
its volume is about 9% of the volume of the surface ocean layer (3 x 10 km).
Despite its relatively small size, up to 20% of total oceanic biological
production occurs there, at least 80% of the mass of terrigenous materials
reaching the ocean is deposited there, and 30 to 50% of total carbonate and 80%
of total organic carbon accumulation in the ocean occur in the coastal zone. In
addition, coastal zone environments are being heavily impacted,
disproportionately more than the much larger area of the open ocean, by
modifications of the biogeochemical dynamics and cycles of carbon (C), nitrogen
(N), and phosphorus (P), three of six of the major life-essential elements (the
other three being sulfur, oxygen, and hydrogen). The coastal zone is strongly
affected by the environmental biogeochemical changes occurring in its
neighboring domains of land, ocean, sediments, and atmosphere. Because of both
climatic change and human-induced forcings on the environment, it is this region
of the ocean that is most susceptible to anthropogenic fluxes of materials and
changes in water quality, organic productivity, and biodiversity. Until very
recently, little attention has been paid to the coastal zone on a global scale
and its role in the global C-N-P biogeochemical cycles that are important to
life on land and in the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we address a
fundamental scientific problem that is also of substantial concern to the human
society: the recent past, present, and near future behavior of the coupled C-N-P
biogeochemical cycles in the coastal marine zone that are influenced by climatic
change and human activities. The time scale of our research is decades to
centuries, including the past 300 years of increasing human perturbations and
about a century of the future, as based on current projections of the magnitudes
of the perturbations. To accomplish our goals, we employ a modeling methodology
developed by us under previous NSF support to analyze environmental change in
the global system of four do-mains: land, ocean, sediments, and atmosphere. We
deal with the following research issues: (a) the changing roles of nutrient N
and P fluxes to the coastal zone from land and from the open ocean as drivers of
organic productivity and the carbon cycle in general; (b) the changing state of
organic carbon metabolism in the coastal zone, and the release or uptake of
atmospheric carbon dioxide by coastal waters, as controlled by the production
and storage of organic and inorganic carbon (CaCO3 ) in the coastal zone; (c)
the effect of rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations on the organic and inor-
ganic C-N-P cycles in the coastal zone, and (d) the effects of possible changes
in the thermohaline circulation of the ocean and in coastal oceanic circulation
(upwelling and onwelling) on the C-N-P cycles in the coastal margin and their
linkages to the land, atmosphere, sediments, and open ocean.&lt;br/&gt;We expect
our results to show to what extent the coupling between the C-N-P cycles and
increased nutrient inputs from changes in the land domain have been responsible
for the biogeochemical dynamics of the coastal zone from the recent past to the
present. We also expect our results to show that the projected trends of
environmental change on land, changes in the magnitude of thermohaline
circulation and coastal upwelling, and global climate are likely to make the
coastal zone a more active and quantitatively important site in the transfer of
materials between it and the domains of land, atmosphere, and sediments and sub-
domain of open ocean in the future. This tentative conclusion has important
implications to the biogeochemical state of the coastal zone relative to the
human population that depends on it.&lt;br/&gt;