* 0223576
* Engineering of Project-based Production Systems for the Delivery of Engineered-to-order Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Iris Tommelein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/2005
* USD 151,152.00

Project-based production (PBP) systems are dedicated to designing and making
artifacts that provide value to project stakeholders. Their delivery is a type
of service when the artifacts are engineered-to-order (ETO). Delivery of custom
products that enable realization of customer purposes, while being responsive to
the needs of multiple users and various life-cycle requirements, pushes PBP
systems and ETO products firmly into the service category.

Numerous services are delivered through PBP systems and produce ETO products.
Examples of services belonging to this class of problems are health care (e.g.,
patient diagnosis and treatment), construction services, film and theatrical
productions, software engineering, oil field development, consumer product
development, custom ship building, and work orders (e.g., job shops). Learning
how to design, control, and systematically improve the delivery of ETO products
can be understood as a topic of importance to many-if not most-service
functions.

The objective of this research is to determine how to reduce lead times for one
type of ETO product in the engineering and detailing phases of delivery using
industry-practice data, computer-based simulation, and computer-based as well as
practice-based experimentation. Taking one step towards the PI's larger
objective, this exploratory research focuses on one type of ETO product, in one
type of service function, namely the delivery of steel reinforcing bars used in
pre-cast or cast-in-place concrete. What is learned from this project will be
cast in a theoretical framework and applied to delivery processes for other ETO
products in various service sectors, in an effort to establish one component of
a general methodology for the design, control, and continuous improvement of
project-based ETO product delivery.

The working hypotheses are that (1) Traditional ETO delivery is characterized by
sequential processing, with each participating company or department sub-
optimizing total system performance; (2) Rework in engineering and detailing
exceeds 10%; (3) The ratio of idle time to total time spent by an ETO product as
it moves from engineering through fabrication and delivery exceeds 20 to 1; and
(4) The ration of fabrication shop cycle time to fabrication lead time exceeds
10 to 1. The research will aim to reject these. Should findings, however,
reinforce these hypotheses, then opportunities for radical improvement in the
ETO delivery process abound. A research agenda will then be staked out, and,
time permitting under this 18 month grant, selected improvements will be
implemented and tested.