* 0223043
* Integrating Computational Science and Grid Workflow Management Systems to Create a General Scientific Web Service Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jerry Greenberg, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 475,000.00

The project defines a workflow management system that allows for a portal
construction that is fully integrated with emerging gird standards (e.g., Globus
Toolkit), but can be dynamically reconfigured.. By defining an XML schema to
describe both resources and application codes and interfaces, the project will
enable a pluggable event-driven model where grid-enabled services can be
composed to form more elaborate pipelines of information processing, simulation,
and visual analysis. The workflow management system will be developed in close
collaboration with computational chemists to not only provide proof-of-concept,
but also to insure that the complete system is immediately useful to an
established scientific community. The proposal is designed by chemists and
grid/portal technology specialists to work together to form a usable system. The
technology/science mix is essential as it ensures the success of grid-based
projects in that it dramatically improves the utility for the end-user.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal also works closely with chemists and portal
specialists to ensure a truly usable system. The resulting architecture will
shield users from the complexity of the HPC resources, and allows them to focus
on their scientific problem. The goal is to enable scientific programmers the
ability to integrate their software into the workflow system in a simple,
effective and uniform manner.&lt;br/&gt;