* 0223283
* Designing Dynamic Service Networks Effectively through Information Management:    Case Studies on Construction Project Management and Crisis Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Burcu Akinci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/2005
* USD 148,376.00

Abstract - Designing Dynamic Service Networks Effectively through Information
Management: Case Studies on Construction Project Management and Crisis
Management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The service industry now dominates the US
economy with over 67% of the labor force and 58% of the output. Taking
manufacturing as the model, the service industry increasingly decentralized its
operations and outsourced its activities, even their "back office operations."
This has resulted in a network of services that, in order to provide customer
satisfaction, require effective designed, management, and control. Current
approaches for service network design focus on maximizing the productivity,
reliability, and quality at the individual service unit level; they neglect
issues associated with the network that ties these units.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information dependencies are an important link betwee
service units, often forming the backbone of the service network. Identification
and management of information dependencies between different service units
within a network is thus tantamount to designing and managing an effective
service network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop formalisms for
the design of effective service networks by modeling and management of
information dependencies between service units. The development effort will
target construction project management and crisis management services since the
need for effective service design tends to be emphasized in these types of
short-lived (discontinuous) services that are composed of dynamic networks of
service providers. Additionally, the unique characteristics of these service
will provide an opportunity to explore and formalize less-studied areas of the
service management field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the context of
construction and crisis management, the research will explore and identify
important design parameters, performance metrics, and project requirements
needed to design a framework for service networks. Information flows and
management requirements of the networks based on these factors will be
characterized. Information and communications technology will be investigated as
ways to meet those requirements. Existing information and communications
technology tools/platforms will be evaluated as enablers of coordination and
enhancers of performance for project-specific services. Existing
operations/engineering modeling tools for designing robust and dynamic project-
specific service networks will be analyzed and evaluated. Finally, case studies
and a service network design simulation game will be developed to educate
business and engineering students as well as industry and academic leaders about
the challenges of designing service network organizations and the role of
information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will significantly
contribute in terms of a list of common network design parameters of short-lived
dynamic service networks, assessment of the role of current information and
communications technologies within service networks, an initial formalism
designing service networks, and a simulation game on service network design.
This formalism will help define the gaps in our knowledge and frame a research
agenda for refining a framework for service network design, construction
management and crisis management. &lt;br/&gt;