* 0223813
* Microbial Community Ecology of Tick-Borne Human Pathogens
* BIO,EF
* 05/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Keith Clay, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2003
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this research is to characterize the microbial communities of
several common tick species using DNA sequence-based techniques, analyze
patterns of co-occurrence among microbial taxa, and mathematically model the
consequences of those patterns on epidemiological dynamics of tick-borne
pathogens. In particular, tick-borne microbial communities will be analyzed for
evidence of competitive exclusion or mutual facilitation among species.
Ecological interactions among species are one of the most important factors
shaping community structure. Much research has demonstrated that ticks may
simultaneously harbor multiple bacterial species, including symbionts
transmitted through eggs and pathogens transmitted through bites. Habitat
alteration, expanding ranges of tick vectors, and increased populations of
shared animal hosts make the movement of pathogenic microorganisms among tick
species more likely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a worldwide basis, ticks serve as
vectors for more human pathogens than any other arthropod. In the United States,
the large majority of cases of vector-borne disease arise from tick bites (e.g.
Lyme Disease), and new tick-borne pathogens are regularly being discovered. This
research will contribute to our basic understanding of microbial communities of
arthropods and the epidemiology of pathogen transmission. Further, this research
will have a practical impact on management of tick-borne diseases and our
understanding of the relationship between invasion of tick vectors and the
emergence of novel, or more highly virulent, human pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;