* 0223022
* Efficient Approaches to Summarize Sparse &amp; Dynamic Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 522,000.00

On Line Analytical Processing tools are increasingly being used in diverse
applications that range from business applications, earth science applications,
to digital libraries. Such applications need to deal with sparse and very large
data sets. Furthermore, such data is updated in append-only manner. In this
proposal novel summarization and aggregation techniques are being developed for
high-dimensional datasets which are sparse and are updated in append-only
manner. These techniques are multi-resolution in nature, and exploit the
efficiency with which disks can read sequentially stored information. Iceberg
CUBES, which have proved to be particularly beneficial for sparse data cubes,
are also being efficiently computed and materialized. Such sparse data cubes are
represented using ranges, and approximations are derived by maintaining
information regarding top-k and bottom-k elements. &lt;br/&gt;Multidimensional
data poses significant challenges not only in terms of storage and retrieval but
analyzing such data becomes a fundamental problem. The focus of this research is
on the issue of developing efficient representations for very high-dimensional
data that are both sparse and dynamic. Efficient representations will enable
fast analysis of high-dimensional data specially in the context of spatial and
temporal data, high resolution images, and time sequences. The research is
timely and is likely to have a profound impact on the development of efficient
analysis tools for large high-dimensional datasets. The research results will
contribute towards the design and development of next generation of on-line
analytical processing tools sorely needed both in industrial as well as
scientific communities. Currently, earth scientists often need to scale down
earth-science computational models due to the complexity of spatial joins for
large datasets. Similarly, datacubes for high dimensional datasets are avoided
by analysts. The tools and algorithms produced will be a step towards
alleviating many of these problems. The PIs frequently interact with members of
the local high-tech industry to provide necessary guidance for solving problems
related to the scalable management of high dimensional data. The research
results will directly contribute to such efforts. The research will also serve
as a vehicle for the advanced training of graduate students and the software
developed will be used in both graduate and undergraduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;