* 0223380
* Exploratory Research On Engineering The Service Sector:  Towards A Decision Informatics Paradigm
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2004
* James Tien, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This study will pursue opportunities for extending engineering- and science-
oriented tools and approaches to newly emerging types of service enterprises."
Consistent with this purpose, the study, after considering the scope, size and
unique features of the U.S. service sector, identifies characteristics of
emerging services from an engineering perspective, which, in turn, augur for a
decision informatics paradigm for enhancing the production and delivery of
services. Within the framework of this new and critical paradigm, the study is
focused on the real-time fusion and analysis of multiple non-homogeneous data
sources.

The intellectual merit of the study is underscored from two critical
perspectives. First, it is problem-driven, not solution-driven. Thus, it is the
engineering-related characteristics of emerging services that have clearly
identified a need for decision informatics, which represents a paradigm shift
towards real-time, information-driven decision making. Second, it will add
significantly to the body of knowledge on the real-time analysis and fusion of
multiple data sources. While there is considerable literature on data mining and
pattern analysis, tools for undertaking real-time data analysis are lacking. For
example, from a real-time decision perspective, it is critical to know whether
the most recently received data point is part of the historical distribution of
data points or an outlier that is, in effect, the beginning of a new phenomenon
-- thus, adaptive, real-time decision making is not only affected by data input
but also by the sequence of that input. Additionally, while there is
considerable literature on the fusion of data from multiple, homogenous --
mostly quantitative -- sources, tools for undertaking real-time fusion of data
from multiple, non-homogeneous (i.e., quantitative and qualitative) sources are
lacking. Moreover, the coincident real-time fusion and analysis of multiple,
non-homogeneous data sources represents an area that has eluded investigation;
yet, emerging services -- especially e(lectronic)-services -- require such tools
to enhance their production and delivery. It should also be noted that the study
seeks to have the broadest impact, especially in regard to the integration of
research and education. First, it constitutes the basis for a doctoral
dissertation effort. Second, the developed, real-time data fusion and analysis
tools will be applied to an existing service problem, employing real data from
multiple, non-homogeneous sources. Third, the results will be presented and
published in a number of venues. Fourth, the results will be appropriately
structured and integrated into two existing courses being taught by the
Principal Investigator; a graduate course, entitled "Evaluation Methods for
Decision Making," and an undergraduate course entitled "Decision-Focused Systems
Engineering." Fifth, consistent with the exploratory nature of the study,
additional research needs will be identified to further underpin the decision
informatics approach, similar to the continuing development of bioinformatics.