* 0223685
* Life History Trait Plasticity and Adaptations to Stochastic Environmental Divergences: High Arctic Charr
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Richard Radtke, Sea of Dreams Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 12/31/2002
* USD 145,000.00

This project represents an interdisciplinary study to test the hypothesis that
stochastic climate and habitat variation play a decisive role in the development
of life history traits, adaptation mechanisms and population composition in
Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus) in high Arctic freshwater systems. The study
combines geophysical observations with ecological, retrospective and genetic
studies. The circumpolar Arctic charr is ideal for the study of how
environmental factors affect life history, population structure and diversity in
fishes. Charr populations demonstrate a tremendous ecological plasticity and
adaptations to harsh environments. Arctic charr is the only freshwater fish in
the high Arctic and, as elsewhere, has a broad range of life-history strategies
including anadromous, resident and landlocked populations. In lake systems with
migrating charr, the population may consist of a mixture of parr, postsmolt and
adult migratory individuals, as well as small-sized resident, large-sized
resident and large formerly resident individuals transformed to anadromy.
Determination of the effect of the environment upon phenotype, genotype and life
history relies upon detailed information about environmental conditions,
developmental rates, genetic information, migration rates and mortality in
extreme conditions. In this study charr populations from lake systems from the
Thule, Disko, Nuuk and Julianehaab, Greenland and Ellesmere Island, Canada areas
will be compared.

Charr in all systems experience highly stochastic environments. Whereas
adaptive, genetic and behavioral mechanisms associated with migration are well
known for salmonid fish at lower latitudes, knowledge about such mechanisms in
anadromous charr inhabiting high latitude environments are still fragmentary. In
general, mechanisms associated with seasonal events must be pre-adaptive. How
such pre-adaptive mechanisms are timed with, and influenced by, the
unpredictable physical conditions allowing for charr migration in high Arctic
systems will be the main topic of this propject.



