* 0223109
* Collaborative Research:    Advanced High Dielectric Constant Gate Materials for CMOS Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 01/31/2004
* USD 312,962.00

0223109&lt;br/&gt;Gangopadhyay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project between Texas
Tech University (TTU) and Lehigh University (LU) is a 'collaborative' program to
conduct experimental and theoretical research in the area of advanced, ultra-
thin, high dielectric constant (high-K) gate materials for CMOS devices. This
project is motivated by the drive for advanced CMOS integrated circuits with
sub-micron feature sizes and the need to scale the gate dielectric, while
preventing quantum mechanical gate current between the silicon inversion layer
and the overlying gate electrode. The Si02 gate dielectric will be replaced with
a single or dual -dielectric film consisting of one or more monolayers of SiO2
to form the interfacial transition region covered with a high dielectric
constant (high-K) insulator. The rationale for a collaborative proposal effort
lies in the capabilities of the two universities with Texas Tech University
expertise in high-K gate materials and Lehigh University integrating these
materials into an advanced gate insulator for CMOS devices. Texas Tech
University will form high-K, Hf02 or ZrO2 gate dielectrics with a custom
electron-beam deposition system to be incorporated into advanced CMOS devices
and test structures fabricated at Lehigh University. The collaborative project
will employ the combined and complementary analytical techniques at both
universities, such as reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and
low energy electron diffraction (LEED) at TTU combined with angle resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy (ARXPS) and high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM) at LU. Electrical characterization will be performed with
unique test structures and measurement techniques to determine carrier trapping
in the high-K dielectrics. The PI's multidisciplinary faculty will bring
together students from different departments and universities in a project to
foster a broad research and educational experience. The project is enhanced with
close collaboration and outreach to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;