* 0223441
* Black Carbon (BC) and the Global Carbon Cycle:  Assessing BC Inventories in Coastal Seawater and Burial in Margin Sediments off the Northeastern USA
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Philip Gschwend, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 08/31/2006
* USD 479,900.00

Black carbon (BC), the product of incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and
biomass, has been increasingly formed and released to the environment for the
last century. Presently, it is not possible to quantify (a) the rate of BC
burial in the oceanic margin sediments (where most of the OC is buried), (b) the
size of the BC reservoir in seawater, nor (c) riverine fluxes of BC to the sea.
Consequently, it is not possible to ascertain how important BC is to the global
carbon cycle. Under this award, the PIs address the following questions: (1)What
is the contribution of BC burial relative to the organic carbon burial in the
Gulf of Maine? (2) How has the input flux of BC to the region's bed sediments
changed in the past century? (3) What is the inventory of BC in coastal seawater
off the Northeast United States and what temporal and spatial variability does
this reservoir exhibit? (4) What are riverine inputs of BC to the Gulf of Maine
and how do they vary seasonally? (5) Can we identify the major sources of BC
(e.g., fossil fuel combustion-produced soots, biomass-derived chars) for coastal
seawater and sediment of the Gulf of Maine? In addition to measurement of the
abundance of BC in various samples, the approach taken includes field sampling
of water and sediments, and a variety of analytical measurements including:
234Th/238U disequilibria in water and unsupported 210Pb in sediments, carbon
isotopes in BC and specific compounds as well as with key marker compounds
(PAHs), and BC analyses in radiometrically dated sediment cores collected from
within and beyond the Gulf of Maine.

