* 0223090
* Support for 2002 Annual Meeting Phytochemical Society of N. America, in Merida, Mexico, July 20-24, 2002.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Jack Schultz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,500.00

The 2002 annual meeting of the Phytochemical Society of North America will bring
together (for the first time) chemical ecologists, biochemists, natural products
chemists, molecular biologists, biomedical researchers and
ethnobotanists/pharmacologists with the goal of developing an integrative
synthesis of these traditional and modern approaches. Symposia will address ways
in which these subdisciplines can inform each other about the evolution,
function, and potential applications of plant products. Submitted presentations
also will address the meeting theme, "Integrative Phytochemistry: From
Ethnobotany to Molecular Ecology". This meeting will provide an unprecedented
intersection of biology, chemistry, sociology and medecine and should produce
truly novel, international and cross-cultural collaborative opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt; The meeting will be held in Merida, Mexico; attendees will come from
all over North America and Europe (at least), and strong representation by
Mexican and other Latin American scientists and students is expected. Meeting
organizers highlight participation by students and younger scientists by
organizing a 'young researcher' symposium and seeking support for travel by
students, postdocs, and junior researchers. Proceedings will be published as a
volume in the widely-read "Recent Advances in Phytochemistry" series.
&lt;br/&gt;