* 0223843
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Cognitive Neuroscience of Category Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Russell Poldrack, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 02/28/2007
* USD 439,586.00

Cognitive Neuroscience of Category Learning

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Gluck and Poldrack and colleagues
will conduct a three-year investigation to test two hypotheses about the roles
of the basal ganglia and medial temporal lobe, and their interaction, in human
category learning. They will test these hypotheses using a combination of
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and studies of patients with damage
to either the basal ganglia (due to Parkinson's disease) or to the medial
temporal lobe (due to anoxia or other causes). The first hypothesis to be tested
is that the basal ganglia are particularly important for learning based on
trial-by-trial feedback, whereas the medial temporal lobe is more important for
observational learning in the absence of feedback. The second hypothesis is that
the engagement of these two regions during category learning is modulated by the
structure of the category that is being learned. For example, some categories
are largely determined by single features; for example, most animals with a beak
are classified as birds. Other kinds of categories require integration of
information across multiple features. We will test the hypothesis that the
medial temporal lobe is crucial for learning categories based on combinations of
features, whereas the basal ganglia are important for learning categories based
on single features. The topic studied in this project is categorization, oneof
the most important acts of human cognition. Categorization is the recognition
that various individual objects can be classified into larger groups that
resemble each other in some way. Research in cognitive psychology has provided a
set of sophisticated models for how humans learn new categories. However, little
is currently known about how these operations are achieved in the brain. Most of
our current knowledge comes from studies of patients with brain disorders. In
particular, patients with Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases have trouble
learning some kinds of new categories, though they are able to learn other kinds
of categories. These diseases affect a set of deep brain structures known as the
basal ganglia, and their impairment on some category learning tasks suggests
that the basal ganglia may be critical for category learning. However, the exact
role of the basal ganglia is unknown. Whereas patients with Parkinson's and
Huntington's diseases are severely impaired at learning some new categories,
patients with amnesia following damage to the medial temporal lobe (including
the hippocampus) are only subtly impaired at category learning. Initial
neuroimaging studies have shown that this region is deactivated when normal
individuals are learning new categories, suggesting that it is not involved.
Furthermore, imaging studies have shown that that activity in the medial
temporal lobe and basal ganglia during category learning is negatively related:
Individuals with more activity in one region tend to have less activity in the
other. These findings suggest that these two regions may interact during
learning, but the nature of this interaction is unclear at present. These
studies have important implications, both for the basic understanding of
category learning and for the understanding of the brain systems involved in
such common disorders as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. Most importantly,
the results of these studies will provide stronger constraints on theories of
human category learning that are currently possible using behavioral measures
alone.