* 0223568
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:   Interplay Between Spin Transport and Magnetization Dynamics in Magnetic Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the
interplay between current-driven magnetization dynamics and the magnetic
configurational dependence of spin transport in magnetic nanostructures, i.e.,
to give a holistic approach to the magnetic and transport properties of magnetic
nanostructures subject to a high current flow. Spin accumulation and spin
current of non-collinear magnetization configuration will be obtained by solving
the generalized Boltzmann equation for several magnetic nanostructures,
including the multilayered pillar structure and the magnetic nanoconstriction.
Magnetization dynamics in the presence of the spin accumulation and spin
currents will be investigated by solving Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation
through micromagnetics codes. Since the spin accumulation and the magnetization
dynamics are inter-dependent, the equations of motion for the non-equilibrium
electron distribution and for the local magnetization must be self-consistently
determined. An extensive comparison between the models developed in the program
and updated (available and on-going) experimental data on spin-current induced
magnetization dynamics will be given throughout this research project. The
project calls for a well-balanced combination of fundamental studies and
applications of the theory for spintronics devices. The outcome of the proposed
research will be a general theoretical framework for understanding the
magnetization dynamics of magnetic nanoconstrictions in a non-equilibrium state
of conduction electrons. It is likely that the numerical modeling tools
developed in this research can be widely used for experimentalists and engineers
to explain, predict, and design for high-speed, high-density spintronics and
other nanoscale devices. We anticipate a broad impact from this program through
participation of a graduate student and a post-doc, and through partnership with
industry. The research results will be integrated into an emerging course of the
frontier of magnetism and magnetic materials that the PI intends to develop.