* 0223304
* Service Engineering of Human Tele-Queues: Empirically Based Stochastic Analysis of Telephone Call Centers
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Lawrence Brown, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 12/31/2003
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract PI: Lawrence Brown (Proposal ID: 0223304) Title: Service Engineering of
Human Tele-Queues: Empirically Based Stochastic Analysis of Telephone Call
Centers

A call center is a service network in which agents provide tele-services, here
to be interpreted as either telephone-based services or, more generally, any
online-service with customers and servers being remote from each other. Sound
scientific principles are prerequisites for sustaining the complex socio-
technical enterprise of the call center. The overall goal is to contribute to
the theory that supports these principles and to the creation of new ones.

The proposed research builds from an analysis of two unique records of call
center operations. These contain complete call-by-call data for the operation
over approximately one year of two call centers of different size and
operational character. This data will be analyzed in order to understand the
mathematical queueing and network characteristics of such centers as they
actually operate. Special attention will be given to developing an understanding
of the role of scale and efficiency in relation to such operations. The
operational features of these two call centers will then be adapted into
realistic mathematical models for their operations. On the basis of preliminary
work already done, it is expected that these mathematical models will differ in
important respects from those in current use for analyzing and predicting
performance of such large-scale service operations. In particular, it is
expected that new theory will be specifically developed to model the queueing
characteristics of centers that operate in the high-volume high-efficiency
domain.

Call centers can be viewed naturally and usefully as queueing systems. The most
widely used queueing model for a call center is the Erlang-C model, also denoted
the M/M/S queue. The Erlang-C model is deficient as an accurate model of a call
center in several respects. One of these is that it does not accommodate
customers' impatience while waiting.

The Erlang-C model also involves other assumptions such as Poisson arrival times
and exponential service times. These will be tested against the data, and
modified theory will be developed as needed. The statistical analysis will be
derived according to the primitive elements of a call-center: system arrivals,
queueing behavior, and services. The interactions of these primitives will then
be analyzed, and alternate queueing models will be examined.