* 0223152
* Attaining Research Extensive University Status in Puerto Rico: Building a Competitive Infrastructure
* O/D,EPS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Manuel Gomez, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 05/31/2007
* USD 6,300,000.00

The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico through the University of Puerto Rico will
implement a proposal aimed at (1) increasing the human resource base and
research capacity in targeted thrust areas; (2) strengthening institutional
research and development infrastructure; (3) accelerating NSF co-funding and
movement of researchers into mainstream programs; and (4) continuing to
transform the institutional science and technology culture. To achieve these
objectives, the Puerto Rico Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (PR EPSCoR) will (1) increase the number and productivity of faculty,
post-doctoral fellows, and students; (2) enhance high performance computing to
support cutting-edge research that cuts across the disciplines; (3)
institutionalize a research management system consistent with the significant
increase in research funding and Research Extensive University status; and (4)
support technology transfer and mutually beneficial
collaboratives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PR EPSCoR will focus on three thrust areas
and six sub-areas: (1) Environmental Science and Engineering with Atmospheric
and Climate Studies, Terrestrial and Coastal Ecology, and Natural Hazards
Mitigation Engineering as sub-areas; (2) Information Technology Research with
sub-areas Telecommunications and Networking, and Computational Sciences and
Visualization; and (3) Materials Science, including Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology as its only sub-area. Furthermore, Puerto Rico has established
benchmarks and target milestones for women graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers in the fields represented by the thrust areas.&lt;br/&gt;