* 0223443
* ESS:  Scheduling, Inventory Optimization, and Coordination of Maintenance Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 01/31/2005
* USD 149,453.00

Many industries rely on the proper functioning of their key assets, such as
airlines on jet engines, electric utilities on generators, and army on
helicopters. A major obstacle on operation efficiency is asset unavailability
due to forced outages and regular maintenance operations. The latter, although
planned, are generally characterized by long and uncertain durations. Instead of
embarking on more intensive preventative maintenance programs, the trend is to
monitor asset conditions, and perform maintenance operations based on conditions
to increase asset availability and reliability. This imposes major challenges on
the networks of maintenance service providers, including overhaul shops, repair
shops, part distributors, and spare part manufacturers, to have short and
predictable turn-around-times while reducing inventory in systems traditionally
characterized by massive uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is on
scheduling, inventory optimization, and coordination of maintenance service
networks under dynamic and uncertain environments to meet the challenges of
condition-based maintenance. By closely collaborating with our industrial
partners United Technologies Research Center and i2 Technologies, Inc., three
tasks will be performed. The first is to develop stochastic scheduling models
for large-scale maintenance service networks based on a realistic discrete event
simulation model provided by our industrial partners. A solution methodology
that synergistically combines Lagrangian relaxation, stochastic optimization,
and simulation will be developed to provide near-optimal solutions with
quantifiable quality and confidence. The second task is to optimize part
inventory, balancing inventory costs and part availability for the scheduling
method developed in Task 1. Continuous and periodic review policies will be
examined, and ordinal optimization will be used to optimize policy parameters.
In the third task, the autonomous nature of various organizations within a
maintenance service network will be investigated. The models of Tasks 1 and 2
will be decentralized. A distributed and asynchronous coordination mechanism
will be established, building on the pricing concept that is consistent with the
methods developed in Task 1. A mobile multi-agent system will then be designed
and implemented for Internet-based deployment of the methods, paving the way for
the next generation e-maintenance service networks. Our goal is to reap the full
benefit of the new maintenance service paradigm by having short and predictable
turn-around-times while reducing inventory levels, making the best use of asset
condition information and the information technology infrastructure. The
research shall also significantly contribute to the fundamental theory and
practice of scheduling, inventory management, and supply chain management,
improving the competitiveness and reliability of service
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;