* 0224501
* Cataclysms and Catastrophes--The Role of Science
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Sean Gulick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2005
* USD 152,126.00

Cataclysms and Catastrophes-The Role of Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing and field-testing curricular materials based on the role
of science in causing and/or understanding catastrophes. The goal of the
materials is to help high school teachers incorporate geoscience into the
teaching of physics, mathematics, chemistry and biology. This is a collaborative
effort involving The University of Texas Institute for Geophysics (UTIG), the
Bureau of Economic Geology (BEG), and 4empowerment, an Austin-based private
education company. Events that capture the imagination of teachers and students
alike-for example, the devastation caused by Hurricane Mitch in Honduras, the
Chicxulub asteroid impact event, and the Oklahoma City bombing-serve as the
basis for inquiry-based, hands-on learning activities using data collected by
UTIG and BEG scientists. Activities are expanded to include familiarity with
technologies such as Lidar (LIght Detection And Ranging), drilling, seismic
reflection and refraction, geophysical logging, and the Internet. In addition to
teaching concepts in science and mathematics, the "Cataclysms and Catastrophes"
theme carries implications for disaster prevention, awareness, and decision-
making. Using seismology to identify nuclear explosions (monitoring nuclear
testing worldwide), for example, is important to national security. Curricula
materials developed for the project are posted to 4empowement's Web site,
Cyberways and Waterways, and promoted through e-letters and collaborations with
state and national science and mathematics educational agencies and
organizations. Curricular materials are also available to DLESE (Digital Library
for Earth System Education) and to the 76 institutional members of the National
Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics, Science and
Technology. The project builds on the recent success of the ongoing TEXTEAMS
(Texas Teachers Empowered for Achievement in Mathematics and Science) Leadership
training program for the Texas high school science course, Geology, Meteorology
and Oceanography (GMO), developed in 2000 by UTIG researchers. TEXTEAMS is a
certification program of professional development and leadership training for
K-12 teachers sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the Texas
Education Agency. The curricular materials developed for "Cataclysms and
Catastrophes-The Role of Science" will also complement the TEXTEAMS GMO offering
designed around the theme "From Texas to Antarctica".&lt;br/&gt;