* 0224069
* RUI:Stress, Stages of Memory and Event-Related Potentials
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Richard Lewis, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 408,785.00

RUI: Stress, Stages of Memory, and Event Related Potentials

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Weekes and colleagues will conduct
a three-year investigation into the relationships among psychological stressors,
stress hormone levels, memory functioning, and electrical brain activity. In one
study, they will investigate the effects of group differences (high vs. low) in
chronic stress hormone secretion on memory performance and electrical brain
activity during both the encoding and retrieval stages of a verbal memory task.
In a second study, they will investigate the associations among the acute stress
response, memory performance and electrical brain activity during both the
encoding and retrieval stages of a verbal memory task. These studies explore
suggestions from various prior studies that concentrations of stress hormones
can significantly impact memory functioning. While studies suggest a detrimental
effect of chronically high levels of stress hormones on memory, there is less
known about the nature of the relationship between acutely high levels of stress
hormones and memory. The strongest effects of chronic and acute levels of stress
hormones on memory appear to be on verbal memory. However, it is unclear which
stage of memory processing may be most sensitive to stress hormone levels, with
some studies suggesting an effect on encoding or storage, and others on
retrieval. Further, a number of recent studies have found effects of stress
hormones on electrical brain activity. Few studies have questioned whether
stress-induced changes in memory functioning are related to changes in regional
electrophysiological activity. This is a particularly important field of inquiry
given the evidence that the most significant effects of stress on such brain
regions as the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex are electrophysiological in
nature. The elucidation of these relationships will lead to a better
understanding and better treatment options for individuals suffering from
stress- or stress hormone-related memory deficits. These populations include,
but are not limited to, individuals with Cushing's disease, Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder, schizophrenia, depression and the elderly.

