* 0224957
* SGER: Effects of B15 on Breeding Success of the Cape Crozier Emperor Penguin Colony
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Paul Ponganis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/2004
* USD 29,548.00

0224957&lt;br/&gt;Ponganis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
the effects of the iceberg, B-15, on the emperor&lt;br/&gt;penguin population at
Cape Crozier. The population of this southernmost of emperor&lt;br/&gt;penguin
colonies, although sometimes fluctuating radically, had steadily grown in
past&lt;br/&gt;years, with as many as 1200 chicks counted. This probably
represented an adult&lt;br/&gt;population of 2400-3000 birds. However, in 2001,
after B-15 ground into the Cape&lt;br/&gt;Crozier area during the winter
breeding period, no live emperor chicks were found. The&lt;br/&gt;colony had
disappeared. The goal of this project is to determine if the colony will
re-&lt;br/&gt;establish itself at Cape Crozier or relocate nearby to a different
site. If the colony&lt;br/&gt;reestablishes at Cape Crozier, we will estimate
the previous year's loss with a census of&lt;br/&gt;the chicks present this
year. The destruction of the colony site by the iceberg in
2001&lt;br/&gt;represents a natural experiment to examine the resilience of
breeding emperors to short&lt;br/&gt;term disasters. Broader impacts of this
study are related to the historical importance and&lt;br/&gt;worldwide interest
in this colony as it was the first emperor colony discovered, and
has&lt;br/&gt;probably the longest census record of any penguin colony.