* 0224822
* Environmental Data Acquisition and Communications Improvements at Sargent Center, New Hampshire
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Rubendall, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Peter H. McCartney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 97,532.00

Abstract - NSF Proposal 0224822 (Phillips, Kunz, Rubendall, Woodcock)

A grant has been awarded to Boston University, under the direction of Dr.
Phillips, Dr. Kunz, Mr. Rubendall, and Dr. Woodcock, to make physical
improvements in environmental data acquisition and communications infrastructure
at Sargent Center for Outdoor Education (SCOE), a field station of Boston
University located in southern New Hampshire. SCOE is a unique environment for
field studies, containing a wide range of terrestrial and aquatic habitats, but
this field station is currently under-exploited for research and education. The
goal of this project is to utilize data acquisition and communications
improvements to enhance ecological research and education opportunities at SCOE.
The scope of the project is broad both in terms of providing data coverage from
four distinct terrestrial and aquatic habitats, and in terms of making these
data available to a large and diverse range of students, educators, and
researchers from the New England region and around the world. This project will
greatly further the central goal of SCOE, to facilitate greater understanding
and appreciation of the human relationship to the environment, and contribute to
making a difference in the world's social and environmental future.

The exact work to be done is as follows. The principal investigators will direct
the installation of a state of the art, spatially distributed system for
automatically collecting and transmitting environmental data from a wide variety
of habitats to a central base receiving station at SCOE. The base station will
be linked to the Internet for remote data access and display for off-site
education and research. The main elements of this system are: (1) environmental
sensors and data loggers for data collection from four major habitats at SCOE
(forest, meadow, aquatic, and small mammal habitats); (2) radio telemetry units
to send data from all habitats to a central base station; and (3) a radio base
station and a web-connected computer server to receive, manage and disseminate
data both within a local area network and to the Internet. In addition, to
provide physical access to the forest canopy in support of automated data
acquisition, in situ research, and educational activities, NSF funds will
support the construction of a secure walk-up canopy access tower. This canopy
access tower will provide a unique facility at SCOE to study the spatial and
functional complexity of forest ecosystems from a wide range of academic
perspectives.

With funding for this proposal, scientists from Boston University and outside
collaborators will be able to pursue ecological research and integrated
ecological education at SCOE. These activities will include research training
for graduate students, research experiences for undergraduate students, and
educational outreach for school children from diverse backgrounds. At the
graduate level, a recently developed, interdepartmental field course at SCOE,
entitled "Measuring and Monitoring Biodiversity", will benefit greatly from the
proposed improvements. At the undergraduate level, the requested equipment and
infrastructure will directly benefit 16 courses within the Environmental Science
major at Boston University. The proposed improvements will also be used to
improve educational outreach to school children participating in five specific
Environmental Studies courses currently offered at SCOE. In all of the above
educational and research applications, the equipment requested will be used to
investigate how critical environmental variables control a diversity of
ecological processes, including small mammal function and reproduction in
shelter habitat; environmental and biophysical variables important for land-
atmosphere interactions in forest habitat, including light, temperature,
humidity, and their gradients from canopy top to soil; forest structural
variables that control forest carbon gain, including leaf area and phenology;
soil science and biogeochemistry; and environmental variables critical to
aquatic and amphibian species survival, reproduction, and conservation.