* 0224469
* CISE Research Resources: Infrastructure for Research in Parallel and Distributed Computing
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Demet Aksoy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rita V. Rodriguez
* 03/31/2006
* USD 134,922.00

EIA 0224369 Pandey, Raju Aksoy, Demet; Devanbu, Premkimar T.; Olsson, Ronald A.
University of California - Davis

CISE RR: Infrastructure for Research in Parallel and Distributed Computing

This proposal, supporting parallel computing, distributed systems, ubiquitous
(autonomous) systems, and satellite communication, aims at establishing a
parallel and distributed computing laboratory within the center for software
systems. The lab will include four clusters, each connected through high speed
network. The parallel computing cluster will host several multiprocessor
systems; the distributed system cluster will include workstations and PCs, the
ubiquitous systems cluster will connect embedded devices (including handheld
device sensors); and the satellite cluster will host equipment for initiating
the downlink communication for disseminating the data. The sensor network will
primarily be connected through an ad hoc wireless network that will be routed to
the main high-speed backbone. The infrastructure will meet the needs of four
research projects in 1. Distributed Systems, 2. Parallel Computing, 3.
Distributed Systems Software Engineering, and 4. Wide Area Data Dissemination.
The distributed systems cluster will enable the distributed systems group to
develop highly efficient, scalable, robust, and secure distributed systems that
adapt to changes underlying systems conditions. Further, the ubiquitous systems
cluster will permit the group to develop new application-specific routing
algorithms, novel programming models customizable middleware that seamlessly
integrate sensor-based systems and scalable resource allocation, and
conservation algorithms for large sensor-based systems. The satellite
communication cluster, along with the distributed systems cluster, will enable
the distributed data dissemination group to develop highly scalable, robust, and
secure data-dissemination techniques with adaptable quality of service. The
concurrent programming group will use the parallel computing cluster to evaluate
their work on both concurrent programming languages and efficient runtime
systems for parallel systems. On the educational side, the infrastructure will
be used as experimental test-beds in several courses and will form the basis for
providing research students with development and analysis skills in parallel and
distributed systems.