* 0224441
* CISE Research Resources:  A National Logistical Networking Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2008
* Richard Wolski, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 10/31/2008
* USD 899,998.00

EIA 02-24441&lt;br/&gt;Beck, Micah D.&lt;br/&gt;Dongarra, Jack J.; Livny, Miron;
Plank, James S.; Wolski, Richard&lt;br/&gt;University of Tennessee - Knoxville
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR: A National Logistical Networking Testbed
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, investigating a distributed network storage
architecture based on the Internet Backplane Protocol (IBP) and the external
node (exNode) data structure, explores an approach to communication
infrastructure, called Logistical Networking. This approach applies the Internet
model of community resource sharing to network storage to infuse the network
itself with storage resources that can be shared, scaled up, and exposed for
external scheduling just like IP datagram delivery. A resource fabric that
unifies the co-management of scheduling of data transport and data storage
results, creating conditions for interoperable state management among
distributed applications. The resources of the National Logistical Networking
Testbed (NLNT) proposed attract the kind of diverse and heavy usage necessary to
carry out critical research and testing on this technology under real world
conditions. NLNT, an experimental communication fabric, places large "depots" of
sharable storage on the nation's high performance network for the unbrokered use
of the research community. These depots support the exploration and testing of
Logistical Networking technology under meaningful loads by diverse middleware
and application research groups. Its leading characteristics follow.
NLNT&lt;br/&gt;1. Storage: scalably sharable. To help maximize the share use of
time-limited lightweight allocations of network storage resources, NLNT uses a
network storage technology, Internet Backplane Protocol (IBP). IBP closely
models IP datagram service and follows Internet design principles for scalable
sharing to create shared storage service that can scale globally.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Target capacity: 1 Petabyte. Planned project funding and contributions from
industrial partners support NLNT capacity of 100TB in year three. As the
technology shows value, capacity grows.&lt;br/&gt;3. Deployment: aims for
ubiquity. To provide high performance access and support heavy use, NLNT locates
massive "depots" at two major Gigapops with direct access to the national
backbone. High value of well-provisioned local depots encourages ubiquitous
provisioning of storage.&lt;br/&gt;The growth of the fully realized NLNT will be
seeded by three storage depots: an advanced 11.68TB Storage Area Network system
donated by Yotta Yotta; a special purpose 16GB RAM-only storage depot to be used
for middleware research on high performance overlay networks; and a third
storage cluster planned as a 88TB system attached to the network via a fast,
non-blocking switch. The units will be placed at Gigapops in Chicago (Starlight)
and near Washington D.C. (MAX). NLNT software foundation, IBP, has already been
implemented and tested. Basic software components (xNode toolset for aggregating
distributed storage allocations, the Network Weather Service (NWS) for
monitoring and forecasting the performance of distributed resources, and the
Logistical Backbone (L-Bone) for NLNT resource discovery) support NLNT
middleware research, including scheduling with dynamic network topology, tools
and methodologies to provide runtime support for key storage functions (e.g.,
replication, caching, etc.), and high performance overlay network technology.
The research involves collaborators from the Universities of California-Santa
Barbara (Wolski) and Wisconsin-Madison (Livny).&lt;br/&gt;