* 0224954
* SGER:  Development of Constant Tracer Infusion Techniques to Measure Fuel Substrate Flux in Flying Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Christopher Guglielmo, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 01/31/2005
* USD 105,402.00

Migratory birds are widely recognized as superb animal athletes. When flying,
birds exercise at twice the maximum rate of oxygen consumption attained by
running mammals, and migrants can maintain this high intensity exercise for
three or more days without water, food or rest. Most notably, birds are able to
use stored fat as the primary metabolic fuel for migratory flight - a capacity
unexplained by models of fuel selection developed in running mammals. Extensive
study of mammals shows that fatty acids stored in adipose tissue should
contribute minimally (10 %) to exercise as intense as flight, suggesting that
birds must have a much enhanced ability to utilize lipids. In spite of its many
interesting characteristics, surprisingly little is known about avian exercise
physiology because of the technical difficulties of conducting physiological
studies of birds in flight. The immediate objectives of this research are: (1)
to determine the surgical techniques and experimental protocols necessary to
apply constant tracer infusion and indirect calorimetry to birds flying under
controlled conditions in a wind tunnel, and (2) to make the first direct, real-
time measurements of fuel substrate (e.g. glucose and fatty acids) utilization
during endurance flight. Over the long term, this new experimental system will
be used by the investigator to study how factors like diet nutrient composition,
obesity and migratory season affect fuel selection in various bird species. Ruff
sandpipers (Philomachus pugnatus) will be trained to fly continuously for up to
four hours in a wind tunnel while fitted with a respirometry mask to measure
oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production. Minute quantities of
isotopically labelled tracers (e.g. glucose or fatty acids) will be infused
through a catheter into the circulation at a known rate. Blood will be sampled
periodically through a second catheter and expired carbon dioxide samples will
be collected. Metabolic fuel transport and oxidation will be calculated from the
rate of tracer infusion, the relative concentration of labelled substrate in the
blood and the rate of production of isotopically labelled carbon dioxide.
Successful completion of this study will mark a major advance in the basic
understanding of avian exercise physiology. Equally important, this research
will catalyze a wide variety of future investigations by the development of a
new experimental model. Physiologists will for the first time be able to study
processes like fuel metabolism, kidney function and gas exchange during flight,
and to infuse hormones and pharmacological agents to examine the metabolic
regulation of exercise in birds. Birds have a nearly unparalleled ability among
vertebrates to metabolize fats and they may provide insight into human obesity
and its treatment.