* 0224266
* Spin Electronics: A new Spin for the Nitrides: Can Room Temperature Ferromagnetism be obtained in (Ga,Mn)N?
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Ian Ferguson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 09/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the
development of a room temperature ferromagnetic compound semiconductor material,
Ga1-xMnxN, for spintronic devices based on the spin property of electrons. Many
advances have been made in developing the materials and devices for III-V
compound semiconductor materials doped with manganese (Mn), with Ga1-xMnxAs
showing the most promise. However, the low Curie temperatures (Tc) for these
materials require potential devices to be operated at temperatures below 77K.
There is a need to produce a new class of materials that can operate at, or
near, room temperature to facilitate the ease of measurement and the eventual
commercialization of this technology. The III-Nitrides will be excellent for
this application because recent theoretical predictions show that Ga1-xMnxN
could have Tc higher than room temperature. The Ga1-xMnxN can also be integrated
into existing base of microelectronics or optoelectronics existing for GaN-based
devices. In this work it is proposed to produce Ga1-xMnxN by Metalorganic
Chemical Vapor Deposition, the growth technique of choice for GaN based devices.
There are no published reports of the growth of Ga1-xMnxN by this growth
technique at this time. A systematic study of the growth of Ga1-xMnxN will be
completed. Detailed characterization of the physical properties Ga1-xMnxN will
be investigated using x-ray analysis, Hall measurements, time resolved
photoluminescence, and other techniques. A novel Ga1-xMnxN/Ga1-xAlxN/Ga1-xInxN
LED structure will be grown so that spin injection can easily be investigated at
room temperature. The broader impact of this work is clear: Spintronic devices
that can be operated at or near room temperature will be required if quantum
computing based on compound semiconductor materials is going to have a
commercial viability in the future.