* 0224851
* FSML: Promoting Biological Research on the Colorado Plateau with the Merriam-Powell Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* James Collins, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 249,710.00

This award provides funds to the Merriam-Powell Research Station for
construction of new housing units at the Centennial Forest, 19,114 hectares of
land set aside by the State of Arizona for research, educational, and outreach
on the Colorado Plateau. The construction of the housing and related
infrastructure is part of a facilities development project for the recently
established Merriam-Powell Research Station (MPRS), a collaboration of Northern
Arizona University, Arizona State University, The University of Arizona, and The
University of Nevada-Las Vegas. The MPRS supports research in the Greater Grand
Canyon-San Francisco Peaks Ecosystem centered along the 3,000 m elevation
gradient first characterized by C. Hart Merriam in developing his Life Zone
Concept. The Centennial Forest is a primary site within the Southwest Ecological
Gradient Network, a latitude/climate gradient extending from Tucson, Arizona to
Las Vegas, Nevada. The Forest includes old growth ponderosa pine, pinyon-juniper
woodland, and high elevation grasslands. Existing research infrastructure
includes elevational gradient plots with weather stations, a 5-year experimental
fire history gradient, 20-year regional ponderosa pine common gardens, and
replicated 50 ha ponderosa pine old growth restoration plots. Although the
region has been used extensively for field research, the Centennial Forest lacks
housing and laboratory facilities. Eventually MPRS expects to have 25 visiting
scientist/student housing units, in addition to buildings that include wet and
dry labs, classrooms and offices, and a greenhouse complex. The housing units
are designed to resemble the traditional Navajo Hogan, and will provide low-cost
on-site accommodations for visiting scientists and university classes, and thus
promote interdisciplinary and interagency collaborations for study of the
Greater Grand Canyon-San Francisco Peaks Ecosystem.