* 0224442
* CISE RR:  Collaborative Research on Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual Machines
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 10/31/2006
* USD 515,000.00

EIA 02-24442 Fortes, Jose A. Figueiredo, Renato; George, Alan D.; Principe, Jose
C.; Su, Stanley Y. University of Florida

CISE RR: Collaborative Research on Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual
Machines

This collaborative research project (with Dinda at Northwestern University,
proposal 02-24449), requiring a wide-area test bed that enables experimentation
with, access to, and running of applications on unique resources, requests PC
clusters, an IBM server, and other ancillary hardware for projects in 1.
Distributed grid computing and information processing systems using
virtualization technologies and 2. Information grids with real users and
research applications requiring capabilities enabled by virtual machines (VMs).
Deploying a distributed system based on clusters connected by local,
metropolitan, and wide area networks, the work aims to provide a virtual
computing and data storage interface to clients that access resources on the
underlying "information grid." The test bed includes the following defining
features. 1. Virtualization capabilities, i.e., the ability to instantiate
independent logical machines that can be multiplexed on physical processors (or
fractions of them), storage and network I/O channels, and can use distinct
operating systems; 2. Wide-area distribution, i.e., Internet-linked test bed
components in independently-administered geographically-apart network domains;
3. Scalable capacity for both scientific computing and information processing;
and 4. Heterogeneity. Interrelated projects enabled by the test bed towards the
goal of developing VM-based middleware for grid computing include virtualized
end resources, monitoring and prediction, interactive computing, virtual file
systems, data management, cycle selling, and security. Information grids and web
portals for use of CAD tools are also enabled by the infrastructure for
dissemination of collaborative research results and data, and for digital
government services. From the availability of the portals and grid-computing
resources benefits are expected in brain-machine interfaces, biologically-
inspired nanocomputing, auction-based computing, distributed knowledge
applications, medical imaging and data archiving, light-scattering spectroscopy,
and mixed non-linear optimization. Collaborations include the Sigmicro
microarchitecture center, NETCARE and the Purdue-hosted Nanohub (enabling users
to run tools for computer architecture and parallel computing, and
nanoelectrnics). The project impacts some minority serving institutions such as
Chicago State and Florida A& M Universities and enables a testbed for a
transnational digital government projects involving Carnegie Mellon University,
University of Belize, University of Colorado, University of Florida, University
of Massachusetts, and Pontificia Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra of the
Dominican Republic.