* 0224605
* Understanding Deep-Ocean Circulation during Miocene Climate Transition: Are Freshwater Impacts the Key?
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Dan Seidov, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2005
* USD 339,327.00

This award provides funds to conduct a multiple stage modeling study to
investigate the role of freshwater inputs to the oceans and its influence on
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the investigators will carry out fully
coupled climate modeling experiments to generate a climate "reference state" for
the Early and Late Miocene. Next, they will complete a series of ocean model
experiments for each of the two periods to target the role of high-latitude in
affecting ocean surface conditions. This effort will focus on the role of
freshwater dynamics in altering the deep-ocean thermohaline circulation for
differing ocean-land configurations. The results from these experiments will be
compared to paleoceanographic data to determine which ocean solution best
corresponds to the paleoceanographic record for these time intervals. In the
last stage of modeling, the research team will use best-fit results from the
ocean model experiments as a foundation for additional coupled model
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Miocene was a notable step in the
transition from global conditions of warm equable climates to a climate with
persistently cold polar regions. This was accompanied by a fully developed
southern cryosphere and the initiation of northern hemisphere ice. It is
hypothesized that the initiation of Antarctic continental glaciation resulted
from tectonic activity during the Miocene. This resulted in a major
reorganization of deep ocean circulation that played a key role in the evolution
of cooling polar climates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of
this award is to attempt to mimic the Miocene climate transition based on the
connections between the freshwater impacts associated with a developing southern
ocean-based cryosphere and intensification of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC). As such, the investigators hope to contribute to an improved
understanding of the dynamics of the Miocene climate transition, especially with
regards to the role of freshwater input in impacting
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a broader understanding
of Earth' climate during an important transition in its history when the
physical features began to appear as they are in the modern world (i.e.,
continental separation, establishment of polar ice caps, circum-Antarctic ocean
circulation).