* 0224078
* SGER: The Response of Marine Phytoplankton to Climate Change:  Characterization of Rubisco Activase
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Rose Ann Cattolico, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 64,854.00

Inorganic carbon plays a crucial role in regulating marine productivity and
species composition in phytoplankton communities. Therefore understanding the
mechanisms underlying inorganic carbon fixation by different phytoplankton
assemblages is critical if we are to understand the response of phytoplankt on
photosynthesis to global climate change, and to develop realistic models of
biogeochernical carbon flux in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rubisco is a
keystone enzyme that drives Calvin cycle function. However, it is now well
documented that terrestrial plant Rubisco is catalytically non?functional
without the co?operative interplay of Rubisco activase. To date, no information
exists in the literature concerning the function of Rubisco activase for gLny
chromophytic alga. In fact, except for Heterosigma akashiwo and two
Cylindrotheca species, no data exists on Rubisco catalytic function for any
other representative of this assemblage that is so critical in global carbon
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Goals of this project are to: a) Isolate
and characterize Rubisco activase using Heterosigma as model chromophytic algal
species; and, in particular, to b) Extend Rubisco activase studies to include
diatoms since they rank as primary contributors in C02
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is feasible because: a) The cloned,
putative Heterosigma activase gene has now been over?expressed in E. coli; b)
Extensive analysis of Heterosigma Rubisco has been accomplished; c) Patterns of
Rubisco mRNA production in response to light cues have been documented; d)
Heterosigma and diatom Rubisco antibodies have been shown to cross react; e)
Flow cytometric measurements of antibody?tagged Rubisco have been
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the effort in understanding the regulation of
Rubisco by Rubisco activase in phytoplankton may be risky, this study will
establish a primary database for chromophytic algae wherein the biochemistry of
inorganic carbon processing via Rubisco/Rubisco activase interaction is
deciphered. The long?term benefit this study is highly significant when
considered in terms of predicting photosynthetic performance in response to
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;