* 0224240
* A comparative fMRI study of evolutionary precursors to written language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Zhiming Zhang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 665,386.00

A Comparative fMRI study of the Evolutionary Precursors to Written
Language&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National
Science Foundation support, Dr. Josephs and colleagues will conduct a three-year
investigation into whether humans have a specialized brain region for letter
recognition, or whether letter recognition is accomplished with the same brain
regions used for recognizing other categories, like everyday objects. To test
this, the researchers will use fMRI to examine brain activation patterns in
human adults as they process letters or pictures of everyday objects. We
hypothesize that humans recognize individual letters using the same brain
regions used for object recognition, rather than using a specialized brain
region dedicated solely to letter recognition. The capacity for language is
often thought to set humans apart from other primates, and some scientists have
suggested that the human brain has special adaptations to support language. The
second goal of this project is to ask the same question about rhesus monkeys'
brains. Because letters are meaningless and unfamiliar to untrained monkeys,
special adaptations for letter recognition should not be detected in monkeys'
brains. However, if letter-specialized regions are detected in monkeys' brains,
this specialization is not likely driven by language capacity, but may instead
reflect the novelty of letters to monkeys. The present proposal looks in more
depth at this controversial idea of brain specialization for language by using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare brain activation
patterns in humans and rhesus monkeys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One challenge of
this research is to determine whether monkeys are paying attention to and
processing letters or objects. Like human infants, monkeys cannot express
themselves through language or follow spoken or written instructions. However,
both infants and monkeys will look longer at stimuli that are new, and looking
time will decrease as a stimulus becomes more familiar. Therefore, by recording
looking times in rhesus monkeys during fMRI scanning, Dr. Josephs and colleagues
can monitor whether rhesus monkeys are paying attention to the stimuli and can
distinguish different letters or objects from each other. This novel application
of the looking time procedure to an fMRI environment makes comparative studies
of humans and other species more feasible than currently available techniques
that require months of monkey training. In addition, recording looking time
minimizes the need for spoken communication or motor responses while in the MRI
scanner. Therefore, this approach may be more widely applied to other special
populations that cannot speak or move due to brain damage or developmental
disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this research are expected to
provide important new understanding into evolution and functional organization
of the human brain. In addition, several junior researchers will receive
outstanding training in research experience.&lt;br/&gt;