* 0224392
* CISE Research Resources:   Being There:   Mobile Devices for Community and Commerce
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

EIA 0224392&lt;br/&gt; Terveen, Loren&lt;br/&gt; Konstan, Joseph A.&lt;br/&gt;
Riedl, John&lt;br/&gt;Shekhar, Shashi&lt;br/&gt; University of Minnesota Twin
Cities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CISE RR: Being There: Mobile Devices for
Community and Commerce &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, building a mobile
computing system, provides a set of mobile, connected, location-aware computing
units consisting of Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) and wearable displays
with some input ability to allow experimentation to affect deployment on the
types of interfaces, applications, and technologies needed as these devices
become commonplace. Devices will carry out a wide range of experimentation, from
tightly controlled experiments to broad field studies, from previously planned
extensions of existing research to last-minute ideas created by student
projects, and from small pilot studies to large deployment studies. The
infrastructure supports research projects in human computer interaction (HCI),
recommender systems, and spatial data management for environments where users
are mobile; specifically, &lt;br/&gt;Ubiquitous Peripheral Social Interaction
(UPSI), &lt;br/&gt;Location-Aware Recommender Systems, and&lt;br/&gt;Spatial
Data Management for Location Aware Mobile Computing.&lt;br/&gt;The first project
presumes availability of several wireless communication channels. Information,
at the periphery of users' attention, is constantly streamed to the device and
displayed as a scrolling "ticker." A user carries a pocket computer and wears a
Networked Wrist Device linked by Bluetooth. This approach presents challenges in
populating and managing the information model driving the interaction, designing
the interface for the networked wrist display, coupling the wrist computer and
PDA, and identifying the types of tasks for which this interaction paradigm is
suitable. Using algorithmic and interface research, pilot tests, real-world
experiments, and metrics, the second project looks into suitable applications
among wired, disconnected, and wireless connected recommenders. Given local and
temporal patterns of users, this project examines when it is appropriate to
interrupt its user with a recommendation, how to present recommendations most
effectively across multi-device interfaces, and how to compute recommendations
when the user is disconnected from the network. The last project looks into the
requirements of spatial data management systems for applications like mobile
location based recommendation systems. The project gathers a trace-based
workload from location aware recommendation systems to evaluate solutions for
critical design decisions such as algorithms for map compression and predictive
pre-fetching strategies to cache relevant segments of maps based on past spatial
queries, scheduled meetings locations, and related information. The educational
plan includes integration of the platform into courses and student involvement
in summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;