* 0224701
* Unified Power and Communication Infrastructures for High Security Electricity Supply
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Amitabh Mishra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Modern innovations in computer based monitoring, protection and control of
electric power supply systems, coupled with the availability of wide-band high
speed communication channels have made it possible to bring about the
development of very highly secure electric supply networks. The ability to bring
about such a supply network requires a multi-disciplinary team of students and
faculty members who are established researchers in the fields of electric power
engineering, communication systems, and new sensor developments. The present
proposal is offered by such a team consisting of Virginia Tech and Arizona State
University personnel, along with a plan of work which will make significant
progress in achieving these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the same time, the
research team recognizes the importance of the electric supply system to the
social and economic well-being of modern societies. These issues are also
addressed in the proposal. An important part of the proposal is the development
of a metric to measure the societal and economic dependence on electricity
supply, as well as the cost of insecurity of the supply system to the society.
The research team is convinced that disseminating the results of their research
to students - and particularly to minority and under-represented groups - is a
very important societal responsibility. To this end, the research plan contains
a significant effort towards creating educational modules which can be broadcast
on the internet, and with a special emphasis on reaching the minority and under-
represented communities.&lt;br/&gt;