* 0224465
* CISE Research Resources:    QPQ:   An Open Source Deductive Software Repository
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Mark Stickel, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2006
* USD 699,980.00

EIA 0224465&lt;br/&gt;Shankar, Natarajan&lt;br/&gt;Stickel, Mark
E.&lt;br/&gt;SRI International &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CISE RR: QPQ: An
Open Source Deductive Software Repository &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project,
establishing a deductive software repository, aims at making software more
available, reliable, durable, higher quality, uniform. Deductive software
consists of symbolic routines for logical manipulations including decision
procedures, solvers, rewriters, model checkers, and theorem provers. It serves
as the semantic foundation for many scientific and engineering applications in
areas such as hardware and software verification, program synthesis and
analysis, data- and knowledge-based systems, artificial intelligence,
linguistics, and e-commerce. This work outlines an initiative for deductive
software components called QPQ ("quid pro quo") as a marketplace for publishing,
exchanging, and refining deductive software components. The refereed publication
and distribution of such scientific software components in open source often
yields higher quality, greater visibility, and accelerated productivity.
Efficient implementation of deductive algorithms, an extremely complex and
delicate task, requires serious investment in basic infrastructure such as
concrete and abstract syntax, syntactic tools (parsers, typecheckers, pretty-
printer), primitive operations (substitution, matching, unification,
normalization), and advanced operations (constraint satisfaction, forward and
backward chaining, rewriting, simplification, decision procedures, induction
methods). Potential impacts include availability, reliability, quality,
durability, productivity, visibility, uniformity, synergy, serendipity, and
history. The following principles will be employed in running the repository:
authenticity, uniqueness, access, relevance, format, quality and version
control, and academic credit. QPQ is already recognized as a valuable resource
for research and education in deductive software. With its role in facilitating
the semantic web and through other applications of logico-symbolic computing,
the QPQ repository might become crucial to society.&lt;br/&gt;