* 0224401
* CISE Research Resources:  R4:  Rescue Robots for Research and Response
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Robin Murphy, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2008
* USD 823,269.00

EIA 0224401&lt;br/&gt;Murphy, Robin R.&lt;br/&gt;University of South Florida
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CISE RR: R4: Rescue Robots for Research and
Response &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing and maintaining robotics
kits for nationwide research, aims at facilitating research into robot-assisted
urban search and rescue (USAR) by providing resources to overcome barriers
presenting research involvement (lack of access to domain experts and meaningful
sites combined with the need for expensive specialized equipment), while at the
same time increasing the availability of mobile robots for an emergency
response. This work supports the&lt;br/&gt;Expansion of existing caches of
robots suitable for USAR research in two different regions,&lt;br/&gt;Training
on these robots, data collection, and access to these robots and data sets via
the Internet,&lt;br/&gt;Field data collection exercises with fire rescue
professionals at USAR sites, and&lt;br/&gt; Loan of robots to individual
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;The work facilitates groups, without rescue robots or
access to domain experts, to have access to data and/or work directly with USAR
robots and rescue experts in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rescue robotics is
a complex domain in need of fundamental breakthroughs in distributed computing,
networking and communications, software engineering and interoperability, real-
time multi-threaded control, user interfaces and human-robot interaction,
robotics, sensors, and artificial intelligence (AI). Hence, the Computing
Research Association declared this research area a "grand challenge." Four types
of research equipment, micro-robots, mini-robots, image processing and video
capturing equipment, and sensors, enable researchers to collect the data and
evaluate their work in the cited areas. In addition to integrating existing
technology and eliciting effective cooperation between professionals and
researchers in the case of an emergency, the project provides education in
robotics for homeland defense, and the potential to safeguard lives of rescue
workers and locate victims.&lt;br/&gt;