* 0224089
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  MLabNet 2000-Advanced Multimedia Systems and Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2002,03/31/2003
* William Grosky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/2003
* USD 5,290.00

0089732&lt;br/&gt;Grosky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on MLabNet
2000-advanced multimedia systems and applications, to be held in Karuizawa,
Japan from October 10-12, 2001. The co-organizers are professors William Grosky
of Wayne State University and Professor Frederic Andres of the National
Institute of Informatics (NII) in Tokyo, Japan. MlabNet is a virtual multimedia
research framework between various institutions in the United States, Japan,
France, Italy and Thailand and has existed since April 1999. Two important
projects being investigated under this framework are the Very Large-Scale
Hypermedia Delivery System (VLSHDS) and MediaSys, which provides an extensible
interface for multimedia management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed seminar
will include research presentations, posters, and demonstrations. It will assess
the research cooperation inside MLabNet in the context of these projects, as
well as address issues in information access and sharing multimedia content
between the involved countries. They will also address issues in cultural
heritage, in the context of future research issues related to the National
Science Foundation framework, the Japanese Ministry of Education framework, and
the Fifth Framework set by the European Union. Seminar organizers have made a
special effort to involve younger researchers, postdocs and graduate students as
both participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work,
and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. Dissemination of
information on the seminar will be available on the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;