* 0224157
* GOALI:   SPIN ELECTRONICS Collaborative Research:   Control and Detection of Spin Polarization in Semiconductor Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Stephen Lyon, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 07/31/2006
* USD 325,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the NSF Spin Electronics for the 2fl
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
investigation of techniques to locally induce, control, and detect electron spin
in semiconductor microstructures by using properly located electrostatic gate
voltages. Electrostatic gates are easily defined on a submicron scale and should
provide switching and manipulations of spin currents. A variety of approaches to
this goal will be pursued, including (i) gate-programmable nuclear polarization
applied to single and double quantum dots, and the transfer of nuclear spin from
dot to dot, (ii) gate-controlled spin-polarization in high-mobility GaAs/AlAs
epitaxial layers; and (iii) electron-spin-resonance {ESR) measurements in
AlAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining state-of-the-art fabrication technology,
careful measurements, and theoretical analysis, the proposed research is highly
interdisciplinary. It relies on expertise of three experimentalists and one
theorist in engineering and physics. It also entails the full participation of
graduate and undergraduate students, who will gain invaluable experience and
knowledge in cutting edge materials science and engineering, with a focus on the
emerging and potentially rewarding field of spin
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be centered at Princeton
University with one investigator at Harvard University. Existing facilities at
Princeton and Harvard will be adequate to carry out all the proposed work. The
majority of requested funding will be used to support graduate students.
Workshops at Princeton are planned to insure a focused research effort and to
enhance interaction among students working on the common research
goals.&lt;br/&gt;