* 0224774
* FSML Planning Grant for a Major New Land Addition at Archbold Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Hilary Swain, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/2005
* USD 18,748.00

This award supports strategic planning for Archbold Biological Station which has
recently expanded its land holdings through a significant private donation.
Archbold was established in 1941 as a not-for-profit research institution
dedicated to long-term ecological research. Staff, visiting investigators, and
students conduct research focused on the environments of the Lake Wales Ridge,
central Florida. Areas of research strength are population and conservation
biology, emphasizing ecological changes over local and regional scales, and
demographic shifts in local species. In addition to research use, Archbold is
used heavily for education by visiting classes and has its own active K-12
program. As the result of a large private donation, the area of the station will
increase by 70%. The new land addition, which includes scrub habitat and
extensive improved pasture, should allow the station to initiate new research
programs in areas such as long-term studies in restoration ecology. With the
funds provided through this award, the station will develop a long-term plan for
future research, land management and education use of the new acquisition. As
part of this effort, existing information will be collected, and placed in a
geographic information system containing both current and historical site
information. Three planning workshops will be held: a Research and Land
Management Workshop, an Education Workshop, and a separate Financial Plan
workshop. The PI will compile workshop results into a Research and Land
Management, Education and Financial Plans for the Reserve including 2, 5 and
10-20 yr goals, objectives, measures of success, and a 5-year implementation
timetable. Besides being used for management of the station, the plans will be
made available to the public using the web and other distribution
means.&lt;br/&gt;