* 0224417
* CISE Research Resources:  Discourse Penn Treebank and Multimodal FORM: Development of Two Richly Annotated Corpora
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2002,09/30/2006
* Mark Liberman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2006
* USD 997,781.00

EIA-0224417&lt;br/&gt;Aravind K. Joshi&lt;br/&gt;Mark
Liberman&lt;br/&gt;University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR:
Discourse Penn Trebank and Multimodal FORM: Development of Two Richly Annotated
Corpora&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, providing critical resources for
research discourse modeling and conversational interaction, aims at developing
new technologies and systems for information retrieval and human computer
interaction. Centering on the construction of annotated corpora, two large-scale
resources, one in the discourse domain and one in the dialog domain will be
built:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Discourse Penn Treebank (DPTB) and&lt;br/&gt;2.
MultiFORM: Augmenting the FORM corpus with body movements, speech, and
intonation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The former project develops a large scale and
reliably annotated corpus that will encode coherence relations associated with
discourse connectives, including their argument structure and anaphoric links,
thus exposing a clearly defined level of discourse structure and supporting the
extraction of a range of inferences associated with discourse connectives. This
annotation will be "on top of" the Penn Treebank (PTB) annotations as well as
the predicate-argument annotations of PTB (called the Proposition Bank or Prop
Bank). The latter involves a corpus of gesture-annotated videos, FORM that was
designed to be extensible in order to eventually represent the entire multimodal
experience of conversational interaction. This multimodal FORM , MultiFORM, will
be created by adding body movement, speech and syntactic structure, and
intonation. Large-scale annotated corpora have played a critical role in speech
and natural language research by enabling large-scale integration of statistical
knowledge (derived from the corpora) with linguistic knowledge (as represented
in annotations) leading to scientific and technological advances. Representative
examples constitute robust parsing and automatic extraction of relations and
coreferences and their applications to information extraction, question
answering, summarization, and machine translation. PTB, a resource developed a
decade ago, represents an example of such a resource that impacts natural
language processing worldwide. PTB deals with corpora at the sentence level
warranting a new large scale and reliable discourse and dialog structure
annotated corpora. Although intellectual and practical connections exist between
studies of the structures of discourse and dialog, the initial requirements for
resources to study these areas diverge while overlapping in conception. On the
discourse side, we need for corpora that deals with the kinds of structures
found in composed text such as journalistic articles. The dialog side needs to
focus on interactions among people and on extemporized rather than pre-composed
material.&lt;br/&gt;