* 0224012
* CISE Research Resources:   Instrumentation for Experimental Research in Machine Learning, Collaborative Filtering, and Virtual Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Ronald Metoyer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

EIA 0224012 Dietterich, Thomas G. Herlocker, Jonathan L. Metoyer, Ronald Oregon
State University

Title: CISE RR: Instrumentation for Experimental Research in Machine Learning,
Collaborative Filtering, and Virtual Environments

This project, upgrading the current cluster for use in large pre-computations
that enable effective real-time performance, supports equipment servicing the
following four projects: Real Time Animation of Human Characters for Use in
Immersive Training Environments, Probabilistic Recommendation Methods for
Collaborative Filtering (CF), Machine Learning for Spatial and Sequential Data,
and Reinforcement Learning for Learning Search Control Heuristics with
Applications to Protein Structure Determination from Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy and to Real-Time Animation. The first project aims at automatically
selecting and ordering short sequences of captured motion to drive a character
along a trajectory while maintaining naturally looking transitions between the
sequences. The project exploits off-line reinforcement learning (dynamic
programming) algorithms to pre-compute a policy for moving between any pair of
poses under a range of trajectory constraints. Real-time control of characters
is then permitted without the need for large run-time searches. The second
project utilizes collaborative filtering (CF) systems that can predict a
probability distribution over the rating of an item. Currently CF, a method by
which multiple computer users indirectly help each other make decisions and
identify solutions to problems, provides ratings or votes returning the items
with the higher number of votes, rather than attaching a probability. The
equipment will speed the research process by enabling the testing of un-
optimized prototype implementations of new algorithms, and hence allow the
evaluation of proposed algorithms without the delay of manual optimization. The
third project deals with emerging applications of machine learning (e.g.,
computer intrusion detection, information extraction from web pages, remote
sensing) involving temporal, sequential, or spatial data where nearby data
points are typically correlated. The PIs have developed a parallel
implementation of a sequential analysis method for conditional random fields
(CRFs) that gives near-linear speedups in the computation time, but which is
limited in the size of data sets that can be processed. The cluster upgrade
should yield a faster solution and allow consideration of larger data sets. The
last project, experiments with two new algorithms for reinforcement learning
that scale to large search spaces as long as the number of reachable states is
small enough to fit in main memory. One method combines linear programming with
support-vector machine techniques; the other combines gradient descent search
with dynamic programming. These methods, requiring an expensive off-line
computation, result in an efficient heuristic that can be applied to the run-
time search. Moreover, the cluster will be used by students in a parallel
computation course.