* 0224555
* Enlightening Lightning! Coupling Earth Systems Research to K-12 Education Using Planetarium Presentations
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Richard Orville, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 179,000.00

Enlightening Lightning!&lt;br/&gt;Coupling Earth Systems Research to K-12
Education&lt;br/&gt;Using Planetarium Presentations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project introduces students to the foundations of earth and atmospheric
processes using planetarium presentations as an out-of-classroom learning
milieu. This project develops a curriculum ensemble on the topic of
thunderstorms, with a concentration on lightning. The curriculum targets
students in grades 5 through 8 and includes both a multi-media sky-dome program
(slides, video, simulations) and companion written and laboratory materials with
inquiry-based exercises. These materials are the first in a series of curriculum
ensembles (covering climate, weather and the water cycle) for dissemination
through planetarium facilities. Learning modules on thunderstorms and lightning
are currently available in several formats, including web-based modules,
conventional texts, video or film presentations, and as static displays in
museums. However, planetarium facilities have typically been by-passed in the
development of thunderstorm and lightning curriculum materials. The planetarium
environment facilitates demonstration of lightning detection from space, for
example, through data collected by NASA's Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission,
Lightning Imaging Sensor, and Optical Transient Detector. In addition, field
campaigns to validate lightning detection on the ground can be shown and
described. Key questions in lightning research can be identified. Participation
by faculty and students in diverse academic departments (atmospheric science,
physics, education, visualization sciences) as well as at premier research
institutions (NSSL) will demonstrably enhance the capacity at all those
institutions to be actively engaged in transferring research to education for
elementary and secondary students.&lt;br/&gt;