* 0224154
* Spin Electronics Novel Optical Probe of Carrier Spin Coherence in Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Steven Cundiff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
novel optical techniques for measuring carrier spin coherence on semiconductors.
Spin based electronics promise to provide increased processing speed, increased
integration density and decreased power consumption as compared to traditional
microelectronic devices. In addition, electronic spins in semiconductors are
attractive for implementation of quantum information processing. These advances
require a firm understanding of electronic spin coherence in semiconductors and
the development of techniques to probe spin coherence. Previous work has shown
that n-doped GaAs has a remarkably long spin coherence time, which has prompted
further investigation. Semimagnetic semiconductors display much shorter spin
coherences, however the stronger carrier-ion interaction makes them better
candidate materials for fabrication of spin filters and related
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this project will
complement the predominant technique of Faraday rotation and provide information
that is not available using Faraday rotation. Of specific interest is why the
Faraday rotation signal saturates for high optical excitation density. The
techniques are based on transient four-wave-mixing. Specifically, by using a
three pulse excitation scheme, it is possible to probe the spin coherence and
generate a signal in a background free direction. A modification of this that
uses the fifth order nonlinear optical response can generate a Raman-spin echo,
which will remove the effects of inhomogeneous spin precession rates due, for
example, to a variation in the g-factor with k-vector. The experiments will be
performed on n-doped GaAs and semimagnetic semiconductors such as CdMnTe and
ZnMnTe. The former samples are commercially available wafers, while the latter
will be provided by collaborators at the University of Dortmund, Germany. In the
latter case, initial experiments to probe the optical coherence (as opposed to
spin coherence) will be performed because it is not well understood and provides
important insight into carrier-ion spin scattering, which is crucial for
electronically controlled ferromagnetism. Preliminary Faraday-rotation
experiments will be performed on both the GaAs and semimagnetic semiconductor
samples to provide a connection to experimental results from other groups.
During this grant, both spin-coherence and Raman-spin echo experiments will be
performed on n-doped GaAs. For the semimagnetic semiconductors, optical
coherence and spin coherence experiments will be performed. &lt;br/&gt;