* 0224676
* Renovation and Improvement of Research, Meeting and Instructional Facilities at the University of Guam Marine Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Steven Amesbury, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 10/31/2004
* USD 123,751.00

This award provides support for the improvement of facilities at the University
of Guam Marine Laboratory (UOGML). The lab is a research unit that serves the
U.S.-affiliated islands of Micronesia, including The Territory of Guam, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, The Federated States of Micronesia
(Yap, Chuuk, Kosrae, and Pohnpei), the Republic of Belau, and the Republic of
the Marshall Islands. The lab is the only U.S. marine research station in the
tropical western Pacific that includes a modern research laboratory. Funds
provided by the award will permit the improvement of a multi-purpose room used
for lectures, meetings and conferences, and various research purposes.
Improvements include replacement of research benches and related furnishings,
purchase of a new audio/visual system, replacement of aging windows and doors,
and purchase of microscopes for general and research-oriented courses, including
a microscope system with display features for instructional purposes. Due to its
location in the Pacific Islands, the UOGML has an important service component
that includes providing data and research services to a broad group of users.
These improvements in the lab's infrastructure will enhance both the research
capabilities of the Marine Laboratory and its ability to disseminate the results
of research to potential users who range from traditional leaders, chiefs'
councils and community-based organizations to territorial, state and federal
agencies.