* 0224138
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:    Varied Synthetic Approaches to the Development of  Room-Temperature Ferromagnetic and Semiconducting Oxide Nanostructures for Silicon Based Spintronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Scott Chambers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 456,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the
synthesis, characterization and optimization of Cobalt-doped transition metal
oxide nanostructures for spin-electronics applications. The proposed work is
based on our recent demonstration of robust ferromagnetic and semiconducting
behavior at room temperature in Co-doped anatase thin films. The proposed
research will establish interrelationships among the structural, optical,
electronic, and magnetic properties of ferromagnetic, semiconducting CoxTi-1-x02
fabricated by a variety of physical and chemical synthesis routes, including
oxygen plasma assisted molecular beam epitaxy, reactive ion-beam sputter
deposition, and solution-based hydrothermal, sol-gel, and aqueous co-
precipitation methods. Different synthetic routes should lead to different
morphologies and dimensionalities, including single-crystal films (2D),
nanoparticles (OD), and planar arrays of nanostructures. They also have
different prognoses and costs for scaling from laboratory to commercial
operation. Spin-dependent transport and magnetic behavior of these materials as
a function of dimensionality and structure will be investigated. Detailed
evaluation of the band structure of the films, combined with proprietary
technology involving SrTiO3 buffer layers, will be used to integrate these films
on silicon substrates. The ultimate goal will not only be to engineer these
materials at the nanometer length scales, but to develop a broad set of criteria
that will serve as the framework to explore the viability of other doped-oxides
for spintronics applications. Finally, the project has a broad education
component that will add new dimensions to the research experience and training
of graduate students participating in the nanotechnology IGERT program on the UW
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is being co-funded by the Divisions
of Civil and Mechanical Systems, Chemical and Transport Systems and Electrical
and Communication Systems in the Directorate of Engineering of the National
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;