* 0224596
* ME:  Metabolic Engineering of Succinate Production in Actinobacillus Succinogenes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* J. Gregory Zeikus, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 01/31/2006
* USD 505,000.00

Succinate has many industrial applications and it maybe used in the future as an
intermediary commodity chemical feedstock for producing bulk chemicals.
Routinely produced from petrochemicals, succinate can also be produced by
fermentation from glucose. Developing a low-cost fermentation process with high
succinate yields would create a new use for agricultural products. The best
succinate producer, Actinobacillus succinogenes, produces up to 100 g/l of
succinate. To engineer an A. succinogenes strain able to produce even more
succinate at a higher chemical yield, the Principal Investigators (PIs) will
determine which metabolic fluxes to target for genetic manipulation. A system of
linear stoichiometric equations (expressed as a matrix) will be built, based on
A. succinogenes metabolic network. Experimental data (i.e., fermentation
balance, biomass production, and label distribution in succinate, formate, and
acetate) collected from continuous cultures grown in the presence of 13 C-NaHCO3
or 2- 13 C-glucose will be fed into this stoichiometric matrix to calculate the
fluxes in the different pathways. Control exerted on flux distribution by
different metabolic branches will be evaluated by growing cultures in a variety
of conditions. Each growth condition will differ from the optimized, standard
conditions by a single parameter. Parameters will include enzyme-specific
inhibitors, different carbon sources, new enzyme activities (by introduction of
recombinant genes), and added reducing power (by the intermediary of an
electrically-reduced artificial electron carrier). The conclusions drawn from
these metabolic flux analyses should give insights on how to engineer A.
succinogenes to produce more succinate.