* 0224513
* Community Integrated GIS Pilot Project:  Sharing Scientific and Local Knowledge
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Nathan Michaud, Island Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 09/30/2003
* USD 93,492.00

Community Integrated GIS Pilot Project: Sharing Scientific
Knowledge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a Regional Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) Resource Center that will be part of a small but
expandable GIS-based network for the dissemination and exchange of scientific
data. The pilot structure initially consists of three community GIS workstations
(separately- funded) on the Maine islands of Vinalhaven, Islesboro and Peaks,
which will be integrated with and supported by the regional center at the Island
Institute's facility in Rockland, Maine. The project is supported by other
community-oriented research agencies, including: The Lobster Conservancy
(Friendship, Maine), The Fisheries Atlas (MIT/Rutgers), the Maine Office of GIS,
the Maine State Planning Office, the Gulf of Maine Information Exchange
(GOMINFOEX) and the National Mapping Project (USGS). GIS, while increasingly a
common medium for the management and exchange of data between the science
community and the lay audience, has great, and largely unexplored, potential as
an educational and spatial decision support tool in small communities. However,
training and capacity-building are needed on the ground in order to forge an
effective and lasting link between communities and scientists, and to increase
the practical use of scientific data locally. Two of the primary assumptions of
this proposal are that 1) small towns have unique strengths which often are not
maximized in the current education and information management paradigms; and 2)
that new technologies like GIS create new opportunities to reconsider these
paradigms. This project explores ways in which communities can be uniquely
empowered through linkage to locally relevant scientific data. The aim is to
create a truly integrated capacity to access, process, create, and share
scientific data through GIS in small communities and to facilitate the
connection between this local information and the broader world of science and
research. The local GIS workstations will be common-format repositories for
locally relevant geospatial&lt;br/&gt;information - a valuable resource for
formal and informal place-based education, research activities, and community-
based resource management. &lt;br/&gt;