* 0224711
* Twin Valleys Outdoor Education Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Thomas Wolosz, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 8,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Plattsburgh State University, under the direction of
Dr. William J. Ehmann, Assistant to the Vice-President for Academic Affairs, to
assess the educational and scientific potential of a university-affiliated
property in Essex County, New York. The site, known locally as "Twin Valleys",
lies within Adirondack Park and consists of a 660-acre forest with a lodge,
cabins, and classrooms. Twin Valleys was used for summer science camps in the
1960s and 1970s, but the facilities have degraded and the site is currently
under-utilized. Special natural features of the site include mature white pine
forest, wetlands, and other habitats for migratory birds, mammals, salamanders,
and at least 14 species of native plants listed as "vulnerable" in New York
State. With this grant, Plattsburgh State will be able to carefully re-evaluate
the property, with specific attention to its suitability for further development
as a biological field station.

A team of six experts associated with the Organization of Biological Field
Stations (OBFS) will visit Twin Valleys with PSU faculty and staff and
representatives of College Auxiliary Services, Inc., (the not-for-profit
corporation that owns the property) in December 2002 and May 2003. Through site
visits, interviews, and workshops, OBFS experts will help assess the scientific
merits of the property, prioritize needed upgrades in facilities, and suggest
academic programs that could use the site to best advantage. A Team Leader will
coordinate production of a written report and will make an on-campus
presentation in September 2004. The recommendations are expected to provide a
basis for requesting more funds to implement the vision, through funding
agencies such as the National Science Foundation, private foundations, and
institutional donors.

Eleven biological field stations in New York focused on terrestrial systems are
currently listed with the Organization of Biological Field Stations, but the
closest is 85 miles from Plattsburgh, which significantly reduces access for our
teaching and research and that of other area educational institutions. PSU is
interested in 1) furthering existing partnerships with North Country high school
students and teachers and community colleges, 2) supporting field components of
a proposed undergraduate major in ecology as well as current majors in Biology
and Environmental Science, and 3) creating new research affiliations. Twin
Valleys also has the potential to attract audiences from large urban areas such
as Boston and New York City (both within a half-day's drive) to Adirondack Park,
a 6 million-acre forest conservation area and model of public-private
partnership.