* 0224652
* Conference on 'Undergraduate Research and Scholarship and the Mission of the Research University' November 14-15, 2002
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Wendy Katkin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2004
* USD 134,943.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project is supporting a two-day national
conference on "Undergraduate Research and Scholarship&lt;br/&gt; and the Mission
of the Research University" at the Reinvention Center at SUNY Stony Brook.
&lt;br/&gt;The conference, which will take place on November 14-15, 2002, will
bring together&lt;br/&gt;university faculty, administrators, and students, as
well as representatives of disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;associations, government
agencies, and private foundations, to focus on fundamental,
institutional,&lt;br/&gt;cultural, and academic issues that are inherent to
research universities. Such issues must be&lt;br/&gt;addressed if research
universities are going to maximize their potential and bring
research,&lt;br/&gt;scholarship, and creative activity to the forefront of the
undergraduate education they offer, as&lt;br/&gt;envisioned in the Boyer
Commission report, "Educating Undergraduates in the
Research&lt;br/&gt;University." Underlying the conference focus is the broader
goal for research universities: (1) to&lt;br/&gt;define and articulate a vision
of undergraduate education that builds upon and is synergistic&lt;br/&gt;with
their research mission, and (2) to develop reasonable expectations for
implementing this&lt;br/&gt;vision so that it impacts significant numbers of
students.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of undergraduate research and
mechanisms for realizing broader&lt;br/&gt;participation is a first step toward
this goal. In their efforts to infuse research into the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
education, those in leadership roles in research universities confront
the&lt;br/&gt;same panoply of issues and challenges that surround their larger
efforts at reinvention. Thus&lt;br/&gt;the conference focus on undergraduate
research provides a concrete and manageable way to&lt;br/&gt;address these
issues.