* 0224726
* Infrastructure Improvement to the Palo Verde Biological Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 115,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to the Organization for
Tropical Studies (OTS) at Duke University, under the direction of PI Dr. Gary
Hartshorn to improve the research facilities at OTS' Palo Verde Biological
Station in Costa Rica. OTS is a nonprofit consortium of 65 universities and
research institutions from the United States, Latin America, Australia, Canada
and South Africa. Founded in 1963, OTS' mission is to provide leadership in
education, research and the responsible use of natural resources in the tropics.
OTS has operated the Palo Verde Biological station since
1971.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Located in lowland, monsoonally dry forest of
Guanacaste Province, Costa Rica, OTS' Palo Verde station is in the heart of Palo
Verde National Park that protects one of the largest remnants of tropical dry
forest in Mesoamerica. At Palo Verde, OTS works in cooperation with governmental
and partner-organizations on scientific issues of training, conservation,
environmental education, wetlands restoration and natural resources management.
Over the past decade the demand to use Palo Verde by OTS and non-OTS education
groups has almost doubled, while research use continues to increase. The
facilities at Palo Verde are inadequate to meet the physical needs for student
and researcher uses, such as laboratory and lecture space, offices and housing.
OTS will use NSF funds to build a new facility to house the station director and
staff; construct a four?unit cabin to house up to eight researchers; construct a
new boardwalk into the marsh; and purchase a new generator to provide a back-up
power source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goals of this project are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieve OTS' long-term strategic goal of developing the
Palo Verde Biological Station as a center of excellence in tropical dry forest
ecology and wetlands management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modernize the Palo Verde
Biological Station to improve its education, research and conservation biology
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To stimulate and support the development and
dissemination of research in tropical dry forest ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full implementation of this project will enable OTS to
continue to build its education program at Palo Verde, assist scientists in
achieving the region's vast research potential, and work with researchers on
wetlands protection at a time when agricultural growth in the lower Tempisque
river basin is having a major impact on Palo Verde National
Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;