* 0224166
* GOALI/Spin Electronics:  Development of ZnO Based Room Temperature Spintronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Yicheng Lu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 09/30/2006
* USD 325,000.00

0224166&lt;br/&gt;Lu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response
to the Spin Electronics for the 21st Century Initiative, Program Solicitation
NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the study and development of metalorganic
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) -grown transition metal (TM) -doped ZnO as a
diluted magnetic semiconductor (DMS) layer, and explore its application through
industrial collaborators, as well as government labs. This material offers the
possibility of highly integrated device architecture along with the ability to
manipulate carrier spin as well as charge. Practical application requires that
the material have a magnetic Curie temperature above room temperature. While
theoretical studies have identified GaN and ZnO as the most promising DMS
materials in this regard, the high solubility of TM ions in ZnO, as well as its
wide band gap (transparent!) its multifunctionality, and relatively low growth
temperature make ZnO an excellent choice of room temperature spintronics
material. To achieve their goals, they will focus on: A systematic study to
develop low-pressure MOCVD technology for growth of TM-doped ZnO films. The most
promising doping species are V, Co, Ni, and Mn, and R-Al2O3 is an optimal
substrate; A coordinated characterization program using both in-house and
synchrotron radiation based spectroscopic, imaging, and diffractive techniques
to characterize the chemical, electronic, structural and magnetic properties of
the MOCVD-grown TM-doped ZnO films; and through the industrial collaboration
integrate the ZnO spin aligner layers with GaN LEDs to form the spin-polarized
injection LED operational at room temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
successful completion of the proposed research will have a significant impact on
the scientific understanding and practical application of diluted magnetic
semiconductor spintronics. It is anticipated that new phenomena related to spin-
electronic, spin-magnetic, and spin-optical integration in wide band gap DMS
materials will be discovered, leading to fundamentally new devices and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;