* 0224387
* CISE-RR:    Instrumentation for Research on Energy Aware Multimedia Information Terminals
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* David Goodman, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2005
* USD 120,000.00

EIA 0224387&lt;br/&gt;Czarkowski, Dariusz&lt;br/&gt; Erkip, Elza
&lt;br/&gt;Goodman, Davis J.&lt;br/&gt;Karri, Ramesh.&lt;br/&gt;Wang,
Yao&lt;br/&gt;Polytechnic University of New York &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
CISE RR: Instrumentation for Research on Energy Aware Multimedia Information
Terminals &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, performing studies related to
minimizing the energy consumed by mobile cellular and wireless networking
hardware, builds a framework to understand, model and measure power consumption,
as well as dynamic allocation of resources to affect power consumption in
portable multimedia communication devices. Three platforms constitute the focus
for implementing signal processing algorithms (general microprocessors, e.g.,
Pentium and ARM), digital signal processors (DSP), and reconfigurable
hardwarefine grain field programmable gate arrays (FPGA) and coarse grain
Application Specific Programmable Processors (ASPP). The work considers two
communications systems that will carry the majority of traffic in wireless
Internets: cellular networks and wireless local area networks (WLAN). Because
battery life depends not only on total energy drain but also on the voltages
employed in the terminal and the temporal profile of energy consumption, the
research includes experiments with lithium batteries to determine the effects on
battery life of continuous discharge and pulsed discharge with various peak-to-
average ratios. The results of these experiments are then merged with the
results of signal processing and communications studies in an energy-management
testbed that verifies predictions and demonstrates the effects of the new
adaptation techniques. Hence, the following four components form the research
plan: &lt;br/&gt;Theoretical and simulation studies exploring power allocation
among source coding, channel coding, encryption, and transmission in a
multimedia, multiuser setting &lt;br/&gt;Measurement and design study examining
the power and energy requirements of signal processing algorithms and producing
a software library of software modules, FPGA configurations, and ASPPs that can
be dynamically selected by a portable device &lt;br/&gt;Measurement and design
study creating an intelligent power supply system that takes into account
effects of battery discharge characteristics and demands of algorithms
implemented on microprocessors, DSPs, FPGAs, and ASPPs.&lt;br/&gt;Creation of
experimental testbed running in the WLAN network from the results of the first
three studies &lt;br/&gt;The experimental testbed addresses three areas of
research: &lt;br/&gt;Power allocation among different components of the
processing pipeline (source coding, channel coding, encryption, transmission);
&lt;br/&gt;Power and energy requirements of signal processing algorithms,
producing a library of various granularity modules (software, FPGA, ASPP) to be
selected dynamically; and&lt;br/&gt;Power supply system that takes into account
both battery characteristics and algorithms needs.&lt;br/&gt;On the educational
side, specific plans involve undergraduate students hands-on work, organization
of workshop, and summer school. Industrial partners and international
collaboration also form part of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;