* 0224778
* Temperature Dependence of Neutral and Ionic Metal Combustion Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Arthur Fontijn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2006
* USD 329,972.00

Reactions of metal monohalides and monoxides of environmental concern are
studied over wide temperature and pressure ranges. Similar measurements are made
on combustion reactions of metal cations. Individual reactions will be studied
in isolation using the Rensselaer HTFFR (high-temperature fast-flow reactor) and
HTP (high-temperature photochemistry) reactors, suitable for the 300 to 1800 K
temperature domain. Together these can be used to cover pressure from 10 to 1000
mbar. The measurements with these facilities are free from interference by other
reactions; temperature, pressure, and concentrations can be varied
independently.

Very little is known of the temperature dependence of the kinetics of ion-
molecule reactions. Such reactions are usually observed below combustion
temperatures, frequently in non-thermalized environments. The use of the HTP
reactors allows study of bulk, temperature-equilibrated reactions by laser-
induced fluorescence, LIF. The use of LIF provides a novel method for the study
of ion-molecule reactions, which are commonly studied by mass spectrometry.
Exothermic and endothermic as well as addition reactions of alkaline-earth
cations of combustion interest are addressed. The results of this work are
needed by combustion engineers, particularly modelers concerned with pollution
abatement, and are also useful for workers in high-temperature materials,
propulsion, chemical vapor deposition, and atmospheric chemistry.