* 0224825
* Planning for a Tallgrass Prairie Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Alison Wallace, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 14,730.00

A grant has been awarded to Minnesota State University Moorhead, under the
direction of Dr. Alison Wallace, Dr. George Davis and Dr. Donna Stockrahm, to
conduct a workshop for the purpose of planning the development of a 5,000 acre
tallgrass prairie biological field station.&lt;br/&gt;The MSUM Regional Science
Center's Buffalo River site is well positioned to place an increased emphasis on
ecological monitoring, research, and research training activities. Current
educational programs are well established. Ecologically unique land has been
purchased and placed under a management plan. Partnerships have been formed with
adjacent high quality lands for research and instructional use, including
property held by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, and the Nature
Conservancy. The site has a basic facility that currently serves K-12
populations and the general public, and could easily be improved to handle
expanded research activities by regional and visiting researchers and students.
There are critical numbers of interested field researchers in the immediate area
from three higher education institutions. Most importantly, there is a need for
a field station that is situated primarily in a northern tallgrass prairie
ecoregion and contains high quality tallgrass prairie acreage available for
ecological monitoring&lt;br/&gt;and research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To make this
planning effort a success, the following objectives will be addressed and met:
1) the articulation of an overall vision for the future of the proposed field
station, 2) the elucidation of specific research and education missions of the
proposed field station, and 3) the formation of a comprehensive plan for
administration, facility, and program development to ensure a fully functioning
field station within a five-year time period. These objectives will be met
during a three-day workshop to be held at the site. An outside panel of field
station professionals will be invited to join regional researchers and agency
personnel. Working groups that concentrate on education, research, or
administrative and facilities issues will be formed. An outside facilitator will
help plan and run the workshop, and edit the final report generated by the
working groups. A successful planning workshop will allow MSUM to proceed with
the development of a field station in an efficient and effective manner, with
the full support of partner institutions and agencies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed field station contains a variety of native and restored
tallgrass prairie, wetland, and riparian woodland areas. However, tallgrass
prairie is by far the most representative of the site, and this rare ecosystem
is not well represented in existing field stations, especially in the northern
regions of the U.S. In order to better monitor and understand our changing
ecosystems, research and educational efforts need to be put forth in a variety
of ecosystems and at a variety of latitudes. Thus the proposed field station
will be a valuable addition to the worldwide network of biological field
stations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;