* 0224747
* EPNES:  Security of Supply &amp; Strategic Learning in Restructured Power Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Ennio Stacchetti, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,981.00

In the first part of our proposal, we study the long run reliability (or
security of supply) of electricity markets under price caps. This (and other
forms or market intervention) cast doubts on the market ability to provide new
capacity in a socially efficient manner (scale, technology and timing). We
propose to develop a dynamic game model of investment. A full characterization
of equilibrium investment will shed light on a number of contentious issues in
the restructuring debate. Examples include; the possibility of "boom and bust"
cycles in equilibrium, a potential technology bias with harmful effects on the
environment, and the need to incorporate capacity
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second part of our proposal we study
learning algorithms as potentially powerful computational tools for electricity
markets. The complexity of electricity markets calls for the incorporation of
some form of bounded rationality in the modeling efforts. However, when players
use simple, adaptive (possibly sub-optimal) rules, repeated interaction may
induce equilibrium outcomes in the long run. Although, many "agent based"
simulation models have been advocated for analyzing electricity markets, they
lack solid theoretical support on issues such as convergence and/or the nature
of equilibrium. In this proposal we will represent competition in electricity
markets under certain congestion management protocols, as games with a special
structure, i.e. "potential games'. For this class of games, the class of
"fictitious play" learning algorithms has been proven to converge with
probability one. Computational tests a large-scale model will serve to validate
and assess the practicality of the class of strategic learning models
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;