* 0224449
* CISE RR:  Collaborative Research on Wide-area Network Computing using Virtual Machines
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Ming-Yang Kao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 10/31/2005
* USD 117,500.00

EIA 02-24449&lt;br/&gt;Dinda, Peter A.&lt;br/&gt;Banerjee, Prithviraj; Kao,
Ming-Yang&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR:
Collaborative Research on Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual
Machines&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project (with Fortes at
University of Florida, proposal 02-24442), requiring a wide-area test bed that
enables experimentation with, access to, and running of applications on unique
resources, requests PC clusters, an IBM server, and other ancillary hardware for
projects in&lt;br/&gt;1. Distributed grid computing and information processing
systems using virtualization technologies and&lt;br/&gt;2. Information grids
with real users and research applications requiring capabilities enabled by
virtual machines (VMs).&lt;br/&gt;Deploying a distributed system based on
clusters connected by local, metropolitan, and wide area networks, the work aims
to provide a virtual computing and data storage interface to clients that access
resources on the underlying "information grid." The test bed includes the
following defining features.&lt;br/&gt;1. Virtualization capabilities, i.e., the
ability to instantiate independent logical machines that can be multiplexed on
physical processors (or fractions of them), storage and network I/O channels,
and can use distinct operating systems;&lt;br/&gt;2. Wide-area distribution,
i.e., Internet-linked test bed components in independently-administered
geographically-apart network domains;&lt;br/&gt;3. Scalable capacity for both
scientific computing and information processing; and&lt;br/&gt;4.
Heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;Interrelated projects enabled by the test bed towards
the goal of developing VM-based middleware for grid computing include
virtualized end resources, monitoring and prediction, interactive computing,
virtual file systems, data management, cycle selling, and security. Information
grids and web portals for use of CAD tools are also enabled by the
infrastructure for dissemination of collaborative research results and data, and
for digital government services. From the availability of the portals and grid-
computing resources benefits are expected in brain-machine interfaces,
biologically-inspired nanocomputing, auction-based computing, distributed
knowledge applications, medical imaging and data archiving, light-scattering
spectroscopy, and mixed non-linear optimization. Collaborations include the
Sigmicro microarchitecture center, NETCARE and the Purdue-hosted Nanohub
(enabling users to run tools for computer architecture and parallel computing,
and nanoelectrnics). The project impacts some minority serving institutions such
as Chicago State and Florida A&amp; M Universities and enables a testbed for a
transnational digital government projects involving Carnegie Mellon University,
University of Belize, University of Colorado, University of Florida, University
of Massachusetts, and Pontificia Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra of the
Dominican Republic.&lt;br/&gt;