* 0224929
* AWARE-Japan, China, Korea, Hong Kong: Materials Science and Engineering Research Experiences for Graduate Students, Undergraduate Students &amp; Teachers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Christopher Summers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2007
* USD 220,995.00

0224929&lt;br/&gt;Thadhani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative international research experience program for faculty, graduate
students, undergraduate students and science teachers to conduct research in the
multi-disciplinary field of materials science and engineering at sites in Japan,
Korea, China and Hong Kong. The principal investigator for the project is Naresh
Thadhani at Georgia Tech in Atlanta. Five faculty/student/teacher groups will be
participating each year. The teachers will be selected from Atlanta area high
schools. The program will provide the opportunity for students to experience
hands-on participation in materials research for up to eight weeks during the
summer months. The research projects will be designed in a manner that allows
promotion of research interactions between faculty from both the U.S. and the
East Asian countries while ensuring that there are specific benefits for each of
the team members in addition to their gaining an international research
experience. The graduate students will be able to enhance the quality and/or
scope of their thesis work while also learning to be mentors. The undergraduate
students will gain a sense of what graduate research is about, and an
international perspective to the field of research that they may eventually
become interested in. The teacher participants will become knowledgeable with
the culture of baccalaureate education in East Asian countries and also learn
about the field of materials science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is made under NSF's AWARE (American Workforce and Research and Education)
program. The challenges of the twenty-first century require a new cadre of
graduates in science and engineering who are broadly educated and are ready to
effectively contribute to difficult technological problems requiring a multi-
disciplinary, teamed, and global approach. This materials education project,
with an underlying theme of structure and properties correlation across length
scales, is of vital importance to users as well as developers of materials.
Recent developments in quantitative microstructural characterization techniques,
approaches for real-time testing of properties, and novel methods for
synthesizing and processing materials, allowing microstructural control, provide
a unique opportunity to cost-effectively design materials with desired
electronic, magnetic, mechanical and optical properties. In addition
advancements in computer technology make it possible to model and simulate
process conditions and allow predictions and simulations of structures that are
directly linked to properties. The participants will undertake studies of
various materials and their applications, focusing on the common theme of
linking and correlating material properties with structure across nano-, meso-,
micro- and macro-length scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;