* 0224592
* Workshop on Global Dynamic Optimization of the Electric Power Grid in Atlanta, GA
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2002
* Ronald Harley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 10/31/2002
* USD 30,000.00

Over the next ten years, demand for electric power in the USA is expected to
increase by about 20% while under the current plans the electric transmission
capacity will increase only by 4%. In addition, the policy of open access to
transmission systems that helped create the competitive electricity markets,
also led to a huge increase in the number of energy transactions over the grid.
This, together with a shortage of generation in some areas, require optimal
usage of existing infrastructure and the addition of FACTS devices and
intelligent controllers. A power system is a dynamic nonlinear time-varying
multivariable complex process. Any optimization strategies must therefore be
carried out in real time and adapt to continuously changing conditions. Recent
developments in optimization techniques, intelligent controllers, power
electronics and digital hardware offer possible solutions.

Power system engineers are aware of the problems and challenges of having some
form of global optimization of the planning and control of the power system.
Control engineers on the other hand have developed algorithms for solving
control problems. Power electronics experts have knowledge of how to design and
control high power FACTS devices when Inserted into power systems. This proposal
is for holding a workshop to bring these groups together and to focus on
discussions leading to fundamental technical solutions to the optimal control of
the electric power network in view of the current energy crisis and to avoid the
crisis in the future. Thirty persons from both academia and industry, will meet
for three days. The program will consist of seven sessions, each of which will
address salient issues. The outcome will be a report which summarizes the
discussions, identifies challenges, strengths and weaknesses, and proposes a way
forward to address the weaknesses. This should lead to more interdisciplinary
research.

