* 0224228
* EPNES: Integrated MEMS and Advanced Technologies for the Next Generation Power Distribution System
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Norma Hubele, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 09/30/2006
* USD 399,968.00

This research project relates to electric power distribution: the delivery of
electric power from a generation and transmission system to a point of
utilization. An important power system component is the circuit breaker,
essentially a switch, used to isolate and separate parts of the system under
fault and certain other operating conditions. In this project, a radical
departure from mechanical circuit breakers is planned: microelectrornechanical
(MEMS) switches shall be operated at very high speed to effectuate rapid system
operating configuration changes. The use of MEMS switches will allow the
application of advanced optimal operating strategies to permit rapid
disconnection of faulted components; rerouting of power from faulted segments to
unfaulted segments; utilization of DC distribution in naval applications; and
minimization of system losses. The economic aspect of the project shall relate
to the optimization of the cost to benefit ratio of innovative distribution
system designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important element of the project is
education over a range of individuals including industrial and electrical
engineers, students and industry engineers, researchers and practitioners. The
premise of the educational component is the value of cross-fertilization in
engineering education. The objective is to utilize cross-disciplinary topics for
motivation as well as education -- at the undergraduate, graduate, and
continuing education levels. The intent is to expose industrial engineers to
electrical engineering topics; engineering students of all disciplines to MEMS
technologies; and electrical engineers to optimization and uncertainty
(especially from an IE point of view).&lt;br/&gt;