* 0224321
* Mapping Higher Level Visual Areas in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Martin Sereno, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2007
* USD 761,583.00

Mapping Higher Level Visual Areas in
Humans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Sereno and colleagues will conduct a three-year
investigation aimed at generating comprehensive, high resolution maps of the
borders and internal organization of intermediate and higher level human visual
areas in occipital, parietal, temporal, frontal cortex using functional magnetic
resonance imaging. The cerebral cortex of each hemisphere in humans contains
more than one hundred distinct areas. Many of these areas are concerned with
vision. The organization of lower level visual areas is well understood; but the
location and number of higher level visual areas is much less clear and the goal
of Dr. Sereno's project to produce insight into these areas. These maps he
discovers will be made available to other researchers interested in determining
how these visual areas differ in their functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
analogy with the human genome project, this study will be carried out with the
participation of a small group of 'professional subjects'. The first set of
experiments extends traditional methods for mapping visual areas (phase-encoded,
surface-based analysis using moving, windowed checkerboards, and a simple
fixation task) by turning to more attentionally captivating windowed stimuli
(television action programs, videos of moving faces and objects, more complex
monitoring tasks). The second set of experiments extends the mapping stimulus
set to include linguistic visual stimuli (reading short stories at
systematically varying retinotopic locations). These two kinds of stimuli are
better suited to activating higher visual areas, but at the same time, are
capable of revealing their borders and internal structure. To successfully carry
out high resolution mapping studies, it is crucial to correct the subtle spatial
distortions present in functional scans before the data is overlaid onto a
cortical surface reconstruction. Therefore, the third main part of the proposal
focuses on improving distortion correction methods (including pre- and post-hoc
corrections for static field inhomogeneities and gradient nonlinearities). The
programs implementing these methods will be freely distributed to other imaging
centers, in a manner similar to the way our cortical surface reconstruction
programs (FreeSurfer) have been freely distributed and
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this research are expected to
provide important new understanding into anatomical and functional organization
of the human brain. These findings will have significant impact on clinical and
basic neuroscience. In addition, several junior researchers will receive
outstanding research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;