* 0224458
* CISE Research Resources:    A Comprehensive Multi-Tier Wireless Network Development Platform
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita V. Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,744.00

EIA - 0224458 Cavallaro, Joseph R. Aazhang, Behnaam Frantz, Jeremy P. Knightly,
Edward W. Sabharwal, Ashutosh

Rice Universiy

Title: CISE RR: A Comprehensive Multi-tier Wireless Network Development Platform

This proposal, developing an infrastructure within the Center for Multimedia
Communication (CMC) to enable repeatable fields' experiments in the laboratory,
aims to develop integration techniques beyond simulations and other modeling.
Using actual field measurement in its emulation, the infrastructure fills a gap
to experimentally validate theoretical results under real-world conditions
promising seamless wireless content delivery (without any service disruptions).
The equipment, mainly consisting of two channel emulators, a logic analyzer, and
a spectrum analyzer, benefits three major projects. Reconfigurable Wireless
Architectures, High Data Rate Multiple Antenna Communication, and Opportunistic
Multi-Tier Wireless Scheduling. The first project involves the design of new
communication architectures that reconfigure based on the network availability,
channel conditions, and data requirements of a handset. The infrastructure will
enable a complete suite of efficient prototypes, which will simultaneously
connect to next generation wireless LANs, third generation wireless cellular,
and Bluetooth personal area networks (PANs), bringing closer the ideal ability
of a single device to seamlessly maintain its link to the network using whatever
connectivity is available. The second project develops new communications coding
and feedback methods for high data rate wireless access by prototyping new
algorithms with multiple transmit and receive antennae on reconfigurable
baseband platform and stress tested in different wireless configurations for
their robustness, performance limits, and power efficiency. The last project
involves the design of optimal methods for scheduling data using all the
resources available by a multi-tier network, including other mobile nodes
connecting the backbone infrastructure. The packet schedulers are being
prototyped on a mobile network processor platform and will use the multi-tier
network interface (mNIC) prototype developed within CMC in its field trials. On
the educational side, students will continue their research on these projects,
and new developments captured for new courses. Rice University is quite active
with under-represented groups. .

