* 0224377
* Collaborative Research:   DOT -- Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate the Development  of Techniques for Efficient Execution of Distributed Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Xian-He Sun, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 87,028.00

EIA- 0224377 Sun, Xian-He Illinois Institute of Technology

Title: CISE RR: (Collaborative) DOT--Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate
the Development of Techniques for Efficient Execution of Distributed
Applications

This collaborative proposal with Northwestern University (Taylor, 02-24427) and
the University of Chicago (Foster, 02-24187), acquiring data nodes and compute
nodes at five sites, contributes to build a Distributed Optical Testbed (DOT).
The DOT system, a product of the paradigm shift from large-scale applications
running on large parallel systems at single sites to those running on
distributed systems, has come about by the availability of high-speed optical
networks (E.g., Starlight, TeraGrid 40 Gb/s network, the PacificRail 10 Gb/s
network). This shift necessitates techniques that allow applications to
efficiently utilize distributed systems. In contrast to parallel systems, these
systems must exploit two characteristics: Heterogeneity of resources (processors
and networks) and Dynamic changes in performance of shared resources, especially
wide area networks. The system, consisting of Linux clusters at six
geographically different sites interconnected via two existing research DWDM
networks, I-WIRE and OMNInet, involves the following sites: Argonne National
Laboratory (ANL), Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), National Center for
Supercomputer Applications (NCSA), Northwester University Chicago Campus (NU-C),
Northwestern University Evanston Campus (NU-E), and the University of Chicago
(UC). DOT will facilitate the following research activities in the area of
distributed applications: Dynamic Load Balancing (Taylor) Performance Monitoring
and Prediction (Dinda, Sun, Taylor) Data Management (Choudhary, Foster) The
first activity develops techniques utilizing network performance predictions
that take into consideration the heterogeneity of the processors and networks of
distributed systems to dynamically balance the load during execution. The second
extends performance monitoring, modeling and prediction techniques that have
been focused on parallel systems and broadband network to distributed systems
with optical networks and different topologies. The last develops techniques
that manage the distributed data such that the actual data location is
transparent and the data is accessed efficiently. These research activities are
driven by three applications that have been parallelized using MPI, such that
the applications can be easily ported to DOT: ENZO, an adaptive cosmological
application, Cactus, an open framework used to solve Einstein's equations, and
AudioVoice, a virtualized distributed audio application with physical
simulations that have real-time deadlines and varying computational demands.
Each application presents challenges, which include adaptivity, flexible
framework, and simulations with real-time deadlines.