* 0224881
* 13th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research; June 28 - July 2, 2002, Seville, Spain
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Eric Richards, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 09/30/2004
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides funding to help junior U.S. scientists attend the Thirteenth
International Conference on Arabidopsis Research to be held in Seville, Spain,
June 28 to July 2, 2002. The aim is to provide an opportunity for these young
researchers to exchange ideas with colleagues from around the world on all
aspects of research concerning the model plant Arabidopsis. The conference will
include sessions on genomics, metabolic regulation, responses to the environment
(biotic and abiotic), hormones and signal transduction, genetic mechanisms and
epigenetics, natural variation and evolution, cell biology, developmental phase
transitions, embryogenesis and vegetative development, reproductive development,
and light signaling and circadian regulation. Arabidopsis is an excellent model
for crop plant development and physiology, and many of the findings made in
Arabidopsis are readily applicable to crop plants. An important component of the
meeting is that approximately thirty of those who submitted abstracts of their
work will be invited to present that work in short talks. The conference will
maximize participation of young scientists by inviting graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and junior P.I.'s to present many of the talks.

Because this is the premier international forum for exchange of the latest
results and approaches in Arabidopsis research, it is imperative that young
scientists from the US have the opportunity to attend this conference. The funds
from this award will provide travel fellowships for approximately thirty junior
US scientists. First priority will be given to those junior scientists who have
been selected by the meeting organizers to give oral presentations and to junior
scientists from underrepresented groups. The fellowships, which will cover
approximately half to two thirds of the expected travel and meeting costs, will
be administered by the North American Arabidopsis Steering Committee, whose
members are elected by electronic ballot by North American subscribers to the
Arabidopsis electronic bulletin board (arab-gen@net.bio.net,
http://www.bio.net/hypermail/ARABIDOPSIS/).