* 0224671
* CISE-RR:    Advancing Visualization Projects Through the Use of High-Performance Virtual Reality Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Brian Slator, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2004
* USD 162,204.00

EIA-0224671&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey T. Clark&lt;br/&gt;Brian M. Slator&lt;br/&gt;North
Dakota State University - Fargo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR: Advancing
Vidualization Projects Through the Use of High-Performance Virtual Reality
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from an EPSCoR state, fostering
development in computer visualization research, aims at acquiring equipment to
support North Dakota's State University Archeological Technologies Lab. The
research involves the use of compelling digital visualization experiences and
authentic simulated virtual worlds to support the following
projects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Virtual reconstruction of Like-a-Fishhook
Village (to be displayed at the Heritage Center - state museum - in Bismarck and
the Cultural Center of Three Affiliated Tribes in New Town),&lt;br/&gt;2.
Virtual reconstruction of On-a-Slant Village (for display at the Fort Abraham
Lincoln Museum in Mandan), and&lt;br/&gt;3. Immersive virtual environment of a
Native American powwow-dancing competition for use in diabetes prevention in
Native American youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An SGI Reality Center as a state-or-
the-art technology augmentation to current NDSU facility and computer
visualization capabilities will contribute to the virtual reconstructions of the
villages and the computer simulation game for diabetes education. The work
facilitates projects in archeology, anthropology, and museology. Expecting to
develop and host a variety of virtual 3D environments at the highest levels and
to send the virtual worlds to multiple remote location for concurrent display,
the equipment and requisite software systems will constitute a qualitative leap
in the capabilities to share high-detail 3D content for both research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;