* 0224730
* Facility Improvements to Enhance Northern Prairie Research and Instructional Efforts at Oak Lake Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Nels Troelstrup, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 171,765.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oak Lake Field Station is a 570 acre teaching and
research facility operated by South Dakota State University in northeastern
Brookings County, South Dakota. Utilization of Oak Lake Field Station for
research activity by local and visiting faculty and students has increased over
400% over the past seven years. This increase has occurred in response to better
advertisement of field station facilities and greater local funding for faculty
and student research. The station recently underwent a facility review, funded
by the National Science Foundation. Visiting reviewers recommended expansion and
improvement of existing laboratory and classroom facilities to meet future
needs. The objective of this effort is to improve research laboratory, classroom
and computer room facilities at Oak Lake Field Station, South Dakota.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds provided by the National Science Foundation will be
supplemented with matching dollars by local sources to remodel and expand the
existing classroom and laboratory building of Oak Lake Field Station. This
construction will provide a 637 sq. ft. laboratory, 918 sq. ft. classroom and
294 sq. ft. office/computer room facility. Lab space will increase 445%,
classroom space will increase 266% and office/computer space will increase 188%
relative to existing facilities. Overall, building square footage will increase
from 1935 ft2 to 2679 ft2. Building renovations will include total enclosure of
the existing field laboratory and classroom, furnace installation to allow four-
season use, new lab countertops, storage cabinets, chemical shower and eyewash
station, telecommunications wiring, sinks, accommodations for digital
projection, classroom to seat 32 students, expanded field library shelving,
storage area and expanded office/computer room.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oak Lake
Field Station provides a unique site to study native tallgrass prairie and
pothole environments within the northern plains. Located within two hours of
several regional universities, colleges and public schools, this remodeled
facility will provide a location for field courses, field trips, student field
projects, graduate and faculty research, symposia, professional meetings and
retreats. Field Station staff conservatively estimate a tripling of field
station instruction and research utilization as a result of this remodeling
effort. Instruction and research efforts will now be possible throughout the
year. Expanded classroom and laboratory facilities will allow simultaneous use
by larger groups of students and researchers. Telecommunications capabilities
will be improved, allowing more efficient communication of field station
programs and data to other academic institutions and organizations. These
enhancements will greatly improve student learning opportunities and research
productivity within a modest budget. &lt;br/&gt;