* 0224114
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:  Carbon Nanotube Based Spin Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Shi-Yu Wu, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 09/30/2006
* USD 449,994.00



This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
fabrication and characterization of two prototype carbon nanotube spin
electronic devices: the nanotube spin transistor and the nano-helix magnetic
field sensor. For molecular scale spin electronic applications, the carbon
nanotube has compelling advantages. Carbon nanotubes are quasi-one-dimensional,
crystalline wires having a low density of spin scattering centers. Therefore,
current flows through nanotubes with very few electron or spin scattering
events. This makes carbon nanotubes useful for molecular scale spin transmission
lines, with spin detection signals remaining high over long transmission
distances. Spin signals can be amplified or suppressed by gating the nanotube to
change the electron density. High ballistic current flow also produces
anomalously large magnetic moments in carbon nanotube circuits. This is useful
for magnetic memory and switching applications to amplify and sense local
magnetic fields.

The nanotube spin transistor is a ferromagnetically contacted nanotube with a
field effect gate. The gate bias modifies the transmission of the up and down
spin channels, and acts to amplify or suppress the spin detection signal. The
nano-helix magnetic sensor is an electrically contacted carbon nanotube grown
into a helical shape. Due to the lack of electron scattering, current flow
through the helix produces a giant orbital spin moment, which interacts strongly
with applied magnetic field. This dramatically alters the resistance between the
two field directions, even for low applied fields. Together, these devices
display a range of behavior that will be useful for advanced spin electronic
applications on the molecular scale. To accomplish this work, the PIs will
combine their collective experience in carbon nanotube spin transport, nanotube
device fabrication, nanotube electrical characterization and nanotube device
modeling. They will work closely with collaborators within the chemistry
departments at Duke University and UC Riverside to optimize nanotube growth,
distribution of nanotubes for electrical characterization, and chemical surface
modification of nanotubes for spin electronic device applications. As part of
their project, they will be training two graduate students in the exciting area
of spin electronics and nanoscale technology. The undergraduate and graduate
curriculum including Nanoscale fabrication, Device Modeling, and Electrical/
Optical Characterization will incorporate their spin electronic research
advances.