* 0224953
* URTD & Environmentally-Threatened Gopher Tortoises
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Mary Brown, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Thompson N. Hobbs
* 05/31/2008
* USD 2,271,031.00

The gopher tortoise is an environmentally-threatened species that is critically
important for maintenance of upland habitats, biodiversity, and community
ecology. Over 360 vertebrate and invertebrate species utilize gopher tortoise
burrows as a refuge. Gopher tortoises also help maintain habitat diversity by
dispersal of plant. Both upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) and
anthropogenic effects such as development, habitat destruction and fragmentation
are believed to play major roles in population declines. The long term goal of
this project is to understand the relationship between URTD and tortoise
population dynamics, with special emphasis on the impact of anthropogenic
effects such as relocation practices and habitat alteration on disease
transmission. This project will use an interdisciplinary approach to determine
the interactive roles of human intervention, habitat quality, and bacterial
factors on spread of disease in natural populations of gopher tortoises. A
mathematical model will be developed to predict disease transmission.

Lack of knowledge with respect to potential infectious diseases present in wild
populations and the impact of disease on relocation and restocking efforts,
population parameters, and long term population well-being creates a major
dilemma for scientists, wildlife biologists, conservationists, and public policy
makers. The model developed in this project can be used to make more effective,
rational, and critical management decisions designed to protect gopher tortoise
populations and the biological diversity that tortoises support in upland
habitats. The management practice of relocation intended to preserve gopher
tortoises may actually resemble natural migration patterns of humans. Important
new insights into the relationship between population movements and transmission
dynamics of an infectious chronic respiratory disease will be obtained in a
natural tortoise population that mimics the life history of humans.