* 0224260
* The Structural and Functional Neuroanatomy of Language Laterality
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Mark Eckert, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 04/30/2004
* USD 54,217.00

Structural and Functional Neuroanatomy of Language Laterality

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Eckert and Binder and colleagues
will conduct a two-year investigation of the brain specialization for language.
Most people are dependent on brain areas in the left hemisphere to process
language. Only rarely is the right hemisphere essential for understanding or
producing language. The reasons for this left-hemisphere language dominance
remain unexplained. One popular explanation suggests that larger left hemisphere
language-related areas, compared to the right hemisphere, predispose language to
organize in the left hemisphere. Superior verbal ability may stem from this
structural and functional organization. The present research project tests this
explanation for language organization, as well as an alternative explanation
that proposes that left hemisphere language-related areas are not the basis for
language dominance, but interact with language dominance to predict verbal
ability. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and the intracarotid
anesthetization procedure will be used to assess language laterality in normal
(functional imaging only) and epilepsy subjects. Anatomical data will be
collected from MRI scans. This study will be the first to directly test
hypotheses about the relation between language, anatomical asymmetries, and
cognition. In addition, this study will increase understanding of functional
imaging results by examining how individual variation in neuroanatomy influences
individual variability in functional imaging patterns of activation.

