* 0224860
* A Seawater System for California Polytechnic State University's Marine Education and Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Mark Moline, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Seawater System for California Polytechnic State
University's Marine Education and Research Center
(#0224860).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly) under the direction of
Drs. M. Moline and N. Adams, to help develop a former petroleum transfer pier
located 40 km from campus in San Luis Obispo Bay into the new Marine Education
and Research Center (MERC). As an integral part of the conversion of this unique
1 kilometer-long steel and concrete pier, a 500-gpm capacity seawater system
will provide life support for the rich fauna and flora that exist in immediate
area for both undergraduate education and collaborative research efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;The work to be performed for this project includes, fabrication of
the piping system that will carry water to the main platform on the pier,
fabrication of a primary and secondary pumping system, fabrication of a primary
and secondary filtration system, integration/fabrication of a series of seawater
tanks/aquaria, and fabrication of a discharge system. The seawater system will
facilitate directed instruction and student research at the MERC. The seawater
system will also provide the infrastructure required to conduct faculty/student
research projects focused on the reproduction, development and physiology of
marine invertebrates, fish, and algae. Some specific core areas of research
include; bioluminescence, fish population genetics, eelgrass and algal
physiology/ecology, satellite remote sensing as applied to phytoplankton,
invertebrate larval settling/development and developmental/cell biology in
purple sea urchins. The seawater system will also meet the requirements for in-
line instrumentation being installed to monitor change in San Luis Bay over a
range of time scales, which will provide the temporal environmental context for
ongoing experimentation at the center. &lt;br/&gt;The system will provide the
foundation for formal instruction at the undergraduate/graduate levels to
approximately 250 students at Cal Poly annually within the departments of
Biological Sciences, Physics, Engineering and Chemistry. It will allow the
University to attract visiting scientists and students to participate in
research and courses and to promote marine sciences nationwide. The location of
the new facility provides the only marine laboratory facility along 320 km of
coastline from Santa Barbara to Monterey. The MERC and a flowing seawater system
provide a cornerstone for a new program in marine education. There is a new
emphasis is on marine-related curriculum with the understanding of the
importance of collaborative research in education at Cal Poly. With pressures on
coastal resources, there has been increased scientific interest in studying the
biological dynamics in the area. The base of the facility is a pristine rocky
intertidal habitat with a kelp forest 200m offshore. The majority of the
coastline to the north extending to the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary
is relatively untouched/unstudied and is ideal for the educational/research
goals of the Center. One of the primary missions of the MERC is to combine our
nationally recognized and diverse student body with our "learn-by-doing"
philosophy on education in marine biology and related marine fields. By exposing
every student to active research programs and providing hands on experience at
the MERC, we are in the unique position to fill the gap that exists in marine
education targeting undergraduate learning. &lt;br/&gt;