* 0224837
* EPNES:    Decentralized Resources and Decision-Making
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Alex Farrell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 08/31/2005
* USD 401,641.00

&lt;br/&gt;0224837&lt;br/&gt;Lave&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs study distributed
resources (DR) in nine areas involving large electricity networks. Our approach
is interdisciplinary, involving electrical engineering, economics, and policy
analysis. They will apply their research to improve undergraduate and graduate
education, as well as provide training for working professionals. The research
areas are:&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Decision-Making: Use economic theory and
autonomous agents to decentralize decision making in complex systems, such as
transmission grids and micro-grids, to increase efficiency and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;Engineering-Economics of DR: Study engineering design,
operation, and economics of DR to understand how to optimize power system
configuration for efficiency and survivability.&lt;br/&gt;Reliability &amp;
Security: Examine the reliability and security implications of introducing DR
into current and advanced electric power systems with advanced computer modeling
methods. &lt;br/&gt;Air Quality &amp; Life Cycle Analysis of DR: Quantify the
implications of DR for local and regional air quality and examine the
environmental implications of DR over its life cycle.&lt;br/&gt;DG &amp;
Microgrids: Examine the technical difficulties of establishing microgrids
powered by DG on total energy use, reliability, cost, and
security.&lt;br/&gt;Interconnect Standards: Examine DR interconnection issues,
e.g., implications for conventional systems and profitability.
&lt;br/&gt;General Regulatory Environment: Study how the actions of regulators
expedite or impede the introduction and operation of DR, e.g.,
microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;Other Applications of the Technology: Examine the
implications of DR for small-scale systems, e.g., power systems on
ships.&lt;br/&gt;Benchmarking Test Systems: Test the research in IEEE-PES
testbeds and utility systems.&lt;br/&gt;Education: Design new courses and
teaching modules for graduate &amp; undergraduate course and develop new
material for disseminating this research to practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;