* 0225665
* ITR Collaborative Research: Enabling the Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* P. Bryan Heidorn
* 09/30/2008
* USD 4,439,765.00

Understanding and sustaining the natural world in the 21st century depends on
improving our capacity to access ecological, earth science, and human-dimension
data; mining these data for new knowledge; and conveying new insights to
decision-makers and the general public. Computer science and information
technology research can effectively address many of these issues and advance our
ability to conduct ecological science. This multidisciplinary research
investigation will create a "Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge"
(SEEK)-an information technology framework and infrastructure that will be used
to derive and extend ecological knowledge by facilitating the discovery, access,
integration, interpretation, and analyses of distributed ecological information.
SEEK will provide for the integration of local desktop data with a larger
network of data and analytical tools, enabling ecologists and other researchers
to tackle complex research problems that were hitherto intractable. The SEEK
initiative stands on the foundation of substantial and productive NSF investment
in ecological and biodiversity informatics and it brings together four highly
collaborative, forward-looking institutions in a partnership committed to
inventing and supporting a global computing infrastructure for environmental
biology. The project involves a multidisciplinary team of computer scientists,
ecologists and technologists from the Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics
(PBI), a consortium comprising the National Center for Ecological Analysis and
Synthesis (NCEAS); the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC); the University of
Kansas (KU), and the University of New Mexico (UNM)) and partnering institutions
(Arizona State University, University of North Carolina, University of Vermont,
and Napier University in Scotland). This five-year initiative will lead to
fundamental improvements in how researchers can 1) gain global access to data
and information, 2) rapidly locate and utilize distributed computational
services, and 3) exercise powerful new methods for capturing, reproducing, and
extending the analysis process itself. SEEK will also specifically provide
ecologists and other researchers access to a large-scale network of information
resources and computational services, via powerful data discovery and analysis
tools that operate from desktop computers. These capabilities will significantly
build research capacity to more effectively address global research, management
and policy issues in environmental biology that increasingly require much more
efficient, automated access to distributed and heterogeneous data. A multi-
faceted approach will be employed to insure that the research products,
software, and information technology infrastructure resulting from SEEK
optimally benefit science, education, and the public. Outreach includes
community involvement, a WWW portal, informatics training, and an innovative
annual symposium and training program that focuses on information technology
transfer to young investigators and students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups. In the information economy, access to information for
knowledge creation and decision-making is as valuable as the information itself.
This project will enable bringing the intellectual content of biodiversity and
ecological information into currency for science and society. Examples of
significant project outcomes include: (i) revolutionizing discovery, access to
and integration of ecological, earth, and human dimension data and information
through the SEEK infrastructure; (ii) developing intelligent analytical tools
and infrastructure to support the needs of scientists, decision-makers, and the
general public; (iii) education and training of the next generation of
ecologists in information technology skills; and (iv) improving the
opportunities for scientists, resource managers, policy makers, and the public
to make scientifically-informed decisions about the environment by expanding
access to ecological data, information, and knowledge.