* 0225660
* ITR:  Robust Large-Scale Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Scott Shenker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2009
* USD 12,000,000.00

This project is a novel decentralized infrastructure, based on distributed hash
tables (DHTs), that will enable a new generation of large-scale distributed
applications. The key technology on which we build, DHTs, are robust in the face
of failures, attacks and unexpectedly high loads. They are scalable, achieving
large system sizes without incurring undue overhead. They are self-configuring,
automatically incorporating new nodes without manual intervention or oversight.
They simplify distributed programming by providing a clean and flexible
interface. And, finally, they provide a shared infrastructure simultaneously
usable by many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach advocated here is
a radical departure from both the centralized client-server and the application-
specific overlay models of distributed applications. This new approach will not
only change the way large-scale distributed systems are built, but could
potentially have far reaching societal implications as well. The main challenge
in building any distributed system lies in dealing with security, robustness,
management, and scaling issues; today each new system must solve these problems
for itself, requiring significant hardware investment and sophisticated software
design. The shared distributed infrastructure will relieve individual
applications of these burdens, thereby greatly reducing the barriers to entry
for large-scale distributed services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our belief that DHTs
are the right enabling infrastructure is based on two conjectures: (1) a DHT
with application-independent, unconstrained keys and values provides a general
purpose interface upon which a wide variety of distributed applications can be
built, and (2) distributed applications that make use of the DHT-based
infrastructure inherit basic levels of security, robustness, ease of operation,
and scaling. Much of the thrust of the proposed research is an exploration of
these two conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will investigate the first
conjecture, that the DHT abstraction can support a wide range of applications,
by building a variety of DHT-based systems. Our recent work has used DHTs to
support such varied applications as distributed file systems, multicast overlay
networks, event notification systems, and distributed query processing. DHTs
simplify the structure of these systems by providing general-purpose key/value
naming rather than imposing structured keys (e.g., hierarchical names in DNS).
These systems are early prototypes, but they suggest that DHTs may be as useful
to distributed applications as ordinary hash tables are to
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second conjecture relies on techniques for
creating robust, secure, and self-organizing infrastructures out of many
mutually distrustful nodes. Our initial work on robust DHT designs gives us
confidence that such techniques are within reach. The bulk of our proposed
research will be devoted to the in-depth study of these techniques, with the
express aim of producing a sound and coherent design for the infrastructure. To
investigate the real-world behavior of our design, we will create a large-scale
open testbed for which we will distribute our infrastructure software, some
enabling libraries, and a few key compelling
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its impact on the creation of
distributed applications, our research program will have benefits in education
and outreach. Given their current importance, security, robustness, and the
design of distributed systems should become central topics in undergraduate
computer science education. To this end, we are planning a new interdisciplinary
course that will address these issues, and bring them into sharper focus early
in the undergraduate course sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our testbed and
research agenda is also a good vehicle for encouraging the participation of
organizations not traditionally involved in networking and systems research.
Participation in the testbed requires little cost (a PC and an Internet
connection) and minimal levels of systems expertise and over-sight. Moreover,
because the material is closely related to the P2P systems with which many
students are familiar, the project might appeal to students who would not
normally be attracted to research in this area. Based on this premise, we plan
an active outreach program to underrepresented populations at non-research
undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;