* 0225983
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Microbial Production of a Biosurfactant Exhibiting Excellent Emulsification and Surface Active Properties
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Stephen Zinder, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 25,000.00

0225983&lt;br/&gt;Zinder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Stephen Zinder, Department of
Microbiology at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York and a team of Egyptian
scientists that includes Dr. Hany Hussein, Dr. Ahmed Gaballa, and Dr. Yasser Abd
Elfattah, of Mubarak City for Scientific Research and Technology Applications in
Alexandria, Egypt. The main objective of this research is to isolate the most
potent microbial cultures capable of producing bioemulsifier. The investigators
plan also to study methods for optimization of the production process through
the study of the different environmental conditions and by assessing the
influence of different carbon and nitrogen limitations on surfactant
productivity. The investigators will isolate the most potent microbial cultures
capable of producing biodegradable surfactants from the ecosystem. Samples will
be collected from different parts of Egypt and the microbes capable of producing
biosurfactants will be isolated and characterized. They also plan to examine the
use of these optimized production processes to produce the biosurfactant on a
large scale. It is expected that a fermentation process will have a key role in
improving the economics of the overall process in biosurfactant
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Surfactants are surface-active compounds
capable of reducing surface and interfacial tension at the interface between
liquids, solids and gases, thereby allowing them to mix or disperse readily as
emulsions in water or other liquids. The topic of biosurfactants is highly
relevant to Egypt where sustaining the environment is a high priority.
Discovering microbes that produce surfactants would have a very desirable impact
on society and on the environment. A number of experiments are proposed, calling
for expertise over a wide area. Drs. Zinder, Hussein, Gaballa and Abdel Fattah
have the disciplinary experiences needed for this research. This project is
being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;