* 0225759
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - "The Web of Modularity"
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Bruce Berndt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/2003
* USD 29,046.00

This award will fund an NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference entitled ``The Web
of Modularity'' to be held at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in
the summer of 2003. The conference lecturer will be Professor Ken Ono of the
University of Wisconsin at Madison; Professor Ono will give ten lectures
centered around the diverse roles which the theory of modular forms plays in
various areas of mathematics related to Number Theory. The conference will focus
on a wide array of problems which can be addressed through the use of modular
forms. These include, among others, problems from representation theory,
partition theory, arithmetic geometry, the theory of L-functions, hypergeometric
series, and combinatorics. Although these comprise a very broad array of topics
in active areas of mathematical research, they share the feature that they can
be understood using a unified set of techniques from the theory of modular
forms.

The main goals of the conference are:

1) To present an organized and motivated description of the important and
diverse role which modular forms play in Number Theory and other areas of
mathematics.

2) To provide young mathematicians and newcomers to the field (particularly
graduate students and post-docs)with an accessible account of important
techniques, theorems, and open problems at the forefront of this area of
research.

3) To provide established researchers an opportunity to share their expertise
and to interact with each other and with junior mathematicians.

4) To strengthen regional ties among researchers working in areas connected to
the themes of the meeting.

5) To plan a scientific program which will lead to a published monograph of
lasting importance to the wider mathematical community.