* 0225642
* ITR: The OptIPuter
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Larry Smarr, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2009
* USD 13,500,000.00

The OptIPuter project explores a new architecture for the distributed
information infrastructure (which NSF terms infostructure) required by a number
of this decade's science and engineering shared facilities. The project is
driven by a close collaboration with leaders of two of these community
systems?NSF's EarthScope and NIH's Biomedical Imaging Research Network
(BIRN)?both of which are beginning to produce an accelerating flood of data
which will in stored in distributed federated data repositories. One
characteristic blocking such science is that the individual data objects (a 3D
brain image or a terrain dataset) are large (Gigabytes) compared to what can be
interactively manipulated or visualized over today's networks. What these
scientists &lt;br/&gt;require are ultra-high-speed predictable "clear-channel"
networks linking PC clusters, storage and visualization systems, enabling
collaborating scientists to explore interactively massive amounts of previously
uncorrelated data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important opportunity exists over
the next few years to develop a radical new architecture for this needed
scientific infostructure. Observing that the exponential growth rates in
bandwidth and storage are now much higher than Moore's Law, this research "goes
to the end of the rainbow" to exploit a new world in which the central
architectural element is optical networking, not computers. This transition is
caused by the use of parallelism, as in supercomputing a decade ago. However,
this time the parallelism is in multiple wavelengths of light, or lambdas, on
single optical fibers, creating supernetworks. The OptIPuter project aims at the
re-optimization of the entire Grid stack of software abstractions, learning how,
as George Gilder suggests, to "waste" bandwidth and storage in order to conserve
"scarce" computing in this new world of inverted values.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a period of technological paradigm shifting requires
large-scale application-driven system experiments and a broad multidisciplinary
team to understand and develop innovative solutions for a "LambdaGrid" world.
Smaller scale efforts are unlikely to produce the radical changes needed to
seize the opportunity. Without tackling this research arena, more traditional
approaches to developing e-Science infostructure will instead be widely adopted,
but at what ultimate cost to the country in our loss of scientific leadership in
the long term? Our approach is not without risk; however, with these
exponentials crossing, and therefore a technologically driven reordering of
&lt;br/&gt;infostructure architectural considerations inevitable, an exciting
research opportunity is now made possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Essentially,
the OptIPuter is a "virtual" parallel computer in which the individual
"processors" are widely distributed clusters; the "backplane" is provided by IP
delivered over multiple dedicated lambdas (each 1-10 Gbps); and, the "mass
storage systems" are large distributed scientific data repositories, fed by
scientific instruments as OptIPuter peripheral devices, operated in near real-
time. Furthermore, collaboration will be a defining OptIPuter characteristic;
goals include implementing a next-generation Access Grid with optical multicast,
enabling tiled stereo HDTV screens of reality-matching visual resolution. The
OptIPuter is an embodiment of the vision of the "hollowing out of the computer"
prophesized by Erich Schmidt in the mid-1990s. The old "computer-in-a-box" is
being blown up and scattered across the Net. The OptIPuter's fundamental
inventions include software and middleware abstractions to deliver unique
capabilities in a lambda-rich world, a world in which endpoint-delivered
bandwidth is greater than &lt;br/&gt;individual computers can saturate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research on campus and metro-scale OptIPuters
complements State (CENIC/ONI in California, I-WIRE in Illinois), national
(TeraGrid), and international (StarLight) projects. The six-university OptIPuter
research team spans applications, software, networking and hardware expertise to
address the challenges. This team has a long history of successfully managing
large multidisciplinary and multi-institutional projects, working with
companies, and delivering high-impact innovations in hardware and software
systems. Since industry is developing key subcomponents of the OptIPuter,
several leading companies are involved as partners. The new architectural models
and the software systems to make them function should contribute important
capabilities to other large-scale Federally funded networked science facilities.
Going beyond research, the collaborative visualization data-fusion OptIPuter
centers coupled to remote instrumentation will be enabling technologies for
broader societal needs, including emergency response, homeland security, health
services, and science education.