* 0225210
* PGE/DEM An Integrated Approach To Change Attitudes Of College Freshmen Toward Female Participation In SME&amp;T
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Anu Gokhale, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2008
* USD 284,069.00

Illinois State University will shape the awareness, attitudes and knowledge of
all freshman students and their parents by enhancing learning about gender
issues in STEM before and during the freshman year. The interventions will be
conducted within three overlapping spheres -- the family context, the peer
context, and the University's curricular and co-curricular structures. It is at
the nexus of these three spheres that students make educational choices that
affect their careers for decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the family
context, there will be a half-day or four-hour workshop that addresses gender
equity in STEM, as part of the two-day Summer Orientation sessions for incoming
900 freshmen and their 1500 parents. All the 150 undergraduate advisors at the
University will also participate in the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within
the peer context, learning communities will be formed to provide a support group
that nurtures freshmen females who express interest (or even mild enthusiasm) in
STEM. The learning communities will be modeled on the existing Connections
program at the University. Each learning community will consist of a maximum of
30 students (females and males), a science, mathematics, or technology
professional on or off campus, who will serve as a role model, and a student
leader (university junior or senior in one of the STEM fields) to help guide the
students through their first year at the University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within
the context of the University's curricular and co-curricular structures, a four-
week "topical excursion" (learning module) will be part of an existing general
education course, Foundations of Inquiry (FOI), which all freshmen take during
their first semester at the University. In that "topical excursion", the
approach to Science/Technology/Society -- current issues in which the science,
mathematics, engineering and technology play major roles -- will be combined
with a more gender-related subtext -- choosing female scientists as authors,
showing female scientists, engineers, and technologists at work, or raising the
issue of gender bias in science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model
exemplified in this project has the potential for replication at comparable
institutions since many universities have some form of a summer orientation
session for incoming freshmen and their parents, an introductory course that
most freshmen take during their first year at the university, a structure for
peer support, and undergraduate student advisement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gender-role attitudes of society are widely thought to
deter college age women from STEM college courses, majors, and subsequent career
paths. Experiences during the transition to adulthood are particularly strong.
The goal is to challenge traditional concepts and definitions of femininity and
its relationship with STEM disciplines taking a "whole community" approach at
this critical stage in education -- getting male and female students, their
parents, student advisors, and faculty involved.