* 0225405
* Integrated Sensing:   Non-Invasive Ultrasound-Based Micro-Flow Imaging System for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Robin Shandas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

The non-invasive imaging and quantitation of micro-scale flow within the body is
still a challenge for current clinical imaging systems. The development of an
ultrasound-based imaging system for detection and quantitation of micro-scale
flows is proposed here. &lt;br/&gt;Two sets of commercially available phased-
array broadband transducers will be used. These will be coupled to custom
electronics and analysis systems to image gas-filled micro-bubbles (diameters: 3
- 8 microns) within the flow field. The first part of this problem is precise
particle detection and tracking. The second part is the development of an
imaging system that reveals local flow characteristics. The non linear
components of backscatter from the highly reflective micro-bubbles will be
analyzed in the RF domain to detect particles. Once the particle is detected, a
particle tracking algorithm will be employed to track the particles over a
specified distance. This will allow calculation of local particle velocity. The
project aims are:&lt;br/&gt;1) Characterize the design specifications for an
ultrasound-based micro-flow imaging system.&lt;br/&gt;2) Build a prototype
version of this system using a combination of existing broadband ultrasound
transducers, coupled with custom electronics and algorithm
development.&lt;br/&gt;3) Validate the performance of this prototype system
using a mock circulatory flow loop with velocity and flow quantified using
independent reference techniques.&lt;br/&gt;At the end of this project,
significant work toward the development of an ultrasound-based micro-flow
imaging system will be complete. The work can then move toward implementation of
the system in hardware for testing under in vivo conditions.&lt;br/&gt;