* 0225469
* Interregional Interaction and Sociopolitical Change on the Peruvian Far North Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 11,995.00

With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Jorge Montenegro will conduct one
year dissertation research to define the sociopolitical organization of local
polities and the nature and dynamics of interregional interaction in the Upper
Piura Valley on the Peruvian Far North Coast. Previous archaeological studies of
culture contact have often emphasized the strategies and perceptions of dominant
external "core" polities while ignoring those of the subjects or "peripheries".
There is evidence of powerful Mochica (AD 300-750) and the Middle Sican (AD
900-1100) "core" polities, from coastal valleys to the south, in the study area.
Yet the significance of this evidence and the nature of interaction between the
local and these foreign polities are poorly understood. For example, was this
interaction coercive or peaceful and/or negotiated? Was it politically or
economically motivated? Was it continuous or discontinuous in time and space?
Did it involve only a specific social segment or a broader segment? What led to
their interaction? These research questions will be answered through a
characterization of the local polities as reflected in their sociopolitical and
economic structure, and testing of different scenarios and their expected
material evidence. The first possibility is that interaction was coercive; a
second scenario considers interaction as a more peaceful and/or negotiated
process; and the last scenario is a potential situation of physical coexistence
without much or any interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Settlement/land use
pattern survey, test excavations, and pottery and architecture stylistic
analysis are the methods proposed for data collection. Systematic surface survey
will localize and determine the nature and patterns of site distribution and its
surrounding environment. Aerial photographs and topographic, soil, hydrological,
and vegetation maps will be used for this purpose. A total of ca. 100 sq-km is
the estimated survey area. Sites thus discovered will be described, recorded,
and mapped, and dimensions and locations will be measured and determined using a
GPS receiver. A purposive collection of artifacts found on surface will give a
good idea of the range of variation within a site's surface artifact assemblage.
Finally, small test (2 x 2 or 4 x 4 m) pits will be excavated at some of the
sites to collect radiocarbon samples, stratigraphic and site formation data. The
data collected will be used to create a GIS database and perform spatial
analysis. Laboratory analysis will be focused on a detailed observation of
pottery recovered. A technological, stylistic, and morpho-functional
classification and analysis will be carried out to better define the local
polities' traditions and their relationship to those of foreign polities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important for several reasons. It offers
an excellent opportunity to study culture contact and to test and/or refine
competing models of interregional interaction. It will establish a sound and
necessary foundation for the planned long-term project investigating
interactions between: 1) the Far North Coast and North Coast, and 2) these
regions and the North Andes. Finally, this investigation will yield new
information on an area that is relatively unknown archaeologically. &lt;br/&gt;