* 0225448
* Integrated Sensing:    Network Support for Distributed Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Ari Arapostathis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 09/30/2005
* USD 150,000.00

At the core of the next generation of networking applications &lt;br/&gt;and
technologies lies the potential of embedding sensing and &lt;br/&gt;actuating
capabilities in the network so as to support a &lt;br/&gt;variety of monitoring
and controls applications. In this &lt;br/&gt;proposal we target applications
that require stringent &lt;br/&gt;quality of service guarantees, e.g.,
applications needing &lt;br/&gt;global snapshot(s) of the state of a physical
attribute,&lt;br/&gt;or requiring correlating various such attributes. For
example, &lt;br/&gt;one might jointly track the wind speed and the density of
&lt;br/&gt;a given pathogen to create evolution models. To support such
&lt;br/&gt;applications while achieving high sensor utilization we
&lt;br/&gt;propose to investigate two complementary problems:&lt;br/&gt;(1) What
are fundamental characteristics and requirements of&lt;br/&gt;estimation and
control applications&lt;br/&gt;drawing spatio-temporal data from networked
sensors; and&lt;br/&gt;(2) What types of network support, e.g., sensing
`primitives' &lt;br/&gt;and resource/traffic management mechanisms will be
&lt;br/&gt;critical to enable wide-spread shared usage of such
networks.&lt;br/&gt;Due to the expected heterogeneity of sensor
networks&lt;br/&gt;and possible mismatch between a sensor's `capacity' to
process&lt;br/&gt;queries and the network bandwidth delay
product,&lt;br/&gt;achieving timely coordinated responses from a potentially
large&lt;br/&gt;set of sensors shared by multiple users may be
difficult.&lt;br/&gt;This is exacerbated by the inherent asymmetry of
communications &lt;br/&gt;associated with such sensing activities, i.e., one-to-
many queries &lt;br/&gt;resulting in many-to-one sensor responses. As a result
one can &lt;br/&gt;expect unpredictable bursts of traffic, network hot spots,
and &lt;br/&gt;degradation in performance. As part of the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;we will investigate these problems from the perspective
of&lt;br/&gt;the applications, the network and the sensors. &lt;br/&gt;