* 0225986
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome diversity among prehistoric Native Americans from the Ohio and Illinois Valleys
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2002,09/30/2004
* David Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,997.00

This study will help document the prehistory of Native American populations that
lived in the Ohio River Valley by characterizing genetic relationships among the
Archaic population of Indian Knoll, responsible for leaving large shell middens,
like those found throughout the eastern United States, in Ohio County, Kentucky
between 6000 and 4500 years ago, two Adena populations that built earth burial
mounds in Boone and Montgomery counties, Kentucky between 2500 and 1800 years
ago, and a Hopewell population that lived in Calhoun County, Illinois between
2100 and 1600 years ago. Although the archaeological traditions of these
populations have been well described, little is known about their relationships
with each other or to modern populations living in eastern North America during
historic times. Were the populations who built Adena burial mounds in different
counties of western Kentucky related to each other? Were the Hopewell
populations of Ohio and Illinois, both of whom developed similar elaborate
burial practices and artistic traditions, genetically related to each other?
Were the Adena populations genetically related to the Hopewell populations who
succeeded them in some areas of the Ohio Valley or, alternatively, were either
more closely related to other adjacent populations of eastern North America?
Were the Adena and/or Hopewell populations genetically related to the Archaic
populations that preceded them or the Late Woodland Mississippian populations
(or, in fact, living populations) that succeeded them in eastern North America?
Archaeological, ethnohistorical and historical linguistic evidence has been
cited in favor of various hypotheses proposing either invasions of populations
into this region from adjacent regions or, alternatively, genetic continuity in
the region during the last 6000 years, but no consensus has emerged. Recent
technological advances have made it possible to extract and study small
quantities of DNA from prehistoric human remains and thus directly investigate
genetic relationships among ancient and modern populations. DNA will be
extracted from skeletal remains from four different prehistoric cemetery sites
and both mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome traits known to be highly
polymorphic in Native American populations will identified using restriction
analysis and nucleotide sequencing. Genetic comparisons among these samples,
published data on other prehistoric populations of eastern North America and
modern populations will be made using sophisticated multivariate phylogenetic
methods and computer programs. Populations to be compared in addition to those
cited above include those from Glacial Kame and Red Ochre sites in the Lower
Great Lakes region, other Hopewell populations in different geographic
locations, later Mississippian populations that replaced populations throughout
eastern North America during Late Woodland times. These comparisons will
determine whether or not cultural traditions that were shared among groups that
lived in different geographic areas represents admixture or, alternatively,
cultural diffusion and whether or not the succession of populations in the Ohio
Valley represents a continuous genetic continuity or, alternative, the
replacement of indigenous populations by invading immigrants. The combination of
genetic evidence with evidence from genetic, archaeological, ethnohistorical and
historical linguistic research will allow more reliable inferences to be made
about the prehistory of the Ohio Valley.