* 0225361
* Organization and Operation of a Workshop for Establishing the US Science Plan for the ANDRILL Project
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Ross Powell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2003
* USD 39,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National
Science Foundation, provides support for a US research-planning workshop for
Antarctic geological drilling. Geological drilling to recover core for
scientific investigations was successfully conducted in the McMurdo Sound Region
during 10 austral summers over a 28-year period since 1973. The sea-ice has been
used successfully as a drilling platform for seven drill-holes in this area.
Experience gained during these projects forms the basis for developing new
drilling technology to advance this approach. The ANDRILL (ANtarctic DRILLing)
Project considers future drilling from sea-ice, ice shelf and land platforms
within its "McMurdo Sound Portfolio". This award provides funds for organizing
and operating a workshop to develop the US science plan for the McMurdo Sound
Portfolio of the ANDRILL Initiative. It has been advertised widely across the US
Antarctic science community as well as beyond, to the general US geoscience
community, and it will be open to all interested individuals. The aim of the
workshop is to bring together scientists to: (1) discuss and refine the
scientific goals and objectives of the McMurdo Sound Portfolio; (2) to inform
the US science community of past and planned ANDRILL activities; (3) provide a
vehicle for the distribution of information to scientists new to Cenozoic
geoscience in Antarctica; (4) devise a plan agreeable to the US community for
the structure of the US ANDRILL program, its style of funding and mode of
operation; and (5) prepare a report that will summarize the interest and
potential contributions of US scientists to this program, and provide guidelines
as to how scientists can participate in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ANDRILL is an international consortium with
objectives to recover stratigraphic core records for use in interpreting
Antarctica's past climatic, glacial, and geological history over the past 50
million years and at varying scales of age resolution (0.1 to 100 k.y.).
Understanding the past history of ice volume variation in Antarctica and
associated physical changes in this region is critical to proper assessment of
the global climate system and interaction of ice sheets with the ocean,
atmosphere and biosphere. ANDRILL will proceed in three phases: geophysical and
site surveys (2001-2004), drilling and core recovery (2003-2007), and climate
and glacial modeling and integration of recovered data into global records of
climate change (2005-2009). For the past 40 million years the Antarctic Ice
Sheet has played a critical role in regulating global climate and sea level.
Climatic warming is expected to be most pronounced in polar regions; Antarctic
temperatures may rise by the end of the century to levels that have not been
achieved for several million years. It is therefore vital that we understand the
past response of the Antarctic ice sheet to climatic change in order to provide
constraints on models that predict the future. ANDRILL currently plans 4 seasons
of drilling under the "McMurdo Sound Portfolio", in the regions of New Harbor,
Windless Bight, Mackay Sea Valley, and on the Southern McMurdo Ice Shelf. This
Portfolio proposes more than ten individual drilling targets that will require
varied drilling equipment and strategies. Most of these targets have several
common requirements, including drilling through hundreds of meters of water (up
to 1000 m), and recovering continuous core starting from the sea-floor to depths
of as much as 1000 m. Through subsequent Portfolios, the life of ANDRILL and
this new drilling system will likely continue towards the year 2020. Support for
programs of this scale must come from contributions of several nations. To date,
the ANDRILL International Consortium includes as member nations the USA, United
Kingdom, New Zealand, Italy and Germany, and it invites membership from any
interested nation. Similar to the Cape Roberts Project (CRP), close interaction
of a diverse team of research scientists, postdoctoral scientists, graduate and
undergraduate students will provide excellent opportunities for education and
on-site training. REU appointments will target underrepresented groups in the
geosciences. ANDRILL plans to expand the educational and outreach component
beyond that of CRP by direct on-site and remote learning opportunities through
member-nation initiatives and ANDRILL sponsored outreach and education. An "on-
ice" team of scientists would prepare the core and provide initial description
and characterization. Samples would be shipped to "off-ice" scientists to study
and present results at the first of two science workshops to be hosted at
member-nations home academic institutions on a rotating basis. Publication of
initial results would be followed by presentation of results in major scientific
journals and at professional meetings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;