* 0225928
* PREMISE:  Product Realization by Closed Loop Direct Metal Deposition: Environmental and Energy Impact
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Debasish Dutta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 09/30/2003
* USD 99,999.00

The overarching goal of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing
Innovative Systems (PREMISE) research project is to develop supporting
technology and knowledge to facilitate the diffusion of Closed Loop Direct Metal
Deposition (DMD) technology as an energy, cost, and environmental improvement
relative to traditional mold and die manufacturing processes. While the
technological viability of DMD is proven, and the technology is poised to have a
major impact on the metals and plastics industries, DMD must be evaluated for
its economic, energy, and environmental impact before the technology diffuses
into the standard practice. As experience has shown, once a technology has
diffused widely and a standard practice is established around it, it is
difficult to improve its environmental characteristics, especially if
environmental improvement requires a change to the supply chain infrastructure.
Therefore it is important to launch DMD at the outset with all of its potential
environmental impacts, costs, and energy consumption minimized, and to develop
an end-of-life recycling and re-use infrastructure that is prepared to handle
pants generated by DMD operations. During Phase I of the proposed PREMISE
research and education program following major tasks will be addressed to
achieve the above-mentioned goals: 1) DMD and traditional mold manufacturing
will be compared with respect to their energy consumption, environmental
emissions, and costs to identify' improvement opportunities; 2) CAD/CAM-based
design tools will be formulated for DMD that integrate design and manufacturing
considerations (including eco-design and manufacturing); 3) An "environmental
thread" will be established for the design and manufacturing curriculum of the
Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In today's fast-paced, environmentally conscious
society, the cycle of consumer taste for products is becoming shorter and
shorter, necessitating manufacturers to go to market with shorter and shorter
lead times while continuously reducing cost. However, the long-lead time
currently required to design and fabricate molds and dies in the manufacturing
industry does not always support this urgency to move products to market
quickly. In fact, it is not unusual for large, complicated molds and dies to
take up to a year before they are ready to manufacture a product. Solid Free
Form technologies such as Closed Loop Direct Metal Deposition (DMD) offers a
viable alternative. DMD produces three-dimensional components including molds
and dies with nearly full density and controlled macro- and microstructure
directly from CAD software using one or more materials.