* 0225890
* PREMISE:  Collaborative Design for the Environment (DFE) for Global Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Debasish Dutta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,975.00

The objective of this PREMISE research is to use engineering, business,
environmental science and public policy knowledge to develop methods and design
metrics that enable the integration of design for environment considerations
into the design, development, production and marketing of global products.
Enforceable guidelines for global manufacturers and material suppliers to use in
rating their products will also be developed. This will include approaches for
capturing the impact of single components as well as that of assemblies of
globally manufactured components. The research results will lead to an
educational module on design for environment in the Global Product Development
course taught jointly at the University of Michigan, Oxford University and Seoul
National University. In return, the course will provide a realistic test bed for
research on topics that transcend local and national
economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important benefit of this research is
that product designers will have available to them methods for designing
environmentally friendly global products. The design for environment rating for
global products will provide an analytical tool that can be used for tradeoffs
and analyses in various phases of the product development. Global products with
"environmental awareness" features will increase the consumer's awareness to
environmental issues. The environmental rating scheme will facilitate decision
making to distribute the product's raw materials and processing to regions where
the environmental impact of production is the lowest. This research will also
allow global product development teams to consolidate resources around
environmental objectives in a way that is not possible for products that are
predominantly local in their production, use and
recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;