* 0225819
* AWARE-Japan: The Role of Akt/PKB in the Maturation of Marine Worm Eggs
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Stephen Stricker, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,648.00

0225819&lt;br/&gt;Stricker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
collaborative research project between Professor Stephen Stricker of the
University of New Mexico and Professor Takeo Kishimoto of the Tokyo Institute of
Biosciences and Biotechnology. The researchers will undertake a study on the
role of Akt PKB in the maturation of marine worm eggs. For fertilization and
development to proceed normally, eggs characteristically must undergo a
maturation process that is mediated by an important cell cycle modulator, termed
maturation-promoting factor (MPF). Immature eggs (="oocytes") of nemerteans
spontaneously mature after contacting natural seawater (NSW) by undergoing a
process called "germinal vesicle breakdown" (GVBD). Such GVBD is blocked by
isolating oocytes in calcium-free SW (CaFSW), but this inhibition can be
overridden by adding low doses of the neurohormone serotonin (=5-HT). The
researchers will attempt to determine if during 5-HT-induced GVBD in nemertean
oocytes, Akt/PKB is activated in a MAPK-and cdc25-independent manner that in
turn downregulates Myt-1 and thereby activates MPF as in starfish oocytes. The
research will be centered on optical imaging and spectroscopic techniques with
high spatial and temporal resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise and research capabilities. Professor Kishimoto's laboratory in Japan
is one of the leading centers in the world for investigations of MPF regulation
in a variety of cells, including maturing eggs. The lab specializes in studies
of starfish egg maturation. The lab practices a low-pressure form of
microinjection that is particularly well suited for quantitative injections
required for antibody inactivations of Akt. Professor Stricker's laboratory
utilizes an alternative high-pressure microinjection system that does not
readily lend itself to quantitation. The research will offer a good opportunity
to join efforts between the two countries. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. The project advances international
human resources through the participation of a graduate student&lt;br/&gt;