* 0225933
* PREMISE:  Ecologically and Economically Conscious Manufacturing of Polymer Composites -  Coating Process Selection
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,999.00

The Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing Innovative Systems
(PREMISE) Exploratory research and education activities will initiate one of the
first efforts for integrated systematic analysis of technical, economic and life
cycle environmental aspects of manufactured products and processes at multiple
spatial scales, with specific emphasis on polymer composites. Advanced polymeric
composite materials are used widely in their enormous range of lightweight
products with superior physical/mechanical properties. Although these composites
provide many advantages in the use phase, they pose significant environmental
challenges throughout their life cycle. These challenges include the use of non-
renewable resources, emissions of hazardous chemicals, energy use, and
difficulty in recycling. Many innovative processes for tasks such as, molding
and coating seem to be economically viable with a smaller environmental impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, industry is often reluctant to adopt many of
these techniques primarily due to a lack of comprehensive studies and tools to
compare and evaluate the technical, environmental and economic aspects of
various composite-manufacturing processes. The need for such research is
identifies in the recent NSF/DOE report on chemical industry. This proposal
brings together investigators from different engineering departments and
universities with complementary skills. The industrial partners, Omnova and
Honda, will help in obtaining the required data for this work. Furthermore,
through the university's Center for Advanced Polymer and Composite Engineering
(CAPCE) the proposed work will have access to 27 industrial members and state-of
the art facilities while providing access to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;