* 0225696
* Pharmaceutical Sorption to Model Soil Components
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Dharni Vasudevan, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 03/31/2008
* USD 378,094.00

0225696 MacKay Human and veterinary pharmaceutical compounds are detected
increasingly in many environmental media, including soils, sediments,
groundwaters and surface waters. It is unknown how humans and organisms will
adapt to increasing environmental exposures to these bioactive compounds. Health
effects of concern include the spread of antibiotic resistance, endocrine
disrupting activity and adverse responses in non-target
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis and Goal: In addition to interactions with
natural organic matter, we hypothesize that pharmaceutical sorption to soils and
sediments is governed by 3 mechanisms: (1) electrostatic attraction to
oppositely charged sites on mineral surfaces; (2) cation exchange reactions with
aluminosilicate clay minerals, and (3) surface complexation to iron and aluminum
oxides. The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to quantitatively describe
sorption of pharmaceuticals to clay and oxide soil minerals based on a
mechanistic understanding of sorption phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;Methods: The research
goal will be achieved by investigating pharmaceutical sorption to
model&lt;br/&gt;sorbents so that with sorbent phases present in real soil or
sediment samples can be probed&lt;br/&gt;independently. Five model sorbents will
be used: 2- and 3-layer clays (kaolinite and montmorillonite), and iron and
aluminum oxides. The high-use veterinary antibiotics oxytetracycline,
ciprofloxacin, and FCQA and Enro-CO2 (substructures of ciprofloxacin) will be
employed as test sorbates because agricultural antibiotic use represents the
most concentrated pharmaceutical release to the environment.&lt;br/&gt;Results
from this research can be used to predict pharmaceutical sorption from compound
properties (solution complexation constant) and sorbent characteristics (surface
chemistry at given pH/ionic strength).&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Benefits of
Research: The proposed research will provide the first mechanistic model of
solid-water partitioning of important veterinary antibiotic compounds. The
quantitative models developed for high-purity sorbents can be adapted to develop
a general partitioning model for any soil or sediment phase. Accurate
descriptions of soil- and sediment-water partitioning will help to interpret
observed pharmaceutical distributions in field surveys of ambient concentrations
of pharmaceutical compounds, including our test sorbates, in surface and
groundwater (USGS Toxic Substances Hydrology Program). Ultimately, the
quantitative model of pharmaceutical sorption developed here can be used
in&lt;br/&gt;an environmental fate model that, coupled with a toxicology model,
will enable accurate assessments of the risk posed by the release of veterinary
pharmaceuticals to aquatic environments.&lt;br/&gt;Educational Benefits:
Integration of undergraduate students into research activities will provide an
opportunity for these students to work closely with faculty to solve open-ended
research problems. The proposed research will also form a foundation for future
integrated research activities between Environmental, Pharmacy, and Agricultural
programs at UConn and Duke.&lt;br/&gt;