* 0225215
* PGE/RES/PLN: How does Technology Affect Gender Equity in Science Education?  A Retrospective and Prospective Study
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Gerd Kortemeyer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 03/31/2004
* USD 29,815.00

For the past decade, a variety of courses at Michigan State University (MSU)
have used the Computer-Assisted Personalized Approach (CAPA) system, a network
tool designed to facilitate and improve the way assignments, quizzes, and
examinations are delivered and graded in large enrollment courses (E.Kashy et
al., 1993). An instructor uses the system to generate unique assignments for
each student in a class. The system then provides immediate feedback to students
(and instructors) on conceptual understanding and correctness of solutions and
allows students to rework incorrect solutions. Recent analyses of data from
introductory physics courses suggest that women are particularly likely to
benefit from the broader use of such systems (D. Kashy, Albertelli, E. Kashy,
&amp; Thoennessen; 2001).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSU will conduct a planning study
with two objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Examine the vast database from courses in many
areas of the sciences that have used the CAPA system in the past to see whether
and to what degree the gender differences found in physics are found in other
science fields.&lt;br/&gt;2. Plan a comprehensive study that will attempt to
identify the critical elements that promote gender equity in science,
mathematics, and engineering education when using this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The courses in the study make use of the LON-
CAPA system (Learning Online Network with CAPA), an integrated tool that uses
network technology for learning and assessment. In addition to providing
improved versions of the tools in CAPA, it includes a content authoring and
management system that allows new and existing materials to be
broadly&lt;br/&gt;and easily exchanged among instructors and institutions, an
extensive data collection and retrieval system, and a content delivery system
that will provide gateways to and from NSF's National STEM Digital
Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will investigate whether the use of this
widely available and free technology is also a tool for enhancing the success
rate of women in science courses.&lt;br/&gt;