* 0225253
* PPD:  FASED:  Shaping Vocational Frontiers:  Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for Persons with Disabilities in Rural and Remote Areas
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Richard Radtke, Sea of Dreams Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2004
* USD 210,000.00

Improving education and inclusion of students with disabilities in science,
mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) through camps, science fairs and
other programs are imperative to the diversification of our future SMET work
force. Students with disabilities in remote and rural regions are much less
likely to have access to SMET resources because of their geographic location.
Additionally, students with disabilities and their families are often strapped
financially due to excessive costs in transportation, adaptive technologies,
support personnel, personal care, and architectural adaptations. After families
pay for these essentials, SMET camps and programs often are a financial burden.
&lt;br/&gt; As one step in our project, we plan to collaborate with existing
SMET camps and programs, to demonstrate that all camps can be appropriate for
students with disabilities. This would enable students in rural and remote
regions such as Alaska to participate fully in science and math education
experiences leading to careers in SMET. The Shaping Vocational Frontiers Project
will be directed by Drs. Radtke and Owens with assistance from Access Alaska.
Dr. Radtke is a well known scientist and community activist and Dr. Owens is an
experienced researcher and teacher, outdoor educator and inventor. Both men have
severe disabilities and are intimately familiar with the problems faced by
persons with disabilities in SMET related activities. Access Alaska will be
instrumental in training, camp accessibility, and network development. The
project will create a program that involves a core of students, families,
scientists, educators, and university-level science teacher trainers. This
amalgam will strive to enhance the opportunities for acquiring SMET education
for students with disabilities throughout Alaska. As a group we will work
towards this goal through changes in science education curriculum, educational
practices, and policy in the state. We plan to identify students with
disabilities across the state who can benefit from this program and provide them
with hands-on, field-based science. We will emphasize activities that provide
for integration of students with disabilities with their traditional
counterparts who do not have disabilities. Role models and mentors, many with
disabilities themselves, will advise, problem solve, and guide both individual
students and heterogeneous teams of students (consisting of both able-bodied and
students with disabilities) in these activities. The appropriate assistive
technology will be used in concert with Internet to insure that students with
disabilities will be fully included in SMET activities, Electronic technology
(including the Internet) will be used to encourage networking and information
dissemination among student teams, educational organizations, administrators,
and members of the community. The project will be carefully documented for
public television and Internet venues. All publications produced by the project
will be available through fully accessible electronic media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;