* 0225844
* PREMISE/Collaborative Research:    Integrated Drag-out and Dynamic Water Allocation for Maximum Reduction of Waste and Energy in the Electroplating Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 50,001.00

In this Product Realization and Envrionmental Manufacturing Innovative Systems
(PREMISE) project, Wayne State University and Lamar University plan to jointly
develop a comprehensive profitable pollution prevention (P3) theory, with a
specific focus on the development of an integrated reversed drag-out and dynamic
water allocation methodology for maximum waste and energy reduction in general
cleaning, rinsing, and plating systems in electroplating. The dynamic waste and
energy reduction will capture all-time details of product and environmental
quality and economics in the entire production system. This distinguishes it
from commonly practiced approaches that focus on: (i) a solely steady-state
result of waste reduction, (ii) individual units, and (iii) end-of-plant, rather
than end-of-line waste. In this development, the PIs will conduct three types of
integration: (i) the integration of cleaning, rinsing, and plating, (ii) the
integration of design (modification) and control (operation), and (iii) the
integration of economics and environmental concerns. In system design, the basic
approach of the methodology is to pump cleaning, rinsing, and plating solutions
back (seemingly very risky), to maximize the dirt residue on parts to the upper
limits of dirtiness (seemingly not acceptable), to increase drag-out in certain
operations (seemingly against convention), and to dynamically switch water
allocation (seemingly very difficult). The methodology will be tested in a real
industrial setting. The preliminary results will justify the initiation of the
second phase of the project. The joint effort will also benefit the graduate
education in the two universities as students will not only be co-advised by the
professors with different strengths, but also have opportunities to work with
collaborating engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the second most environmentally
regulated industry, the electroplating industry is facing tremendous challenges
in achieving increasingly stringent environmental and energy goals and
maintaining global economic competitiveness. An urgent need for the industry is
the methodology that can substantially improve pollution prevention (P2)
practice and gain economical benefits simultaneously in electroplating plants.