* 0225414
* INTEGRATED SENSING:   Distributed Multiscale Geometric Processing On Real-Time Sensor Networks On Radiation Fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* David Brady, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2004
* USD 150,051.00

&lt;br/&gt;0225414&lt;br/&gt;Brady&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A group of engineers
specializing in multiplex sensors and computer scientists specializing in
computational geometry will jointly develop physical and logical geometric
processing to improve sensor network efficiency. The efficiency of sensor system
may be defined as a ratio of the number of sensor states to the number of system
output states. An efficiency ratio near 1 dramatically reduces the computation
and communication costs of sensing. Reduced computational loads are critical to
real-time operation. Multiplex sensing (meaning non-isomorphic mapping between
the source state and sensor pixels) is the critically enabling feature of
efficient systems. Geometric structure is used to encode multiplex sensitivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may lead to motion and tracking sensors for
human-computer interfaces at much lower cost and with much lower computational
complexity than current technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
leverage sensor network testbeds developed through the Duke Information Spaces
Project (DISP), including Argus, a 128 video camera array on a 14 meter ring
connected in parallel to a Beowulf processing cluster, 5,000 square foot
pyroelectric and acoustic sensor volume in the Smith tobacco Warehouse and ad
hoc sensor networks in the Duke Forest.&lt;br/&gt;