* 0225202
* Upgrade of Power, Electrical and Communication Infrastructure at the Shoals Marine Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* James Morin, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 92,205.00

Abstract for Upgrade of Power, Electrical and Communication Infrastructure at
the Shoals Marine Laboratory

NSF Proposal 0225202 submitted to the NSF Field Stations and Marine Laboratories
Improvement Program

A grant has been awarded from NSF to the Shoals Marine Laboratory (SML), Cornell
University, under the direction of Dr. Morin to upgrade the (1) power and
electrical distribution, and (2) basic communication infrastructure. SML is a
seasonal field station situated on a 95-acre rocky island six miles off the
coast from the Maine/NH border in the Gulf of Maine. The isolated nature of the
facility on a small, environmentally sensitive offshore island necessitates that
SML carefully maintain its own systems for communications, power and
electricity, water, seawater delivery, and waste water management. The station's
existing generators are in need of being replaced or rebuilt, and much of the
electrical distribution system dates back to the 1970's. These systems have
reached a critical state and urgent improvement is needed to conform to current
standards. SML's communications systems also requires modernization; only
limited and intermittent Internet access has been available at the field station
up until now. It has been very difficult and often impossible for researchers,
faculty, staff and interns to achieve electronic contact with the mainland and
their labs. Through a grant from the American Distance Education Consortium
[ADEC], an NSF sponsored project, SML will have Internet access in 2002. However
the award does not include hardwiring and network connections between and among
the various, widely spaced building that house the laboratory facilities,
classrooms, and administrative offices. Voice and facsimile communications are
also outdated and not adequate for maintaining connections to SML's
administrative offices at Cornell. The existing radiophones need to be replaced,
and a third remote line needs to be added to provide more reliable connections
to the mainland, and alleviate the problems associated with having only two
phone lines available for as many as 25 staff, faculty and researchers on island
at a time. All these improvements are critical and they will greatly enhance
SML's ability to provide quality research and educational experience to its
constituents. To accomplish the power and electrical upgrade: (1) a new 113 KW
(kilowatt) generator will be purchased, (2) an existing 65KW generator will be
rebuilt, and (3) transformers, transfer switches, electrical governors and
panels, circuit breakers, and associated cables will be installed to revitalize
the outdated electrical infrastructure. The generator room will also be improved
by adding ventilation and sound-proofing. The communication infrastructure
upgrade will include completion of hardwiring and network connections for SML's
new satellite Internet system to the campus. These funds will also be used to
purchase a new remote telephone system, and upgrade the existing radio-
telephones currently used for voice and facsimile communications. SML is
entering its thirty-seventh year as a field station dedicated to marine
research, undergraduate instruction in the marine sciences, and educating the
general public about our world's oceans. SML is situated in an extraordinary
location for addressing significant questions related to field marine science.
There is easy access to a rich variety of coastal environments including
intertidal, subtidal, oceanic and terrestrial habitats. A valuable continuous
set of biodiversity surveys along the island's intertidal zone has been
catalogued over the past 30 years through SML's programs. For over 25 years
SML's bird banding station has been documenting seasonal patterns of bird
migration. Each summer over 200 undergraduates participate in more than sixteen
courses, most of which have a strong research component. SML is also a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site. This NSF funded program allows nine
REU interns to carry out directed independent research projects at SML. In
addition, six to twelve visiting researchers use SML as a primary field research
site. SML facilities are also available to numerous groups including SML adult
education courses, visiting academic institutions, environmental organizations
(e.g., Audubon Society), local high schools (over 200 participants each summer),
and over 1,000 day and overnight visitors visit each summer to learn about the
marine environment and the island's rich cultural history.