* 0225453
* Viral Transmission Dynamics in the Serengeti
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Thompson N. Hobbs
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,488,000.00

Of the emerging infectious diseases, zoonotic and generalist viral pathogens
pose a particular threat to public health and biodiversity. The effective
control of these diseases requires both the identification of reservoires of
infection and an understanding of viral transmission dynamics within complex
host assemblages. Yet for most emerging infectious diseases, reservoirs remain
to be identified and little is known about mechanisms by which infections are
maintained. This study will propose a theoretical and practical framework for
recognizing reservoirs in the field, which will be applied to identify
reservoirs of viral infections in the Serengeti, Tanzania. The recent emergence
of viral diseases in this area provides the opportunity for a comparative study
of zoonotic and generalist pathogens within a diverse, well-studied and
important ecosystem. Furthermore, the area is surrounded by rapidly expanding
human and domestic animal populations which have profound impacts on the
transmission dynamics of infectious diseases. This study will investigate the
transmission dynamics of three viral pathogens, rabies, cane distemper virus
(CDV), and canine parvovirus (CPV), identifying reservoirs of infection through
a combination of approaches that include intervention trials, genetic analyses
and disease surveillance. Empirical data on the spatial distribution of hosts
and contact rated will be integrated into mathematical models of transmission
between and within species. These models will be used to (a) investigate
mechanisms by which viral infections are maintained in multi-population systems;
(b) anticipate future requirements for disease management in relation to changes
in human activity and climate patterns; (c) design cost-effective programs for
the control of disease in human and animal populations.&lt;br/&gt;