* 0225611
* Neural Plasticity and Functional Adaptation in the Human Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Angela Sirigu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 838,250.00

Neural Plasticity and Functional Adaptation in the Human
Brain&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, Drs. Scheiber and Sirigu and colleagues will conduct a three-year
investigation of adult human amputees who will undergo bilateral hand
transplantation. Brain imaging, stimulation, and recordings of muscle activity
underlying finger movements-all will be applied longitudinally before, and at
intervals after, hand transplantation to address the following experimental
questions. (1) Is reorganization limited to the cortical representation of the
grafted hand, or does it involve additional body segments? (2) Is reorganization
observed in the primary motor cortex correlated with changes occurring in the
homologous regions of the primary sensory cortex? (3) Upon loss of the hands,
does use-dependent reorganization in the sensorimotor cortex result in a loss of
motor skills, which must be reacquired when the hands are restored? (4) Does re-
expansion of the motor cortex hand representation correlate with the return of
motor skill? The parts of brain studied in this project are the primary
somatosensory and primary motor cortices, which contain the most detailed maps
of bodily sensation and movement in the brain. These representational maps
undergo considerable reorganization, however, in response to altered sensory
stimulation, behavioral use, or amputation of a body part, such as the hand.
After amputation, the cortical territory that has been deprived of its specific
body part reorganizes to represent remaining nearby body parts. Amputation-
induced reorganization occurs even in adult humans, and can occur rapidly and
reversibly. Little is known, however, about the reversibility of such plastic
reorganization months to years after amputation, when structural changes in
nerve cells and their interconnections have had time to occur. Transplantation
to replace amputated body parts offers the opportunity to study the
reversibility of reorganization in the primary somatosensory and motor cortex
after such long-term changes. The results of these studies will expand our basic
understanding of how representations of bodily movement in the sensorimotor
cortex are shaped and re-shaped by plastic reorganization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;