* 0225436
* Integrated Sensing:    An Integrated Biosensor System for Cellular Studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 02/28/2006
* USD 168,000.00

In biological research, the study of cellular functions in vitro is basic to
other fields, such as clinical diagnostics, therapy, pharmacological drug
screening, and environmental monitoring. In our proposal, biotechnology, silicon
micromachining, microelectronics sensor and signal processing technology are
used to realize a multi-purpose biological sensor with integrated lownoise
signal processing. We research program to for culture, characterization and
manipulation of biological cells in silicon chips. In particular, the proposed
integrated biosensor system structure can be used as a planar patch-clamp setup
for the experimental testing and evaluation of the effect of drugs on prepared
ion channels. The proposed device can also act as a miniaturized platform for
cell culture and characterization of a cell population together with counting
and sizing within the culture chamber. The basic biosensor is a 2D planar
'patch-clamp', which can be employed for sensing the ion-transport through ion
channels, the count and size of biological particles, and culturing or sorting
cells. We believe the proposed biosensor will enable eventually electronic DNA
sequencing through the measurement of ionic current changes as a sequence
single-stranded DNA bases pass through a nanoscale pore, which is fabricated and
sized to electrically control the single-stranded DNA. A major objective of our
proposal is to develop a bio-electronic interface that integrates biological ion
channels into a 'nanowell' with associated integrated electronics. The biosensor
combines control electronics into a low noise, correlated-double-sampling
(CDS)sensitive signal readout with a switched capacitor 'headstage'
preamplifier. On-chip electronics will reduce the recording impedance levels,
minimize the output leads, prevent crosstalk, and amplify the low-level ion-
channel signals. In addition, the biosensor system will enable rapid, computer-
aided, automated testing and characterization of ion-channels and their
interaction with drugs. The biosensor will also enable experimental verification
of ion channel models as well as provide data, which can be analyzed with
various algorithms to extract information regarding time and frequency response
of the ion channels and their relationship to pharmacological drug
investigations. This effort will also explore the use of 'on-chip' adaptive
signal processing to electrically model biological cells in real-time with
voltage-clamp stimuli applied to the cells.