* 0225782
* WCR:  A New Technique for Mapping Recharge Fluxes to Groundwater at a Regional Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2003
* Jozsef Szilagyi, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 15,120.00

0225782&lt;br/&gt;Szilagyi &lt;br/&gt;Naturally occurring long-term mean annual
recharge to groundwater over a large region (i.e. the state of Nebraska) will be
estimated with the help of a water balance approach coupled with an automated
baseflow-separation technique. Evapotranspiration is to be calculated with the
WREVAP model at the Solar and Meteorological Surface Observation Network
(SAMSON) sites. Mean annual base recharge will be obtained by the product
of&lt;br/&gt;Long-term mean annual runoff (the difference between precipitation
[about 400 stations] and evapotranspiration) and the Baseflow Index using
discharge data from the USGS gaging stations (about 130 stations) in Nebraska.
Base recharge will be augmented by the amount&lt;br/&gt;of evapotranspiration
that comes directly from groundwater and will be obtained by using satellite-
derived multi-year Normalized Difference Vegetation Indices to locate the areas
where this happens. Mapping will be achieved using Geographic Information
Systems technology and geostatistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds
upon recent advances in hydrology (the WREVAP model using Bouchet's
complementary hypothesis which proved to be pivotal in explaining climate-
induced changes in the hydrologic cycle [see this author's works on evaporation
trends: http://csd.unl.edu/csd/ staff/szilagyi/szilagyi.html], and the automated
baseflow separation algorithm) while making use of remote sensing and GIS. The
present approach can easily be extended to continental scales to define fluxes
to the groundwater which may become important in the understanding of the global
hydrologic cycle as it relates to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Currently there is no standard approach in estimating recharge fluxes to the
groundwater, especially at a regional scale. The existing approaches generally
build upon the use of complex water balance and/or hydro-geological models, with
typically large number of parameters related to: soil and vegetation type and
status, and diverse aquifer properties (permeability, saturated thickness,
etc.), many of which must be optimized. Instead, the proposed approach utilizes
measured data of streamflow, precipitation and a state-of-the-art evaporation
estimation technique enhanced by satellite remote sensing images without the
need of complex modeling and parameter optimization.&lt;br/&gt;