* 0225578
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Spin and Charge Dynamics in Conducting Polymers by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* W. Gilbert Clark, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2006
* USD 24,000.00

0225578&lt;br/&gt;W. Gilbert Clark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a US-India cooperative research project entitled Spin and Charge
Dynamics in Conducting Polymers by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Studies. US
PI W. Gilbert Clark, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) will
collaborate with Reghu Menon and two other researchers from the premier Indian
Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore. The objective is to investigate the
dynamics of charge carriers in electrically conducting polymers by NMR
measurements. They will carry out related electrical transport and electron spin
resonance studies and synthesis of the appropriate samples. This research will
address many key questions on the mechanisms for electron transport in
conducting polymers that are of current interest such as the length scale of
disorder and nature of the metal-insulator transition. The ultimate research
goal is to increase understanding of the mechanisms for electron transport in
these materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Professor Clark is a well-known
expert in applying the NMR technique to study properties of conducting molecular
crystals and solids. He has extensive experience with NMR, electrical transport,
and measurements at ultra-low temperatures and high magnetic fields. His Indian
collaborators, who have complimentary expertise, will carry out sample synthesis
and well-defined transport measurements at the IISc, Bangalore. The PIs will use
UCLA facilities, the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee, and
the Grenoble High Magnetic Field Laboratories in France. This collaboration
takes advantage of a synergy between Clark and Menon first established during
Menon's tenure at UCLA as a post doc. This project will provide an international
experience for a UCLA postdoc and graduate student, and will enhance
collaboration between UCLA and the IISc. This project is jointly supported by
the Indian Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;