* 0225927
* PREMISE:  Exploratory Research: An Alternative Process Model for Printed Circuit Board Recycling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Carol Korzeniewski, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 05/31/2005
* USD 113,782.00

The objectives of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing
Innovative Systems (PREMISE) Exploratory Research project are: (1) To conduct
exploratory research into the feasibility of an alternative PCB recycling
process based on cryogenic decomposition of the PCBs; (2) To establish an
interdisciplinary research team that can develop a long-term collaboration that
builds on the understanding developed in this project; (3) To evaluate the
proposed recycling process against traditional PCB recycling processes in terms
of recycle rate economics, energy consumption, and environmental performance;
and (4) To examine the feasibility of reusing plastics in the proposed recycling
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed recycling process is cryogenic
decomposition of the PCBs. The process takes advantage of the fact that at very
low temperatures, polymeric materials become highly brittle. In addition, the
residual stresses set-up in the PCB resins due to thermal expansion mismatch
between the polymers and other materials on the PCB is expected to lead to a
better separation than might otherwise be possible simply due to the
embrittlement of the plastics. Actual laboratory experiments will be performed
using a cryogenic test system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wide diffusion of electronic
equipment and shortening of product lifecycles have caused a serious problem:
how to deal with large quantities of end-of-life or obsolete electronic
equipment. While there are various technical challenges for electronic product
recovery and recycling, this research focuses on printed circuit boards (PCBs)
or printed wiring boards (PWBs). PCBs are primary components in many electronic
products built for both military and commercial applications. Due to their
complex construction and the consequent complicated mixture of materials, PCB
recycling presents a serious challenge to today's industry. The rich content of
precious metals provides a strong economic justification for materials recovery
and recycling. On the other hand, large amounts of toxic components and fiber-
reinforced polymers create difficulties for recycling and adverse environmental
impact.