* 0225079
* PGE/DIS  Women and IT Video Project
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Anne Spence, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 10/31/2004
* USD 132,285.00

The Center for Women and Information Technology (CWIT) at the University of
Maryland, Baltimore County UMBC) will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Create a four-
minute, high quality video presenting diverse images of successful women in
science and technology careers and targeting girls and young women ages 12 -
20.&lt;br/&gt;2) Develop a speakers program involving female UMBC students and
faculty and representatives from the business community, who will use the video
as an exciting entree to a discussion of women's opportunities in science and
technology careers.&lt;br/&gt;3) Once the video is completed, evaluate a
speaker's success, with and without the video, in educating a total of 1500
middle, high school, and community students about the opportunities for careers
in IT and related science&lt;br/&gt;fields, with a focus on women.&lt;br/&gt;4)
Develop guidelines for integrating the video and speaker into any venue,
including classrooms, after-school and&lt;br/&gt;summer programs, assemblies,
career fairs, programs for college freshmen, and other programs for young
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the traditional videos currently available
on the topic, this brief, high-intensity video will engage the emotions and
interests of young people. Rather than presenting talking heads, this video will
combine vibrant rock or pop music, striking color, and flash images and text to
create energy and excitement around the topic of women's career possibilities in
IT. The video is modeled upon a high-quality, four-minute music video developed
by General Motors and used, with permission, as a template for feedback and
evaluation by a diverse group of 102 middle school, high school, and community
college students ranging in age from 13 to 26. Over 90% of these students, both
male and female, believed creating a short video about women and IT modeled on
the GM video was an excellent idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Video Press, a small
for-profit arm of the University of Maryland, College Park, and winner of an
Oscar for its production "King Gimp" will develop the video under the guidance
of the Video Project Committee (VPC). The VPC members represent UMBC faculty and
staff and the video project subcommittee of Center's advisory
board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once the video is completed, the project team will
work with an external evaluator to assess the effectiveness of the video in
enhancing a speaker's success in educating students about career opportunities
for women in IT and related fields. A booklet will be developed to support the
use of the video and be distributed with 100 videos statewide for additional
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VPC members will disseminate the video and
guidelines for use nationally and internationally through the Maryland public
school system, Maryland community colleges, national and international
listservs, journals, radio and television, local and national conferences, and
an internationally recognized website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The External
Advisory Board is composed of high level executives from the following
companies: T. Rowe Price Investment Technologies; Maryland Department of
Business and Economic Development; Maryland State Department of Education;
Northrop Grumman; Saraf Software Solutions; Hewlett Packard's Digital Village
Project; SM Consulting; Allfirst Bank; the Community College of Baltimore County
(CCBC); and an entrepreneur and Founder/CEO of WomenCONNECT.com. Maryland Public
Television will serve in an advisory capacity on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional partners in this project include Meade
Middle School, Pine Grove Middle School, Parkville High School and Center for
Science, Mathematics, and Computer Science, and the Community College of
Baltimore County. The Maryland Association of Community Colleges will support
the program through the dissemination and assessment of the video project to all
16 community colleges in the state. Summer Days Math and Science Camp for Girls,
Inc. will assess the video as a recruiting tool. The Director of the Center for
Social and Community Research at Loyola College in Maryland will independently
evaluate the project.&lt;br/&gt;