* 0225533
* Integrated Sensing:  High-speed 3D Microscopy by Hybrid Optical-Digital Encoding and Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Carol Cogswell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to develop a novel paradigm for high-
speed,&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional (3D) image scene acquisition and rendering.
This project&lt;br/&gt;is especially directed at imaging 3D dynamic microscopic
scenes at video&lt;br/&gt;rates that can be further visualized off-line at
variable speeds and from&lt;br/&gt;multiple viewpoints with stereoscopic display
systems. As of today, no&lt;br/&gt;other technique can offer simultaneously the
high temporal and 3D-spatial&lt;br/&gt;resolution of the proposed system. The
new microscope is expected to&lt;br/&gt;acquire images simultaneously containing
large depth of field, high&lt;br/&gt;resolution, and 3D-range
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optical-digital system is based on a novel
approach in which a) the&lt;br/&gt;optical, b) the digital computational, and c)
the rendering parts of the&lt;br/&gt;system are simultaneously designed. The
microscope will combine, for the&lt;br/&gt;first time, the rotating point-
spread-function and the wavefront coding&lt;br/&gt;technologies. The system will
be oriented to surface relief applications&lt;br/&gt;where very fast dynamical
processes affect the microscopic 3D scene. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, it will be
tested for MEMS inspection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system will be
extremely valuable in micro-nano pattern&lt;br/&gt;recognition and inspection
for advanced manufacturing, remote microscopic&lt;br/&gt;information sharing,
biological imaging, and other applications that&lt;br/&gt;require the
acquisition and visualization of 3D miniature scene-mappings&lt;br/&gt;at very
high speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will be
actively involved in the&lt;br/&gt;analysis, design, and experiments. The
instrumentation developed will be&lt;br/&gt;available for education in the area
of microscopic visualization in&lt;br/&gt;subsequent years.