* 0225863
* PREMISE:  Applying Decision Production Systems to Improve Environmentally Responsible Product Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Jeffrey Herrmann, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/2004
* USD 105,625.00

The objective of this research project is to understand how&lt;br/&gt;product
development organizations use environmental information in&lt;br/&gt;their
decision-making during the design of a new product. The research&lt;br/&gt;views
product development as an information flow governed by&lt;br/&gt;decision-makers
who must act under time and budget constraints. The&lt;br/&gt;project will
conduct an exploratory study to describe the flow of&lt;br/&gt;information
related to environmental decision-making in the product&lt;br/&gt;development
activities of an electronics manufacturing company. The&lt;br/&gt;project will
construct a long-term collaborative research agenda to&lt;br/&gt;improve
environmentally responsible product development, particularly&lt;br/&gt;by
integrating design decision support tools into other
product&lt;br/&gt;development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this research will yield new models that guide the&lt;br/&gt;development of
powerful decision support tools (for specific decision-&lt;br/&gt;makers) and
the rational and systematic deployment of these tools across&lt;br/&gt;the
entire product development organization. Ultimately, this will
reduce&lt;br/&gt;the time and cost of environmentally responsible product
development&lt;br/&gt;across a range of industrial sectors. The research will
benefit society&lt;br/&gt;by helping manufacturing companies develop energy-
efficient and&lt;br/&gt;environmentally benign
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;