* 0225852
* PREMISE:  Environmental/Energy Comparative Analysis of Polymer Powder Coating Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Marino Xanthos, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,998.00

The technical approach in this Product Realization and Environmental
Manufacturing Innovative Systems (PREMISE) project involves the selection of
conventional batch polymerization processes in solvent media and comparison with
alternative solventless continuous processes. Application of the produced solid
powders will be compared by considering: a) conventional high temperature curing
and b) lower temperature curing by UV radiation. The research plan includes
detailed engineering calculations; cost comparison and application of life cycle
analysis (LCA) principles and Design for Environment (DFE) methodologies to
identify the potential advantages of the alternative systems as well as
initiation of experimental work towards developing UV curable powder
formulations in continuous solventless reactors.

Polymeric powder coatings provide environmental and corrosion protection to a
variety of substrates for civilian and military applications. By comparison to
solvent based coatings whose application is often associated with significant
VOC emissions, the production of powder-coated items is sometimes considered as
a "green" process. However, there are still many elements in the lifecycle of
conventional powder coated products, from manufacturing of the powder by
polymerization to its subsequent application and curing, which are excessive in
energy and solvent usage. Systems based on continuous bulk polymerization
processes in the absence of solvents, followed by UV initiated curing at low
temperatures appear to be excellent candidates for reduced energy usage and
lower environmental impact versus conventional systems.

This research is highly relevant to the R&D priorities of the coating industry,
i.e. lower overall cost and lower curing temperatures along with low VOCs and
hazardous air pollutants (HAPs). It is also relevant to the growing need in
polymer engineering academic curricula to incorporate case studies related to
industrial ecology and environmental issues in process/product design.