* 0225801
* Antarctic Climate Evolution: Paleoclimate and Ice Sheet Modeling Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Robert DeConto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2003
* USD 33,961.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science
Foundation, provides support for a workshop entitled "Antarctic Climate
Evolution: Paleoclimate and Ice Sheet Modeling." ACE (Antarctic Climate
Evolution) is a new research initiative that has recently grown out of the
ANTOSTRAT (ANTarctic Offshore STRATigraphy) project. The goal of ACE is to
advance the study of Antarctic climate and glacial history, through paleoclimate
and ice sheet modeling studies, purposefully integrated with geological
investigations of the direct and proxy record of ancient Antarctic climates and
ice sheets. While ACE is not yet an official SCAR (Scientific Committee for
Antarctic Research) program, a proposal will be presented to SCAR XXVII in July
2002, with the hope of establishing ACE as a fully sanctioned, international
research initiative, operating under the SCAR umbrella. The ANTOSTRAT and newly
appointed ACE steering committees have identified the need for members of the
international climate and ice sheet modeling community, with interests in
Antarctic climate and glacial history, to be identified and united with
geologists working on the reconstruction of ancient Antarctic climates and ice
sheets. In order to promote interaction between these groups, an ACE
Paleoclimate and Ice Sheet Modeling Workshop will be held in Northampton
Massachusetts, May 30-June 2, 2002. The emphasis of the workshop will be placed
on evaluating the "state of the art" in modeling the climates and ice sheets of
the Antarctic paleoenvironment and developing strategies for incorporating
geologic data into paleoclimate, ocean, and ice sheet modeling studies. The
workshop will consider a wide range of timescales, with an emphasis on Paleogene
glacial inception and longer-term (&gt;10 4 year) climate change and ice sheet
behavior. The workshop will better define modeler's needs, from a geologic data
perspective. In turn, the modeling community will have a better understanding of
the types and quality of data available for model boundary conditions, model
development, and model validation. Workshop topics cover two general categories:
1) climate and ice sheet models: assessment and applications, and 2) the
geologic record: boundary conditions and model validation. Participants will
contribute to one of these categories by submitting an extended abstract, giving
15-minute oral presentations, and presenting volunteered posters. The meeting
will be limited to 30 participants. The workshop strategy calls a roughly equal
number of modelers and geologists. Lively discussion, focused on developing
strategies to better incorporate geologic data into numerical modeling exercises
and vice versa, is anticipated. Some workshop participants will be charged with
chairing sessions, leading breakout groups, and reporting on breakout session
activities. All participants are expected to engage in discussion and to
contribute to the final workshop summary document. The workshop report will
include extended abstracts, meeting proceedings, and a final summary report. The
summary will include recommendations for future research strategies aimed at
unraveling Antarctic climate and glacial evolution. A draft version of the
workshop report will be presented to SCAR XXVII in July 2002. An abbreviated
workshop summary will be submitted to the primary literature, while the complete
document will be disseminated via hardcopy mailings, through email list servers,
and via the world-wide-web. An ACE website has already been established at the
University of Massachusetts (http://www.geo.umass.edu/ace). It is intended that
the results of this workshop will help guide ACE related research for years to
come.