* 0225137
* FSML Renovation of Research/Teaching Laboratories at MDI Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Evans, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 167,867.00

This award provides partial support for renovation of small research/teaching
laboratories at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (MDIBL). The
Laboratory has a history of accommodating NSF-funded research and training
programs, but is increasingly limited by the deteriorating quality and poor
insulation of its older buildings. The three aging laboratories to be improved
have been in service since 1929 (Kidney Shed), 1938 (Halsey Laboratory) and 1963
(Rappaport Laboratory). The planned improvements and renovations include
restoration of exterior surfaces and roofing, improved insulation, replacement
of bench tops, cabinetry, plumbing and installation of seamless flooring. These
renovations will maintain the informal seaside appearance of the buildings.
MDIBL provides facilities for visiting investigators who use marine species for
investigating the mechanisms of basic biological processes such as
osmoregulation, reproduction and cell division, and offers educational programs
for students at all levels from high school through postdoctoral. The recent
initiation of the Center for Marine Functional Genomic Studies at MDIBL, which
includes modern genomics and bioinformatics capabilities, has increased the
demand for laboratory space and made the planned improvements a high priority
for the Laboratory.