* 0225589
* Starter Grant:  Evolution of Host Range in the Bacteriophage PhiX174
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Christina Burch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Dr. Burch will use the bacteriophage phiX174 and its alternative hosts, E. coli
and S. typhimurium, to investigate the impact of host limitation on the
evolution of host range in this virus. By manipulating host limitation, she will
test the hypothesis that the benefits of host range expansion outweigh the costs
when hosts are limited, and that the costs of host range expansion outweigh the
benefits when hosts are abundant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advantages of host
range expansion for parasites include reduced competition for hosts, reduced
time spent searching for hosts, and increased probability of transmission to a
suitable host. However, parasites are most often observed to specialize on a
limited number of hosts. This specialization may be explained by a variety of
costs associated with broad host range, including a possible trade-off between
fitness on one host and fitness on alternative hosts. Experimental studies of
host range have tended to concentrate on the potential costs of expanded host
range rather than the potential benefits. In contrast, Dr. Burch will study the
evolution of host range by presenting the bacteriophage phiX174 with ecological
conditions in which the benefits of expanded host range differ. Studies of this
nature may help identify ecological conditions that favor acquisition of new
hosts, as in the recent movement of HIV into humans from
chimpanzees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;