* 0225427
* Integrated Sensing:   Integrated Smart Wireless SAW Sensors and Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Massood Atashbar, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Sensors and sensor systems are used in a wide range of industrial and consumer
applications, providing real-time information that allows decisions to be made
when and where required. Sensors allow industrial processes and applications to
be more cost effective, reliable, and safe. In many applications, sensors and
data collection processing must be distributed and placed in inhospitable or
inaccessible environments. This complicates sensor and system design by
requiring devices with small size, rugged construction, an efficient power
supply for active components, communications for derived information, and simple
installation with a minimum amount of infrastructure and overhead.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated Smart Wireless surface acoustic wave (SAW)
sensors and systems composed of distributed wireless SAW sensors, sensor
communication transceivers, and a centralized host. New generations of SAW
microsensors promises to provide measurements of a wide range of physical and
chemical parameters, including: temperature, pressure, chemical concentration,
gas concentrations, etc. Compatible with integrated circuit-processing
techniques, SAW devices can and will be combined with active circuitry into
integrated smart SAW sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Western Michigan
University, this project will provide a basis for the development of laboratory
facilities for SAW design and fabrication and the expansion of our wireless
communications capabilities. It will provide student research opportunities and
demonstrate technology and results that are widely applicable to a broad range
of electrical and computer engineering classes. This project will provide a
range of distributed wireless sensors while significantly advancing WMU's goal
of being a "student centered research institution". &lt;br/&gt;