* 0225622
* Upgrade of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Chemical and Biochemical Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2003
* USD 40,000.00

Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Upgrade of a
Scanning Probe Microscope for Chemical and Biochemical
Analysis"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scanning probe microscopic (SPM) technique
can be used not only for the characterization of surfaces at the sub-nanometer
resolution, but also for the measurement of nano-scale forces. SPM has been one
of main techniques used in the PI's group for various ongoing nanotechnology
projects, including (a) characterizing self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) formed
by alkanethiols on Au(111), dendrimer monolayers on Au(111), and alkyl
monolayers on Si(111) at the molecular resolution, (b) studying protein
adsorption and detecting antigen-antibody interactions, and (c) measuring
quantitative frictional properties of various thin films. Tapping mode SPM is
very important for these ongoing projects, particularly for the study of
interfacial phenomena and properties of biological systems on surfaces in
liquids. The current SPM system in the PI's group was acquired from Digital
Instruments (DI) about five years ago. It has been heavily used in various
research and teaching activities. However, it does not have many important
features, such as tapping mode operation. The PI proposes to upgrade the
existing SPM from NanoScope E to NanoScope IIIa Control Station with Extender
Electronics Module. This upgrade will allow the PI's group to perform tapping
mode SPM in liquids. Upgrade of the SPM will greatly enhance the PI's research
capacities, broaden his research areas, and facilitate collaborations with
people on and off campus. The broader impact of this grant will be that many
graduate students and undergraduate students will benefit from the instrument
through their research experience or laboratory sessions in a course. If the
research is successful, society will benefit through better biocompatible
materials.&lt;br/&gt;