* 0226344
* An Active Object-Based Digital Library for Microeconomics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,04/30/2005
* James Austin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2005
* USD 699,996.00

Students from a variety of disciplines take Microeconomics courses to learn how
various types of markets function and how enterprises and consumers make buying
and selling decisions in these markets. As such, Microeconomics education plays
an important role in preparing future business leaders and practitioners and
serves as part of general business and social sciences training for students in
other fields of study. Currently, Microeconomics courses are typically taught in
a traditional lecture format. Recent developments in economic theory and
electronic commerce, however, call for significant innovations in course content
design and delivery. An emerging trend is to allow the students to actively
participate in economic decision-making through various market institutions,
including recently emerging Internet-based online market institutions, to gain
hands-on experience and acquire economic insights. Constructivist learning
theory supports this educational approach. It promises to revolutionize the way
in which Microeconomics courses will be taught in this new Millennium. Although
several efforts have been initiated to create online Microeconomics contents,
including experimentation tools and software, they have been developed in a
system development and content collection paradigm that is closed and therefore
cannot scale. In this project we are creating a Digital Library (DL)-based, open
approach to deal with the challenges of developing an extensible and scalable
collection of Microeconomics related contents. &lt;br/&gt;(a) From the
perspective of the application domain, i.e., Microeconomics, we are making
contributions in creating new types of digital contents, including simulated IT-
enhanced market institutions and intelligent trading systems implemented as
software agents. These agents are emerging as part of the IT-enhanced electronic
market institutions that have the potential of greatly reducing economic
transaction costs and improving the quality of economic decision-making.
&lt;br/&gt;(b) From the viewpoint of the National STEM Digital Library, we are
creating an Open Archives Initiative (OAI)-compliant collection of
Microeconomics education contents that incorporates experimental software and
automated e-commerce agents. A major DL research task that we are undertaking is
the development of a metadata representation of active objects such as software
modules (e.g., economics experimental software). This research has the potential
of being applied in other DL collections involving software and simulation
environments. &lt;br/&gt;(c) From the educational viewpoint, we are developing
new integrated Microeconomics curricula leveraging the developed active
objected-based DL. We are studying the impact of these new curricula, and
investigating related changes in course management and teaching methodologies.
We are combining research, teaching, and evaluation expertise and resources from
several academic departments and labs at the University of Arizona. Four key
contributing entities are: (1) the Economic Science Lab, a premier institution
on experimental economics methodology and applications, (2) the Artificial
Intelligence Lab, a leading institution on DL, Internet computing, and software
agents, (3) the Hoffman E- Commerce Lab, an instructional and research facility
focusing on e-commerce teaching and research, and (4) the University Faculty
Center for Instructional Innovation, a teaching evaluation facility with
emphasis on the impact of IT on education. &lt;br/&gt;