* 0226926
* The Impact of Leadership Turnover and Regime Type on the Evolution and Maintenance of International Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Alastair Smith, New York University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2004
* USD 75,000.00



In an age of globalization, interactions between states are increasingly common.
Nations cooperate on many dimensions. For instance, they participate in
international agreements, they invest in each other economies (Foreign Direct
Investment) and the lend each other money (sovereign debt). Yet, all nations do
not participate equally. Although the world appears increasingly cooperative,
the underlying anarchic nature of the international system remains unchanged and
no overarching authority exists to enforce agreements. Therefore, the ability to
cooperate relies upon trust between nations. For instance, nations will only
lend to a foreign state if they trust it to repay its debts.

Traditional liberal theory suggests nations enforce cooperation by conditioning
future behavior upon current interactions; for instance, by refusing to make
future loans to a country unless it repays debts today. Through the use of such
reciprocal punishment strategies, liberal theory explains why cooperation is
possible, but it fails to account for the great variance in the level of
cooperation between states. The Principal Investigators propose regime type and
the turnover of leaders accounts for these differences.

The Principal Investigators propose a theory of leader specific punishments in
which the responsible leader, not the nation she represents, is held accountable
for a breakdown in cooperation. By refusing to cooperate with this leader in the
future, foreign nations create an incentive for the citizenry to remove their
leader and replace her with a new leader. Since foreign nations have no grudge
against the new leader, this restores cooperation between states. This argument
suggests important features in the pattern of cooperation between states. First,
the turnover of leaders refreshes soured relations between states, as the
restoration of relations between Yugoslavia and western states following the
removal of Slobodan Milosevic illustrates. Second, regime type affects the
extent to which regimes can cooperate. Regime type determines the ease of leader
removal. In autocratic regimes, where the cost of replacing a leader is
typically high, the benefits of restoring international cooperation are unlikely
to compensate citizens for the costs of deposing their leader. Leaders in such
systems can violate international agreements with impunity. In democratic
systems replacing leaders is much easier. As such, the citizens of democracies
can restore halted international cooperation by simply replacing their leader.
Democratic leaders who violate international agreements or norms of cooperation
risk losing their jobs. This makes them more likely to honor their commitments
and makes them more trustworthy.

The Principal Investigators propose testing how regime type and leadership
turnover affects relations between states in a variety of contexts. Events data,
such as COPDAB, allow the construct of indices of cooperation between states.
Using such indices the Principal Investigators intend to study how one state
reacts to the behavior of another and how these relations are moderated by
domestic political institutions and leadership tenure. The Principal
Investigators also propose examining dyadic trade flows, sovereign debt, foreign
direct investment and the termination of sanctions. In addition to compiling
numerous existing data sources, the proposed empirical research requires
substantial updating of leaders data (Bueno de Mesquita and Siverson 1995).

