* 0226918
* The Articulation of Political Strategies and Regional Structure in the Teuchitlan Tradition of Western Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/22/2001,07/31/2002
* Christopher Beekman, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2002
* USD 22,751.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christopher Beekman will conduct
one season of archaeological fieldwork in the Jalisco region of Western Mexico.
He will focus on sites which relate to the Teuchitlan Tradition which spans a
1,200 year period from ca. 300 BC to 900 AD. Sites are characterized by a
distinctive form of public architecture and ceramic models of these features
indicate they were used for feasting activities, marriage ceremonies and ritual
purposes. Also associated with these structures are specialized workshops (which
produced, among other items, obsidian jewelry), and shaft and chamber tombs.
Excavations at one such shaft tomb yielded a wide variety of imported offerings
suggesting an elite burial. Over the course of its history the Teuchitlan polity
varied in both size and in degree of political centralization. Dr. Beekman notes
that the emphasis on elites symbols varies as well. During the period of maximum
centralization evidence of items associated with an elite class are relatively
rare but in other periods when central control appears replaced by factional
confrontation such markers are common. Dr. Beekman suggests that inter group
competition spurs the emergence of claimants to elite status as individuals vie
for political control and followers. Once a structured hierarchy is established
such status markers are no longer necessary. This interpretation contradicts
commonly accepted theory and therefore has generated considerable interest. With
National Science Foundation support this pattern, which to date is based on
preliminary evidence, will be examined in detail. In this first stage of the
research Dr. Beekman and his colleagues will test excavate a number of sites
which sample different time periods and he will then analyze the objects
collected. A chronologically sensitive ceramic sequence is necessary to order
sites correctly and the pottery excavated from stratigraphically secure contexts
will be analyzed to provide time sensitive markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Although it exhibited the social complexity which characterized many other parts
of Middle America, the prehistory of Western Mexico is poorly known. Dr.
Beekman's research will not only shed new light on the mechanisms which underlie
the development of stratified societies but will also provide data of interest
to many archaeologists.&lt;br/&gt;