* 0226236
* Collaborative Research: TeachEngineering -- Hands On Engineering Resources for K-12
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Michael Mooney, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 06/30/2003
* USD 112,272.00

This Collections project builds on extensive K-12 engineering curriculum
developments funded by the NSF GK-12 program with several engineering colleges
collaborating to create an on-line digital library of engineering resources (the
TeachEngineering Collection) for use by K-12 teachers and engineering college
faculty conducting outreach in their communities. Each institution is already
partnered with numerous local school districts to promote engineering as a
vehicle for math and science integration. Lessons and activities that introduce
engineering to K-12 students while serving as integrators of science and
mathematics concepts will populate the Collection. The lessons and activities in
the TeachEngineering Collection relate to everyday encounters in the lives of
youngsters, thus providing a context for student learning. Collections curricula
meet explicit minimum quality criteria and are aligned with national science,
mathematics and technology educational standards. Activities can be constructed
at low cost with readily available materials -- an "engineering on a shoestring"
approach to encourage adoption of the Collection. The Collection also provides a
portal to several "living laboratories" -- structures, facilities and processes
instrumented with sensors, providing data on-line in real time. The project team
also is reaching out to end-users by promoting workshops that train teachers and
faculty to use the Collection. The American Society for Engineering Education
involvement guarantees long-term sustainability, with responsibility for
certification and testing of new curricular components, and nationwide
dissemination and promotion of the Collection. The collaborators are designing
the system architecture, developing the search engine, and refining and testing
the system and contents, including the "living laboratories" component, in
collaboration with K-12 teachers. Integration and interoperability with other
NSDL collections are being addressed. Concurrently, the Collection content is
being standardized, converting a variety of K-12 engineering curricula into
searchable, standards-based documents with a common look and feel. In a set of
second-level tasks, the team is populating and testing the Collection,
integrating it into the Tufts Digital Library, completing the loading and
testing of the initial contents, conducting teacher and faculty workshops, and
transferring the Collection oversight to ASEE. Moving K-12 engineering outreach
curricula from individual sites to a unified and useful library provides
accessible resources for the K-12 community and stimulates the involvement of
engineering faculty and professionals in K-12 education. Broader impacts of this
work are engaging more engineering programs in K-12 outreach, providing the
expanded opportunities to dramatically increase general STEM literacy and
expanding the pool of youngsters eagerly prepared for a future in engineering.