* 0226321
* Using Spatial Hypertext as a Workspace for  Digital Library Providers and Patrons
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Frank Shipman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 425,000.00

This Targeted Research project is investigating the use of spatial hypertext by
digital library patrons to&lt;br/&gt;build personal and shared annotated digital
information spaces, and by digital library providers to
organize,&lt;br/&gt;annotate, and maintain collections of digital information.
Spatial hypertext is a class of information&lt;br/&gt;workspace in which users
collect source materials as information objects in a set of two-dimensional
spaces and imply attributes of and relationships between the materials via
visual and spatial cues. The ease of expressing evolving interpretations makes
spatial hypertext well suited for tasks where the task and materials (or the
user's understanding of these) change over time. The PI and colleagues are
extending an existing spatial hypertext system, the Visual Knowledge Builder, in
the following areas: (1) suggestion-based methods supporting the incremental
specification of metadata; (2) dialog generation for converting the visual
interpretation that occurs in the workspace into metadata; and (3) history
annotation, filtering, and editing for viewing how collections change over time.
By expanding the means to create personal digital information spaces beyond
textual modes into visual ones, this investigation promises to broaden the
impact of the NSDL on users.