* 0226764
* Mini-symposia on New Technologies in Biomedical Optics and Recent Advances in Medical Imaging, Houston, Texas, October 23-26, 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Larry McIntire, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 03/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0226764 McIntire The Second Joint Meeting of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBS) and the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) occurs
in Houston, Texas, October 23-26, 2002. The technical program of the meeting
includes the 3 mini-symposia of Biomedical Optics, Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
and Terahertz Bioimaging and Biosensing Applications. Funding is being provided
to support the participation of 8 young investigators who will give featured
30-minute presentations in the special mini-symposia on the topics New
Technologies in Biomedical Optics, Recent Advancces in Magnetic Resonance
Imaging, and Terahertz Bioimaging and Biosensing. The intellectual merit of the
3 mini-symposia is high: the topics chosen for discussion represent new areas of
investigation in Biomedical Optics and Imaging and are to be described by new
investigators at the forefront of their respective fields. The mini-symposia
will add significantly to the scientific quality of the Joint Conference, which
currently represents the largest professional forum for Bioengineers worldwide.
The information presented will have broad impact in the fields of biosensors,
BioMEMS, medical imaging, and the areas of applied research that depend on such
emerging technologies.

Each recipient of support is expected to submit a report outlining their
exciting new findings and their scientific experiences at the Conference.