* 0226809
* Tests of Fundamental Symmetries Using Spin Magnetometers
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Michael Romalis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 262,171.00

This project consists of two experiments aimed at testing fundamental symmetries
of nature using spin magnetometers. The first experiment will set new limits on
violation of time-reversal symmetry by searching for a permanent Electric Dipole
Moment (EDM) using liquid 129-Xe. It will constrain new sources of T and CP
violation caused by Supersymmetry and other extensions of the Standard Model.
The current best limit on EDM of a diamagnetic atom comes from the 199-Hg
experiment and is limited by statistical noise. Using liquid Xe we will be able
to increase the number of atoms by eight orders of magnitude and the electric
field strength by a factor of 10 relative to the latest version of the 199-Hg
experiment. SQUID magnetometers will be used for detection of spin precession
and for monitoring leakage currents. The limits on CP violation can be improved
by 2 to 4 orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;The second experiment will set new
limits on CPT violation and Lorentz symmetry violation by comparing the spin
precession frequencies of 3-He and 39-K atoms contained in the same cell. CPT
and Lorentz symmetry violations can occur in string theories and other theories
of quantum gravity. The K magnetometer will operate at low magnetic field and
high number density, eliminating relaxation due to spin exchange. We will use a
new self-compensating design that takes advantage of the spin-exchange coupling
between K and 3-He atoms, while automatically canceling magnetic field
fluctuations and eliminating many systematic effects typically limiting atomic
spin magnetometers. We expect to improve the existing limits by 2-3 orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;