* 0226453
* Workshop on the Role of Geotechnical Physical Modelling in Education, July 9, 2002; St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Deborah Goodings, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2003
* USD 60,001.00

CMS-0226453&lt;br/&gt;PI: Deborah Goodings&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Maryland&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Subsidy Request for Workshop on the Role of
Geotechnical Physical Modeling in Education"&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding will be used
to subsidize a one-day Workshop on the Role of Geotechnical Physical Modelling
in Education, to be held on Tuesday, July 9, 2002, to precede the International
Conference on Physical Modelling in Geotechnics in St. John's, Newfoundland,
Canada. The Workshop will be organised by: Deborah J. Goodings (PI, and
Professor at the University of Maryland) and Dr. Ryan Phillips (Senior Key
Personnel, and Geotechnical Director and Associate Professor at Memorial
University, Canada). The goal of the Workshop is to educate attendees on the
opportunities to integrate physical modelling research as it is conducted into
education at the K-12 level, into education at the undergraduate level, and with
increasing coverage into graduate level education. The workshop is relevant to
educators with modelling facilities in their home institutions, as well as to
those without modelling facilities, and it will provide an excellent and timely
opportunity for teachers, academics, and potential employers to consider the
role of geotechnical physical modelling in education. With NSF support, the
workshop can be open to any attendee without charge. In addition, travel
subsidies will be provided to senior graduate students and junior faculty from
US universities to attend the Workshop, with particular attention to encouraging
women and underrepresented minorities to attend.&lt;br/&gt;