* 0226818
* Support for the Secretariat of the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change (IHDP)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Andreas Rechkemmer, University of Bonn
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2008
* USD 880,000.00

Concerns about changes in the world's environment have led scientists from many
different nations to collaborate on a broad range of research and training
activities. Many of these activities are coordinated by one or more of three
major international organizations: the World Climate Research Program (WCRP),
which is overseen by the World Meteorological Organization; the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), which is overseen by the International
Council of Science (ICSU); and the International Human Dimensions Programme on
Global Environmental Change (IHDP), which is overseen by the International
Council of Science (ICSU) with cooperation from the International Social Science
Council (ISSC). The objective of the IHDP is to initiate, coordinate, and find
support for research on the human dimensions of global change. IHDP also places
strong emphasis on developing research capacity on this topic and on
strengthening national and international research networks. A major emphasis of
IHDP activities is the development and conduct of core projects. Projects
already established by IHDP deal with Land-Use and Land-Cover Change (LUCC; co-
sponsored by IGBP), Institutional Dimensions of Global Environmental Change
(IDGEC), Global Environmental Change and Human Security (GECHS), and Industrial
Transformation. This award will provide support for the IHDP Secretariat, which
coordinates IHDP at the University of Bonn in Germany, and for activities
undertaken by the Chair of the IHDP Scientific Committee and by its major
coordinating committees. Core support for the IHDP and its Secretariat is
provided by NSF on behalf of agencies participating in the U.S. Global Change
Research Program.

Through support of the IHDP, a solid investment is made in the infrastructure
that fosters broader and deeper international, interdisciplinary collaborative
networks. This further strengthens scientific inquiry across a range of topics
and projects, thereby helping to enhance fundamental knowledge about very
important topics and issues. Through its capacity-building activities,
especially support for activities that education and involve more scientists
from developing nations, the IHDP also facilitates a strengthening and
diversification of the international scientific workforce.