* 0226538
* Collaborative Research:  A Broadband Seismic Investigation of Deep Continental Structure Across the East-West Antarctic Boundary
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 198,024.00

9909969 &lt;br/&gt;Anadakrishnan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by
the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs,
supports a project to evaluate geodynamic models for the tectonic development of
Antarctica by investigating crust and upper mantle structure beneath the East-
West Antarctic boundary. This experiment will use a focused broadband
seismograph deployment to address two outstanding problems concerning the
tectonic development of the Antarctic continent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The
origin of the Transantarctic Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;Even though the Transantarctic
Mountains are widely considered a classic example of rift flank uplift, there
appears to be little consensus about the exact uplift mechanism. Many mechanisms
have been proposed, ranging from delayed phase changes to transform-flank
uplift, all of which make various assumptions about upper mantle structure
beneath and adjacent to the rift-side of the mountain front.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The structure of the East Antarctic
Craton.&lt;br/&gt;East Antarctica displays the greatest modal elevation of any
major cratonic block when corrected for glacial loading. The anomalous elevation
of East Antarctica may have been an important factor in the onset of continental
glaciation. However, the support mechanism for this anomalous topography is
unknown; possible models include isostatic uplift from (a) thickened crust, (b)
anomalously depleted upper mantle, and (c) thermally modified upper mantle, as
well as dynamic uplift. The lateral extent of the very old continental
lithosphere is also uncertain. In particular, it is unknown whether the old
lithosphere extends to the western edge of East Antarctica beneath the crustal
rocks deformed during the Ross Orogeny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine details
of the crust and upper mantle structure across the East-West Antarctic boundary,
this passive seismic experiment is comprised of three elements:&lt;br/&gt;(1) A
1400 km linear array of 17 broadband seismic stations extending from the high
central regions of the East Antarctic craton to the Transantarctic Mountains
(Array 1).&lt;br/&gt;(2) An intersecting 400 km linear array of 16 broadband
seismic stations extending from the coast across the Transantarctic mountains
nearly perpendicular to the strike of the range in the dry valleys region (Array
2).&lt;br/&gt;(3) An array of 11 broadband stations in coastal regions around
Ross Island and Terra Nova Bay (Array 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experiment
will be conducted over a three-year period, to allow sufficient data collection
from naturally occurring earthquakes, and will begin in November 2000. Airborne
surveys for surface elevation and ice thickness will be completed in support of
this work. If feasible, aerogravity and aeromagnetics data will also be
collected. Data will be analyzed using a variety of proven modeling techniques,
including body and surface wave tomography, receiver function inversion, and
shear wave splitting analysis. The results of these analyses will be maps of the
variation in crustal thickness, upper mantle structure, anisotropy, and mantle
discontinuity topography across the boundary of East and West Antarctica. These
results will provide a solid foundation for understanding the geodynamics of the
Antarctic continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;