* 0226269
* Scaling the Peer Review Process for National Stem Education Digital Library Collections
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Gerard Hanley, California State University, Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 09/30/2006
* USD 409,468.00

One of the primary goals of STEM digital libraries, as well as the NSDL itself,
is to enable users to identify potentially useful digital learning materials and
information from a wide range of collections. Faculty, instructors and student
users of STEM digital libraries are often presented with numerous results from a
search query where they then face the challenge of searching for only those that
serve their educational purposes. STEM undergraduate educators expect and need
digital libraries to provide them with the information and tools to evaluate the
quality of content of learning materials, their potential efficacy in teaching
and learning, their usability and stability, and the adaptability of these
materials for their educational needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How best to develop,
implement and scale up effective, efficient and reliable peer review systems
plagues both mature and newly developing STEM digital libraries. Differences in
what is reviewed (journal articles vs. learning materials) and the purpose of
the materials (advancing knowledge vs. promoting learning) help compound the
situation. Another factor affecting peer review processes for digital libraries
stems from users. From their standpoint, the ultimate goal of peer review is to
help them select the learning materials. In this case, they are not interested
in advancing knowledge in a particular field or helping authors improve their
articles (the purpose of peer review for online journals). Effective systems
require STEM digital collections to expend significant resources to recruit,
train and support large numbers of reviewers who evaluate materials by applying
a set of criteria that requires expertise in the integration of technology with
pedagogy, cognitive science and content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration
with its partners, NEEDS (a Digital Library for Engineering Education, and HEAL)
the Health Education Access Library, this project is developing one solution to
the problems associated with implementing and scaling peer review systems for
NSDL collections, namely, the high costs associated with face-to-face training,
retention of reviewers, and the inability of reviewers to keep pace with the
rapidly increasing size of the collections. This work builds on the foundation
of the MERLOT peer review process. To encourage adaptability by other NSDL
collections there is an adaptable online professional development processes for
implementing both peer and Premier reviews that is designed as a channel
adaptable to the framework uPortal (the software selected by the NSDL-Core
Integration development team to create the initial NSDL Main Portal). The main
outcome of this collaborative project is a professional development module for
training peer reviewers, designed for NSDL collections (and others) to
effectively and efficiently implement and sustain peer review of their
collections. The adaptable module, training and mentoring processes save NSDL
collections significant time, effort and funds in their implementation of valid
and reliable peer review processes. &lt;br/&gt;