* 0226327
* Second Generation Digital Mathematics Resources with Innovative Content for Metadata Harvesting and Courseware Development
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Timothy Cole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 796,689.00

This Collections project is developing second-generation capabilities for two
mathematical digital libraries that support mathematics, engineering, physics,
and applied sciences education and research the&lt;br/&gt;"MathWorld" site at
http://mathworld.wolfram.com and the "Functions" site at
&lt;br/&gt;http://functions.wolfram.com. Functional enhancements are being added
to these two comprehensive and content-rich sites, and collection and item-level
metadata from these resources are being integrated into the NSDL Metadata
Repository framework via maintenance of an Open Archives Initiative (OAI) server
available for harvesting by the NSDL core integration group. The project team is
also investigating several issues, including the potential for semantic search
of functions and mathematical content, and the capability of characterizing and
mapping or adding equations appearing in the physics journal literature to the
"Functions" site. The project team is comprised of investigators at Wolfram
Research, Inc. and faculty from the UIUC Library and Department of Theoretical
and Applied Mechanics (TAM). Sample courseware and model problems for several
TAM applied mechanics courses are incorporating content and functional
components from the two sites in the collection and are being used to assess the
utility of the sites in teaching and course development.&lt;br/&gt;