* 0226535
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Onset of Ice Stream Flow: A Ground Geophysical Field Program
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2006
* USD 324,500.00

0086297&lt;br/&gt;Anandakrishnan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a four
year project to develop of better understanding the ice streams of the Ross Sea
Embayment (A--F) which drain the interior West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) by
rapidly moving vast quantities of ice to the calving front of the Ross Ice
Shelf. The project will examine the role of these ice streams as buffers between
the interior ice and the floating ice shelves. The reasons for their fast flow,
the factors controlling their current grounding-line-, margin-, and head-
positions are crucial to any attempt at modeling the WAIS system and predicting
the future of the ice sheet. For the Antarctic ice streams of the Siple Coast,
the transition from no-sliding (or all internal deformation) to motion dominated
by sliding is defined as the "onset-region". To fully understand (and adequately
model) the WAIS, this onset region must be better understood. The lateral
margins of the ice streams are also a transition that need better explanation.
Hypotheses on controls of the location of the onset region range from the
"purely-glaciologic" to the "purely-geologic. Thus, to model the ice sheet
accurately, the basal boundary conditions (roughness, wetness, till properties)
and a good subglacial geologic map, showing the distribution, thickness, and
properties of the sedimentary basins, are required. These parameters can be
estimated from seismic, radar, and other geophysical methods. The transition
region of ice stream D will be studied in detail with this coupled geophysical
experiment. In addition, selected other locations on ice streams C &amp; D will
be made, to compare and contrast conditions with the main site on ice stream D.
Site-selection for the main camp will be based on existing radar, GPS, and
satellite data as well as input from the modeling community.&lt;br/&gt;