* 0226353
* NSF/ESF WORKSHOP: Adaptation and Constraint in Avian Reproduction; Integrating Endocrinology and Ecology to be held in Heteren, the Netherlands on September 6-7, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2003
* USD 16,800.00

&lt;br/&gt;Fast-paced environmental changes currently threaten bird populations.
To predict how birds will respond to these changes it will be essential to
acquire new knowledge about environmental influences on individual reproductive
decisions (e.g., whether, where, and when to reproduce) and how organisms
respond to their environments as physiological and behavioural systems. While
some species are flexible with respect to laying date, clutch size, mating
system, etc., others are less flexible. If scientists are to predict which
populations will be able to adjust or adapt and how rapidly, they will require
far greater knowledge of the mechanisms underlying reproductive decisions than
they currently possess.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining that knowledge will
require the expertise of reproductive endocrinologists, physiological
ecologists, behavioral ecologists, comparative biologists, population
biologists, and quantitative geneticists (or, more simply, endocrinologists and
ecologists). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an exploratory
workshop that will convene ~30 European and North American scientists. The
workshop will foster the exchange of knowledge, techniques, and data between
endocrinologists and ecologists to address this pressing and topical issue. It
will lead in turn to the formation of a research network that will foster
international collaborations and opportunities for international training of
graduate and postdoctoral students including students from groups
underrepresented in science and developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;