* 0226422
* Generation and Answering Systems R&amp;D for Technology-Enabled Learning Systems; January 2003; Washington, DC
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Henry Kelly, Federation of American Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2003
* USD 75,000.00

0226422&lt;br/&gt;Henry Kelly&lt;br/&gt;Federation of American
Scientists&lt;br/&gt;"Question Generation and Answering Systems R&amp;D for
Technology-Enabled Learning Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
bringing research and development leaders together across disciplines and the
public and private sectors to identify promising research that addresses the
challenge of incorporating question generation and answering capabilities into
learning systems. Advice from panels of experts from companies, universities,
government research facilities, and others with unique related expertise will
result in: 1) A comprehensive review of recent research on questioning and
answer systems from multiple perspectives: psychology, cognitive science,
computational linguistics, and information systems design; 2) Telephone
interviews with relevant researchers, program managers, and industry
representatives; 3) Assimilation of the findings from tasks 1) &amp; 2) into a
preliminary report; 4) A workshop of acknowledged experts, researchers,
developers, and implementers of question generation and answering systems to
evaluate, discuss and contribute to the final report; 5) A final report that
will synthesis the discussions from the workshop that can serve as a
comprehensive and strategic view of the field which researchers, industry, and
funding may use as a guide for developing and applying question and answer
systems. This project addresses a critical need to raise awareness of research
results, tools, and on-going programs and projects across research disciplines,
industry efforts, and government funding organizations related to question
generation and answering. The work combines the skills of many disciplines
including information science, software engineering and design, and cognitive
science.&lt;br/&gt;