* 0226243
* Linking Pedogogy, Resources and Community Interaction to Support Entry-Level Undergraduate Geoscience Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Dorothy Merritts, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2005
* USD 600,000.00

This project involves the development of a thematic collection and specialized
portal for faculty teaching entry-level geoscience to college students and is
exploring some of the ways that the NSDL can catalyze improvement in
undergraduate teaching. The project has two major components: 1) Creation of a
thematic collection that contains the full suite of resources needed to support
faculty teaching at the entry level including teaching resources (e.g.,
visualizations; field, lab and classroom activities; problem sets), information
on effective teaching methods, and examples of successful teaching in the
geosciences. 2) Development of a portal designed specifically to support faculty
and graduate teaching assistants teaching entry-level geoscience. The portal
presents resources from the collection in thematic views or modules that link
pedagogic and content resources and place them in the context of a specific
issue in teaching entry-level geoscience. Supporting a virtual community of
faculty will be an integral aspect of the portal. The collection is being
developed around four priority issues: inquiry based laboratory and field
experiences, using an Earth system approach, effective pedagogical approaches,
and teaching quantitative skills. This project is drawing on resources in
existing NSDL collections including several DLESE collections, the Math Forum,
the Learning Matrix and the Gender and Science Digital Library demonstrating the
power an integrated library holds for sharing among the disciplines. Significant
co-funding of this project is being provided by the Division of Earth Sciences
in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in recognition of the importance that
this collection of digital resources on teaching entry-level geoscience courses
has for graduate students and undergraduate faculty.