* 0226076
* SGER:  To Manufacture Superconducting Accelerator Cavities by Electron-Beam Assisted Physical Vapor Deposition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Louis Hand, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 02/29/2004
* USD 80,000.00

SRF cavities in high energy accelerator application are very costly to produce,
at $44,000 per meter, however the reduced operating costs with these cavities
creates the need to investigate means of producing these cavities in new and
efficient fashion. This SGER aims to consider the deposition of textured niobium
films on molybdenum structures by electron beam assisted PVD. The modification
of the PVD adds addition process driver that can be used to produce higher
quality conforming thin films. This is a high potential proposal considering the
applications, and the advantage that would be gained if these SRF cavities could
be produces in quantity and lower cost. The high risk is related to the
uncertainty of producing relatively defect-free Nb films, where surface defects
and grain boundaries would be extremely deleterious.

This exploratory research will test the feasibility of creating these films on
the moldy substrates, exploring the processing issues related to high
performance thin films. If this proof of principle can be established, then
further research will be needed to determine optimization conditions for high
quality film producibility. The PIs will include undergraduate research
assistants on this program through REUs. A subaward to Penn State will provide
the necessary materials characterization capability and the collaboration will
give students a chance to visit / conduct research at either campus