* 0226244
* The Journal of Chemical Education Digital Library
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* William Coleman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 12/31/2005
* USD 930,277.00

This Collections project by the Journal of Chemical Education (JCE) is creating
the JCE Digital Library. Four major new collections are being added to the
considerable digital material already available at JCE Online, the JCE Web site.
Each collection is being carefully reviewed to ensure that it contains materials
that are scientifically accurate. Reviewers are also requiring that materials
embody pedagogy supported by the chemical education research literature. Each
collection is being categorized using keywords, organized by curricular level,
and correlated with textbooks to allow quick and easy access by teachers from
high school chemistry through graduate-level courses.

The four collections being developed include:

DigiDemos-digitized text, graphics, sound, and video of chemical demonstrations
that are enabling teachers to learn the most effective demonstration techniques,
the latest important safety and waste disposal information, and exemplary
pedagogy involving demonstrations.

Computer Algebra Systems-documents for Mathcad, Mathematica, Maple, or MATLAB
are being designed to help students learn mathematically intensive aspects of
chemistry.

JCE WebWare-a collection of Web-deliverable animations, simulations,
calculations, and other pedagogically useful items are being incorporated into
classroom presentations to promote discussion and interaction among students,
and to provide new insights through graphic and other non-traditional means.

Resources for Student Assessment-Web-deliverable materials including homework,
quiz, and examination questions with anytime anywhere, feedback and tutoring
based on student responses, and a variety of new approaches to student
assessment are being developed.

JCE is providing a paid staff to organize volunteer efforts in order to maintain
and to update content, and will continue to do so after the project ends. JCE
also is providing a well-established review process involving more than 4,000
reviewers, many of who already review digital materials. Finally, feature
columns edited by volunteers with expertise in specific content areas and who
can serve as nuclei for additional collections materials are available once the
JCE Digital Library is established.

JCE is ideally suited to develop this Collection of digital materials for
chemical education as it has nearly 80 years of expertise and experience in
chemical education and a worldwide reputation. JCE is where chemistry teachers
from high school through graduate school look for high quality materials. This
Collection is enhancing and improving science education throughout the USA,
thereby fostering better public understanding of chemistry and science and
aiding in the recruitment of all kinds of students to careers in science.
Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance of a digital library for the
support of the learning of chemistry.