* 0226872
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research:  Optical Beams and Short Pulses in Nonlinear Media and in Nonlinear Periodic Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Moysey Brio, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 13,852.00

0226872&lt;br/&gt;Brio&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI and graduate
students from the University of Arizona in a collaboration with Mads Sorenson of
the Department of Informatics and Mathematical Modeling at the Technical
University of Denmark in Lyngby. The research will focus on two physical
problems. One is the study of integrated photonic devices; a second is the
propagation of ultra short pulses and beams in nonlinear media, including air.
The problem of femtosecond light pulses in bulk media is a challenging
computational problem because the high intensity of the laser pulse can cause
optical breakdown of the material leading to highly nonlinear response. Recently
developed efficient parallel algorithms will be applied to the problem of
modeling ultra short pulses in nonlinear media. For the study of short pulse
dynamics in photonic crystal fibers, theoretical calculations will be done to
investigate supercontinuuum generation, soliton self-frequency shift, and third-
harmonic generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combined effort of the US and
Danish groups is expected to provide a much needed theoretical and numerical
component to the important technologies associated with applications of ultra
short pulse phenomena. The topic area has the potential to produce revolutionary
advances in the fields of communications, medicine, energy efficiency, defense,
and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;