* 0226219
* Collaborative Project:  Physics Teaching Web Advisory (Pathway)--A Digital Video Library for Physics Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Scott Stevens, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 323,324.00

This is a collaborative project with Kansas State University (Award No.
0226157).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are creating a proof-of-concept
demonstration of a new type of digital library for physics teaching. The project
brings together several long-standing research projects in digital video
libraries, advanced distance learning technologies, and collaboration
technologies, and nationally known experts in physics pedagogy and high-quality
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on Carnegie Mellon University's
Informedia Digital Video Library (see NSF Award Nos. 9411299, 9817496, and
0085834), which is addressing the problem of information extraction from video
and audio content, and "synthetic interviews" of master physics teachers.
Synthetic interview technology creates an anthropomorphic interface into video
of a person responding to questions. Synthetic interviews based on videos of
several master physics teachers will allow teachers to converse with
knowledgeable experts about their classroom techniques and about how those
techniques are related to contemporary issues in physics teaching. Teachers will
also be able to create personal synthetic interviews, which, in addition to
providing a resource for other teachers, can become a virtual, "anytime,
anywhere" tutor for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to produce a
state-of-the-art system through which teachers can interact, both virtually and
directly, with experts in physics teaching, cooperate to help each other become
more effective teachers of physics, and develop advanced courses for their
students.&lt;br/&gt;