* 0226962
* SUNY-Brockport College and Rochester City (SCOLLARCITY) Math and Science Partnership: Integrative Technology Tools for Preservice and Inservice Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2011
* Barbara Helland, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Hannah M. Sevian
* 06/30/2011
* USD 3,978,604.00

The project is proposed by a partnership between SUNY-Brockport, Rochester City
School District (RCSD) third largest in New York state with the lowest
achievement scores and Brighton Central School District (BCSD) with similar gaps
among underrepresented groups yet with one of the highest overall achievement
rates in the state. Additional partners are the Shodor Foundation and The Krell
Institute. &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal for the partnership is to improve student
outcomes in mathematics and science in grades 7-12 by creating a multi agency
approach for the recruitment and professional development of mathematics and
science teachers. &lt;br/&gt;A Computational Mathematics Science and Technology
(CMST) approach to learning science is employed in which students and teacher
are engaged in fieldwork, laboratory experiments, mathematical modeling,
computer simulation and visualization. CMST employs math models to describe
physical phenomena therefore bringing a new perspective about the usefulness of
math as a tool in real life. The method is designed to make science and
mathematics concepts more easily comprehensible. A Challenge program
incorporating CMST is providing tools and motivation for 200, grades 7-12
students, under the supervision of participating teachers. The approach in
addition to teaching science concepts is designed to promote teamwork,
collaboration and new strategies for problem solving. &lt;br/&gt;A component of
the comprehensive professional development program for mathematics and science
teachers is a four-week summer institute each year serving a total of 240
teachers. In addition there is a master's degree program for 30 teachers.
Preservice education programs at SUNY Brockport are being revised and new
courses are to be introduced to assure an improvement in the quality quantity
and diversity of the new teacher workforce. &lt;br/&gt;