* 0226214
* Access NSDL
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Madeleine Rothberg, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 04/30/2005
* USD 500,000.00

This Services project is building the capacity of the National Science,
Technology, Engineering, and&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics Education Digital Library
(NSDL) to serve learners with disabilities. Project activities are being led by
the National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM), a joint effort of the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting and WGBH. Through this project the NSDL is
benefiting from and contributing to the national and international dialogue on
access specifications for online learning resources to meet the needs of users
with disabilities and to ensure interoperability of accessible content. Project
deliverables include an automated evaluation tool that reports on a site's
accessibility and guides users to relevant resources to address barriers to
accessibility by people with disabilities; an integrated and comprehensive
information resource with useful materials, tools, sample solutions, and
demonstration models specific to challenges presented by math and science
content; and a Working Paper on Access Specifications and Solutions that
summarizes relevant approaches to access and interoperability from working
groups within the IMS Global Learning Consortium, the W3C and the Dublin Core.
NSF's Division of Human Resource Development is providing co-funding for this
project in recognition of its importance to broadening access to the educational
resources of the NSDL.&lt;br/&gt;