* 0226862
* ITR:   Adaptive Protocols for a Distributed Java Virtual Machine
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Dan Moldovan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 144,354.00

Java is a language of growing importance but so far parallelism in Java has been
limited to either multi-threading on symmetric multiprocessors (SMP) or
distributed computing using Remote Method&lt;br/&gt;Invocation (RMI). The number
and size of Java-based Internet-related applications require more and more
parallelism and system scalability. This proposal addresses the problem of
designing memory consistency&lt;br/&gt;protocols for a distributed Java Virtual
Machine capable of self-adapting at runtime to different application
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is divided into five
tasks: (1) the definition of the memory consistency model, (2) the development
of consistency protocols, (3) the definition of an analytical performance model
on which&lt;br/&gt;adaptive protocols are based, (4) the development of
processor allocation algorithms for load balancing, and (5) the evaluation of
the system performance using four classes of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A correct distributed Java Virtual Machine
specification must be first defined. The correctness issue is especially
important for a distributed shared memory Java Virtual Machine due to the
incompatibilities between the Sun specification and distributed memory
architectures. Preliminary work indicates that Sun's JVM specification is too
strong for DSM architectures. A thorough analysis of the JVMS requirements will
produce the set of constraints that have to be relaxed from the original Sun's
JVMS to allow an efficient distributed implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once a theoretical memory consistency model is
established, the next step is to develop consistency protocols. An analytical
model is proposed to analyze the application behavior for various protocols. The
application profile can be abstracted by the object granularity, temporal
locality of accesses, and object access&lt;br/&gt;patterns. A novelty of the
proposed work is the mapping of application parameters into protocol parameters
using the analytical model parameters: thread creation time, synchronization
time, and execution&lt;br/&gt;overhead. These parameters can be estimated
analytically and measured. The correlation between model parameters and adaptive
protocols needs to be investigated. It is necessary to develop heuristics that
link&lt;br/&gt;parameters with the protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
the preliminary work, a distributed Java Virtual Machine called DISK has been
implemented in our network-of-workstations laboratory consisting of sixteen
Pentium III computers connected by a&lt;br/&gt;100 Mbps network. DISK currently
supports two memory consistency protocols: an invalidate and an update lazy
release consistency protocol. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several Java-specific
applications will be investigated to measure and tune the performance of the
adaptive protocols developed. Four different classes of applications from the
Internet and knowledge &lt;br/&gt;processing technology will be used as new
benchmarks: (1) client-side I/O intensive applications, (2) server-side I/O
intensive applications, (3) computational intensive applications,
and&lt;br/&gt;(4) computational and I/O intensive applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;