* 0226866
* Computer Networking:   Curriculum Designs and Educational Challenges Workshop; August 20, 2002; Pittsburgh, PA
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 07/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

The ACM Special Interest Group in Data Communications (SIGCOMM) will sponsor a
one-day workshop on "Computer Networking: Curriculum Designs and Educational
Challenges," August 20, 2002, preceding the annual ACM Sigcomm 2002 conference
in Pittsburgh, PA. The goal of the workshop is to bring together faculty from a
broad spectrum of academic institutions, industry engineers and scientists, and
others with an interest in education to discuss curriculum design and teaching
practices in the field of computer networks. The workshop will focus on (i) the
development of model curricula for a first (undergraduate) course in networking,
(ii) the evolution of graduate-level curricula in the area, and (iii) developing
"hands-on" laboratory-based courses at the undergraduate/graduate level. The
workshop will provide an opportunity to discuss these and other related issues;
to share viewpoints, experiences, and materials; and to learn what others are
doing, and considering doing in the area. The workshop will produce a report
detailing the attendees'discussions and will serve as a springboard for future
activity in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding to
assist up to 20 United States-based faculty members to attend and participate in
this workshop. The awards will be primarily targeted at faculty from 4-year
colleges and universities who would not otherwise have the funds to attend the
workshop or ACM SIGCOMM 2002. Particularly there is an interest in drawing
faculty from 4-year college to the workshop. Given that the workshop is targeted
broadly at all faculty in the computer networking area (not just those with the
research funds to attend SIGCOMM), the grant will help broaden the base of
participants, and serve to make the workshop a truly community-wide
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;