* 0226334
* Ceph School: A Pedagogic Portal for Teaching Biological Principles with Cephalopod Molluscs
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Wood, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2006
* USD 924,601.00

This collections track project is developing a new educational interface called
Ceph School supported by CephBase data. In Ceph School, Cephalopods are being
used as the model organisms for a number of reasons. Cephalopods (squid,
cuttlefish, octopus and nautilus) are very different from animals that students
typically study. They actively, colorfully, and dynamically illustrate all major
concepts in biology and are bio-medically important. They are animals that
students are naturally curious about. Ceph School is providing full access to
all of the current data and also modifying and expanding it by creating an
entirely new age/knowledge appropriate interface composed of eight new modules.
The goal, using cephalopods as model organisms, is to have students understand
basic principles in biology (modules 2,4,5 & 7), observe the methodology of
scientific research and become familiar with cephalopods (modules 1& 6), and
also provide student and teacher-specific support (modules 3, 5 & 8). These
modules are enhanced with web cameras, videos and links to additional data. From
a distance, students observe living animals in real time, use interactive maps
to explore their geographical distribution and habitats, learn about their
anatomy, physiology and behavior, search appropriate bibliographies, locate
world experts, and observe science in action. Additionally, teachers have a
quality, data rich tool to help their students get excited about science. A
regional group of motivated and innovative teachers, who are familiar with
theresearch center, supply a pedagogue's view of the initial design and
appearance of the site, and provide critical assessment of the usefulness of the
modules and finally suggestions for improvement and refinement.

This system is structured to provide a type and quality of standard information
(Textley and Wild 1996) that is customized for high school and university
students. Ceph School begins with the already successful OBIS (Ocean Biological
Information Systems) compliant CephBase website (www.cephbase.utmb.edu),
recognized twice in Science (282:587 and 285:2027). The site includes complete
taxonomy for all living cephalopods, from phylum to subspecies. It includes over
1000 images and 70 video clips depicting behavior, taxonomic traits and predator
and prey data. It also includes a directory of all the world's cephalopod
workers, a "frequently asked questions" database, a searchable scientific
literature database containing 4688 papers on cephalopods, geographic
distribution maps made in real time, and finally a powerful web interface that
allows interoperability with other OBIS databases (i.e., FishBase, Kansas
Geological Survey and Species 2000).