* 0226986
* Stark County Math and Science Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Christine Krol, Stark County Educational Service Center
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2009
* USD 7,699,641.00

This project is proposed by a partnership that includes the Stark County
Educational Service Center; seventeen school districts (Alliance City, Canton
City, Canton Local, Plain Local, Fairless Local, Jackson Local, Lake Local,
Louisville City Local, Marlington Local, Massillon City, Minerva Local, North
Canton City, Northwest, Osnaburg Local, Perry Local, Sandy Valley Local and
Tuslaw Local ); the East Regional Professional Development Center; Stark
Education Partnership (a business and community organization); and five
institutions of higher education located in Stark County ( Malone College, Walsh
University, Kent State University-Stark Campus, Mount Union College and Stark
State College of Technology).

The partnership focuses on raising student achievement and reducing the
achievement gap in mathematics and science at 44 middle and high schools in
Stark County, OH, and is designed to impact over 40,000 students and
approximately 650 middle and high school math and science pre-service and in-
service teachers. The hallmarks of the Stark County Math and Science Partnership
(SCMSP) are the development of urban centers linked to reducing the achievement
gap, increasing inquiry and real world problem solving teaching skills, and
collaboration and networking among secondary teachers and college content and
methods faculty. Four Urban centers will be created to address performance
disparity in districts with the largest minority populations and largest
achievement gaps: Alliance City, Canton City Massillon /city and Plain Local.
These centers will be located in the high schools of these districts and will
have aspects of both professional development schools and lab schools with
college faculty, preservice teachers, coursework, seminars, field experiences
and practice teaching on-site. While these urban centers will provide
concentrated support to four districts, all 17 districts will participate in the
Lead Teachers, Study Group, Peer-Coaching, Summer institutes, and Industry
Internships components of this endeavor in order to increase inquiry and real
work problem-solving in mathematics and science classrooms.

