* 0226304
* Collaborative Project: Managing Authority Lists for Customized Linking and Visualization
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Gregory Crane, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2005
* USD 249,983.00

This is a collaborative project with Johns Hopkins University (Award No.
0226234).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing Services for a
Customizable Authority Linking Environment (SCALE) to support all levels of
reading in the National STEM Education Digital Library (NSDL). In particular,
the project is developing two broad classes of service. First, the investigators
are providing automatic linking services that automatically bind key words and
phrases to supplementary information. Such services help students, professionals
outside a particular discipline, and the interested public to read documents
full of unfamiliar technical terms and concepts. For example, astronomy students
and curious amateurs may need to see expansions of acronyms--e.g., MACHO
(massive compact halo object)--or pictures of "Kuiper belt objects"; or the
student struggling with research papers on bioluminescence may need to locate
information about particular chemical processes or relevant species of
echinoderms. Second, the investigators are basing automatic linking on authority
control of names and terms and on links among different authority lists such as
thesauri, glossaries, encyclopedias, subject hierarchies, and object
catalogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities in the project
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* creating and maintaining authority lists of
technical terms and concepts harvested from Open Archives Initiative (OAI)
metadata, extracted from full text, and imported from existing authority
lists;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* extending current automatic hypertext capabilities
to embed glosses of technical terms and links to related passages within HTML,
PDF, and XML documents in the NSDL;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* providing term
detection and document linking through Simple Object Access Protocol
(SOAP)-based Web services;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* evaluating the interface to
and functionality of SCALE in cooperation with the National Virtual
Observatory;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* customizing SCALE through explicit user
configuration and adaptive learning of preferences; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
collecting annotations on the quality of links to improve precision and provide
a training set for future systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the work at the
Tufts University Perseus Digital Library Project (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)
and the Johns Hopkins Digital Knowledge Center (http://dkc.mse.jhu.edu/) has
already focused on exploiting various kinds of authority lists (gazetteers,
biographical dictionaries, dictionaries, glossaries of technical terms, and name
authority files) for the automatic generation of hypertext links and for
visualizations such as automatically generated dynamic maps and timelines. Such
link generation complements the current practice of automatic identification and
aggregation of citations. The current project augments and transfers the
existing technology for managing authority lists, converting this from a
research effort to an institutionalized service serving a wider
community.&lt;br/&gt;