* 0226515
* Workshop: Is Global Climate Change Research Relevant to Day-to-Day Water Resources Management?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Christopher Lant, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2003
* USD 14,000.00

0226515&lt;br/&gt;Lant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The huge temporal and spatial
differences in water availability and use, the economic inefficiency of trading
water long distances, and differences in institutions and ecosystems across the
United States, have traditionally placed water management decisions at a local
level. To reduce drought and flood risks, local managers have relied upon
infrastructure (e.g. dams and levees). As human understanding of the world's
climate variation is enhanced, there is the possibility that the extremes of
climate can predicted with sufficient reliability to make local water resource
management decision less risky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models and information
products of global climate change research are becoming increasingly available
and are being put in forms related to water research management decisions. But
how willing and able are local decision-makers to incorporate this new
knowledge? Are water management decision calendars understood well enough to
know how to infuse climate change information, in the right form and at the
right time, and with sufficient reliability to be of use to local water
managers?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UCOWR is proposing to organize a workshop at its
2002 annual meeting in Traverse City, Michigan to examine the current state of
climate change research and its interface with water resources management
decision-making, from national, to regional, to state, local levels. The results
of the workshop will be published as a Water Resources Update issue in 2003.
Workshop participants include:&lt;br/&gt;Robert Ward, Colorado State
University&lt;br/&gt;Richard Lawford, Program Manager, Office of Global
Programs, NOAA&lt;br/&gt;Tom N. Chase, Cooperative Institute for Research in
Environmental Sciences R. A Eugene Stakhiv, Chief, Planning and Policy Studies
Division, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;Peter Roger Division of A lied Sciences Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;