* 0226040
* www.eSkeletons.org:  An Interactive Digital Library of Human and Primate Anatomy
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* John Kappelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2006
* USD 398,726.00

&lt;br/&gt;This collections project builds on the earlier successes of the web
site, www.eskeletons.org, and&lt;br/&gt;dramatically expands the range of
content at the site, the degree of student interactivity with
the&lt;br/&gt;materials, and the amount of student interaction with each other.
New laser scanning equipment&lt;br/&gt;along with dramatic improvements in
existing high resolution X-ray computed tomography technologies allows the
inclusion of species of a much smaller body size than those initially posted at
the site, with the completion of the scans accomplished on a much faster
timetable. This site provides students with a more complete understanding of the
range of primate diversity and facilitates a great diversity of lab
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additions to the site include: 1) an expansion
of the range of content including additional species, larger samples of
particular species, and case studies that illustrate specific points, including
forensic studies, and the option for researchers to post their datasets, 2)
multiple entry portals that are age-specific and include separate portals for
grade, college, and Gray learners, a "collaboratorium" link to serve as a
clearinghouse for bringing together classrooms and instructors from different
parts of the country, a series of tools and exercises that examine a variety of
biological concepts and topics, 3) expansion of the current self-
quizzing&lt;br/&gt;feature and the incorporation of prepared curriculum
materials, PowerPoint presentations, and&lt;br/&gt;classroom exercises that can
be downloaded by instructors for use in the classroom, 4) 3-D hard copy
printouts to explore the use of anatomically accurate models at various scales
as teaching tools, with a special emphasis on identification kits and
comparative anatomy, 5) versions of the web site that can be
downloaded&lt;br/&gt;for remote use on laptops and handheld PDAs, and 6)
conformity with the NSDL Core Integration effort.&lt;br/&gt;