* 0226066
* SGER: Use of Phase Imaging in Atomic Force Microscopy for Measurement of Viscoelastic Contrast in Polymer Nanocomposites and Molecularly-Thick Lubricant Films
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Bharat Bhushan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,900.00

Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) Use of Phase Imaging in Atomic Force
Microscopy for Measurement of Viscoelastic Contrast in Polymer Nanocomposites
and Molecularly-Thick Lubricant Films

In the proposed work our goal is the development of a technique for
quantitative imaging of viscoelastic properties across polymer nanocomposite
bearing surfaces and surfaces lubricated with ultrathin films. This would be an
important technological advancement that would provide a tool for measurement
and optimization of polymer nanocomposites and a tool for measurement of
lubricant film uniformity. Such a tool would be particularly important for MEMS
and magnetic storage. So this project has a very high potential payoff. Although
this is a high risk project (because such a technique has never been developed
before), we have seen promising results in our preliminary experiments. Much
more work must be carried out however. Preliminary studies of phase contrast,
using an atomic force microscope (AFM) in both tapping and force modulation
modes have shown that different regimes exist. Different AFM cantilever/tip
vibration amplitudes and tip-sample surface separation distances give different
phase contrast images. We believe that hard tapping conditions, i.e. high
cantilever/tip vibration amplitude and low tip-sample surface separation, give
phase images that emphasize viscoelastic properties, which are important in
polymers. In commercial magnetic particulate tapes and polymer films with hard
embedded particles, high phase contrast is found. The hard particles give lower
phase lag than the surrounding polymer at hard tapping conditions, as expected.
In the proposed research we will develop the technique with phase contrast
measurements. We will make simultaneous measurements using several well-
established AFM techniques: friction force (for contrast based on differences in
lubricity among materials), force modulation (for contrast based on stiffness
differences), and Kelvin probe (for contrast based on surface potential
differences) microscopies. These should provide insight into the results of the
phase contrast technique that is being developed here. We also seek to quantify
results. We will attempt to relate phase data from the AFM for thin polymer
samples to viscoelasticity data obtained for these samples by another proven
technique known as dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA). In the DMA thin polymer
samples are subjected to tension/compression strain cycles and the corresponding
stress is measured. The phase lag between the stress and strain is then found.
If the AFM is truly measuring viscoelastic properties then it should be possible
to find a correlation between loss tangent from the DMA and phase lag from the
AFM. In order to quantify, it will be necessary to understand the physics of the
contact. To this end we will develop a vibration model that accounts for the
repulsive and attractive forces between the tip and the dissipation caused by
the viscoelasticity of the sample. An award would support one graduate student
and partially support one postdoctoral researcher. This would provide an
opportunity to recruit and fund a minority or woman. The PI and his department
have made efforts to attract such students in recent years. The department
regularly invites, and provides travel grants for, students, particularly women
and minorities, from other schools to attract them for graduate studies; we have
had some success in this. Undergraduate students would work on the project as
well. Projects like these provide hands-on opportunities for undergraduate
students in a high-tech lab. Past undergraduates in the PI's lab have actually
coauthored articles for technical journals. This project will provide additional
material for the PI's course on tribology and in soon-to-be-developed nanoscale
courses.