* 0226791
* Imperial Interaction in the Andes: Wari and Tiwanaku at Cerro Baul
* SBE,BCS
* 04/30/2002,06/30/2004
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 58,638.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Patrick Williams and his
collaborators will conduct two seasons of archaeological research at the site of
Cerro Baul in highland Peru. The site, located in the Moquegua sierra of
Southern Peru dates to approximately 600-1,000 AD and represents a complete
administrative center set on top of the most imposing natural feature in the
region. Two phases of monumental architecture have been identified on the summit
and these include administrative architecture, religious temples, elite domestic
contexts and craft production and artisan habitation facilities. On the slopes
of the mountain mesa domestic terraces inhabited by lower status people are
present. The site is particularly interesting because it lies at the boundary
between two prehistoric empires, Wari, with a capital in Ayacucho to the North
and Tiwanaku with its capital in Bolivia. Wari which has been characterized as
secular and militant, governed most of highland and coastal Peru while Tiwanaku,
portrayed as ecclesiastical and mercantile held sway over Bolivia, southern Peru
and Northern Chile. Economically Wari generated agricultural revenue by
constructing irrigated terraces on steep mountain slopes where maize and other
crops could grow. Occupying the higher Altiplano plains, Tiwanaku reclaimed flat
terrain for farming potatoes and other high-altitude crops while also herding
camelids and using llama caravans to secure distant resources. Luckily for
archaeologists the empires employed different styles of imperial architecture
and much of their ceramics and iconography are also distinct. It is only in the
Moquegua region of Peru that both Tiwanaku and Wari settlements are found in
close proximity and the site of Cerro Baul itself contains evidence of both
groups. Dr. Williams wishes to understand the nature of the interaction between
them. Therefore he will conduct extensive excavation at the site and carry out a
regional survey to reconstruct the agricultural systems. With these data he will
determine the extent to which integration took place and the types of
complementary strategies employed. Analyses of excavated materials will focus on
subsistence production systems, domestic activity patterns, craft production
systems, elite exchange and iconographic relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
case of Wari-Tiwanaku interaction provides one of the few examples in prehistory
in which the influence of peer empires on each other can be examined. By
documenting the development of political economy and ideological exchange at
Cerro Baul, Dr. Williams research will make a significant contribution to the
anthropological study of complex societies and the evolution of Andean
statecraft.&lt;br/&gt;