* 0226164
* CAREER: Bayesian Econometric Modeling and Nonparametric Identification
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Keisuke Hirano, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 155,866.00

This project aims to introduce and improve methods for analyzing economic data
and robustly assessing the likely impact of policies, and to develop new course
material to train graduate students in the analysis of economic data. The main
approach centers around Bayesian estimation methods applied to large parameter
spaces, in combination with recent strategies for defining and identifying
effects of treatments or policies.&lt;br/&gt;The first component of this project
will develop new methodology for estimation of flexible models for economic data
by adapting Bayesian methods for inference to handle estimation problems in
which prior knowledge places only limited restrictions on the range of
possibilities-nonparametric and seimparametric estimation problems. Bayesian
methods are attractive because they have risk optimality properties, and because
they can be used to generate predictive distributions for future outcomes that
incorporate parameter uncertainty. Previous work by the investigator on
semiparametric Bayesian inference in models for longitudinal data will be
extended to allow for additional regressors, binary outcomes, and alternative
representations of unknown disturbance densities&lt;br/&gt;Many policy questions
can be framed as questions about treatment effects defined in terms of potential
outcomes. The second component of this project will apply flexible Bayesian
methods to estimation problems involving treatment effects, and compare this
approach to more conventional methods for learning about these treatment
effects. One part of' this research will consider inference for treatment
effects with continuous treatments when treatment assignment is independent of
potential outcomes conditional on a vector of pretreatment variables. Another
aspect of the research is to extend earlier research on parametric Bayesian
approaches to causal instrumental variables estimation to semiparametric
models.&lt;br/&gt;The third component of this project focuses on bringing
selected recent developments in econometric methodology into the classroom in
order to better train graduate students in practical, flexible empirical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;