* 0226199
* Earth Exploration Toolbook: A Collection of Examples of Educational Uses of Earth System Science Tools, Datasets and Resources
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Dan Barstow, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2005
* USD 755,898.00

This project is creating the Earth Exploration Toolbook (EET), a collection of
step-by-step examples, called chapters, to guide educators at both the pre-
college and college levels on how to use, in an educational context, various
Earth system tools and datasets that were developed and archived by and for
scientists. The examples provide the educators with enough experience with and
in-depth knowledge of these resources to be able to use them in other contexts,
and to help their students use them to explore and investigate issues in Earth
system science. Use of the EET is being promoted through teacher workshops and
presentations at professional meetings. The EET is a Web site housed at the
Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton College. The EET is
accessible from the DLESE Community Center Web site. The EET is integrated into
DLESE, with the EET Web site, each of the EET chapters, and the associated
resources being cataloged in DLESE. A search within the DLESE Discovery System
brings up both the chapter and the resources used, facilitating an educator's
use of those resources. In addition, the review process is using the DLESE
Community Review System. Entry to the DLESE Community Review System appears in
each EET chapter, facilitating educator input after testing and eventual
acceptance of the EET chapter into the DLESE Reviewed Collection. In addition to
developing the EET chapters, the EET team is also developing a template that
serves to facilitate the contribution of additional EET chapters by members of
the DLESE community, and ensure the growth of the EET after the conclusion of
this project. Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the
Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in recognition
of the importance that this collection of Earth system datasets and tools has on
K-12 teachers and undergraduate faculty.