* 0227859
* Space Odyssey Internship Program
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Dr. Dimitri Klebe, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 12/31/2004
* USD 145,000.00

AST-0227859&lt;br/&gt;Andrews, Polly&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ms. Polly Andrews is
awarded funds at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science to develop an
Internship Program for the new Space Odyssey exhibit. The funds will, for one
year, support one full-time resident teacher intern, the equivalent of one half
FTE research scientist (allocated over two part-time content specific
researchers), two part-time graduate students, and four part-time undergraduate
students from different disciplines. These interns will work with Museum staff
to develop and prototype educational programs for Space Odyssey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists, teacher, students, and Museum staff will
work together in teams to create or upgrade classes that cover topics in solar
system astronomy, stellar astronomy, and astrobiology. In addition, a separate
new program will be developed that highlights the latest developments in
astronomy and space science in a news format. The scientists will ensure that
the scientific content for the classes will provide a balanced and cutting-edge
view of contemporary space science research. The teacher will ensure that the
content presented in the classes is both age- and curriculum- appropriate, and
that the programs meet teachers' needs. The students will gain valuable
experience by serving as research and program assistants. Space Odyssey has the
potential to reach 1.5 million annual Museum visitors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Actitivies in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;