* 0227511
* US-UK-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Relationships among Trophic Structure, Bioturbation and Organic Matter Preservation Across the Oxygen Minimum Zone on The Indus Margin
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/2006
* USD 24,624.00

0227511&lt;br/&gt;Levin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-UK-
Netherlands collaboration involves Lisa Levin of the University of California's
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Craig Smith of the University of Hawaii,
Greg Cowie at the University of Edinburgh, Jack Middelburg of the Netherlands'
Institute of Ecology and others. They propose to study biological and
geochemical processes in oxygen minimum zones (OMZs). These are extreme and
widely distributed ocean environments and deep-sea habitats. The proposed
studies involve research cruises in the Indus Margin, where the OMZ intersects
the sea floor. Through sediment sampling, the investigators will study impacts
of low oxygen on food-web structure and dynamics, sediment geochemistry, and
carbon burial. They will use stable-isotopic, radiochemical, biogeochemical and
faunal measurements to characterize shifts in ecosystem functions and faunal
adaptations along a seafloor transect. Sampling will take place at 6 stations
(100-2000 m depth) ranging from fully oxic to permanently hypoxic conditions
during monsoon and inter monsoon periods. The project takes advantage of British
and Dutch complementary expertise. They will make numerous geochemical and
biological measurements and provide the ship time. The collaboration will
advance understanding of OMZ ecology and organic matter preservations. OMZs
provide in situ laboratories of past climate conditions and as such, can enhance
abilities to predict the impacts of global climate change on continental
margins.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These award covers travel funds and living
expenses for the US investigators aboard the ocean research vessel and travel to
the UK for laboratory analyses. &lt;br/&gt;