* 0227508
* An Oceanic Mantle Dynamics Workshop, to be held September 18-20, 2002, in Snowbird, Utah
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Robert Detrick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David E. Epp
* 07/31/2003
* USD 115,000.00

In recent years, many models of flow in the upper mantle beneath the oceans have
been developed including plume upwelling and swell formation at hotspots, small-
scale convection beneath plates, mantle flow&lt;br/&gt;and melt migration
beneath fast and slow spreading centers, channelized mantle flow from hotspots
to spreading centers, convective overturn above subducting plates,
asthensopheric flow associated with propagating rifts, downwelling beneath the
Australian-Antarctic discordance, return flow from&lt;br/&gt;trenches to ridges,
and flow around subducting slabs during trench rollback. Now, for the first
time, we are entering an era when these often speculative models of mantle
dynamics can be tested and refined with&lt;br/&gt;measurements in the oceans
that have the power to resolve subsurface structure at the critical length
scales. The establishment of a U.S. National Ocean Bottom Seismometer Instrument
Pool with a total of more than&lt;br/&gt;100 long-duration, wide-band
instruments provides an opportunity for progress in understanding the dynamics
of flow in the upper mantle beneath the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
Ocean Mantle Dynamics community workshop will be held September 18-20, 2002 in
Snowbird, Utah. This workshop has five major objectives: (1) highlight the
science that can be done by the program, (2) develop a plan for "leapfrogging
arrays", (3) define the design and technical requirements for an offshore
component to USArray, (4) describe program needs in other areas like geodynamic
modeling, petrology/geochemistry and laboratory measurements, and (5) descuss
the relationship of the program to other major geoscience
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;