* 0227881
* Vortex Tubes, Spirals and the Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Dale Pullin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 01/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0227881&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: DALE I.
PULLIN&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VORTEX TUBES, SPIRALS AND THE LARGE-EDDY SIMULATION OF
TURBULENCE&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to further develop the idea of the
stretched vortex as the fundamental element for both the modeling of the fine-
scales of turbulence and for the building of structure-based subgrid-scale
models for the Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) of turbulent flows. The challenge is
to develop a unified description of the small-scale dynamics and their effect on
the larger scales in realistic turbulent flow at large Reynolds numbers. This
modeling approach will be applied to the construction of a special subgrid scale
model for the near-wall region of turbulent flow, to the LES of trailing
vortices and to the study of velocity-scalar correlations in turbulent mixing.
The research to be conducted will include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) development and testing
of a special subgrid-scale model for the near-wall region of wall-bounded
turbulent flows. A quantitative description of this process is developed based
on the distortion/winding of the local mean spanwise shear by a nearly
longitudinal sublayer vortex. &lt;br/&gt;(2) LES of complex unsteady flows with
high large-scale strain, such as the turbulent trailing vortex at high Reynolds
number. This involves the evolution of a highly anisotropic, unsteady flow with
mean streamline curvature that is subject to strong internal large-scale
rotation and strain. The proposed LES will use realistic initial conditions
combined with a model for the production, inside the vortex core, of axial flow
generated by an induced axial pressure gradient.&lt;br/&gt;(3) application of
the stretched-spiral-vortex model of turbulence small scales to the analysis of
velocity-scalar correlations in homogeneous turbulence in the presence of a mean
scalar gradient. &lt;br/&gt;These application areas are chosen because they
represent, respectively, important problems in the modeling, computation, and
analysis of turbulent flows at large Reynolds numbers.&lt;br/&gt;