* 0227870
* What ARE Astronomers Doing?:  A Project for MPS Internships in Public Science Education
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Sandra Preston, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 11/30/2004
* USD 155,098.00

AST-0227870&lt;br/&gt;Hemenway, Mary Kay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are awarded
to Dr. Mary Kay Hemenway at the University of Texas at Austin to produce a web
site and museum kiosk that will describe and explain how astronomers perform
astronomical research. Specifically, the project will help adults understand how
astronomers perform research at a major astronomical observatory; help students
explore astronomical research, equipment, and careers; lead both a Science
Education graduate student, a teacher intern, and other K-12 teachers to a
deeper understanding of astronomical research while enhancing their contacts
with astronomers; and give astronomers an organized way to share their research
with the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The web site and kiosk will open
with a calendar outlining research scheduled on each of &lt;br/&gt;the major
research telescopes at McDonald Observatory. Links to related visitor-friendly
&lt;br/&gt;pages provide information on the astronomers using the telescopes;
information on the telescopes, including their instrumentation and operation;
rationale for using the chosen instrument for each particular project; and a
glossary of astronomy terms. The primary audience will be the 1,500 teachers and
their 150,000 students using "StarDate/Universo in the Classroom." The project
team includes experts in astronomy public outreach and education, an
astronomical research expert, a graduate student in Science Education, and a
K-12 teacher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will also share the project's
design and templates with other institutions with similar outreach missions. A
national Education Advisory Board will evaluate the project as it develops.
Planned evaluation techniques include interviewing Observatory visitors who use
the kiosk, and surveying teachers about their and their students use of the web
site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Actitivies in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;