* 0227105
* Alliance for Improvement of Mathematics Skills PreK-16
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Lee Sloan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2009
* USD 4,179,784.00

The Alliance for Improvement of Mathematics Skills PreK-16 (AIMS PK-16) is a
partnership of nine independent school districts in South Texas and two
Hispanic-serving institutions of higher education, Del Mar (Community) College
and Texas A&amp;M University, Kingsville. The partner school districts serve
roughly 30,000 students, of whom 61% are minority students and 50% are
economically disadvantaged students. The overarching goal of AIMS PK-16 is to
prepare all students in the partner districts for success in college-level
mathematics courses by the time that they graduate from high school. This will
require the partnership to close significant achievement gaps among student
groups, especially raising the achievement of a sizeable Hispanic student
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With its emphasis on mathematics education,
AIMS PK-16 partners will engage preK-16 administrators, teachers, guidance
counselors and higher education faulty in action research, case studies and
analysis of student work. As a basis for establishing a challenging curriculum
for all students that emphasizes the development of mathematical skills
necessary for the college classroom, partner school districts teachers and
administrators will work with higher education faculty to vertically align
mathematical content in preK-12 courses as they relate to college expectations.
TEXTEAMS professional development for teachers, then, will be directed at
offering a mathematics curriculum that matches these expectations, and in
understanding and implementing the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
and TEKS-based assessments. To enhance teaching and learning, AIMS PK-16 will
support the appropriate use of technology to support richer mathematics and
problem-solving experiences for students. AIMS PK-16 school districts and
university partners are committed to serving as a laboratory for research about
the effectiveness of intervention strategies designed to increase mathematics
achievement of all students and closing various achievement
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;