* 0227755
* Revealing the Invisible Universe: from Nanoscope to Telescope
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Stephen Pompea, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 455,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the MPS Internships in Public Science
Education (MPS-IPSE) solicitation, NSF 02-064. The project aims to create
informal science programs that appeal to public interest by highlighting
scientific areas in which people are interested, and broaden the audience for
science by sending programs into the community. It will concurrently provide
valuable experience to undergraduate and graduate students in communicating
about science with public audiences. This is a collaborative effort among the
Flandrau Science Center, the Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
the Arizona State Museum and the Science and Math Education Center, and the
National Optical Astronomy Observatory at the University of Arizona. The project
will create three modular programs for the general public and middle-school
groups. The programs will highlight the use of optical and electron-beam
technologies to extend human vision out to the edge of the universe, and into
the atomic structure of materials. The first program, Electronic Detectives of
the Future and Past, will examine the use of electron microscopy to develop new
materials for the future, as well as to understand how Native Americans used
materials in ancient times. The second, called Revealing the Invisible, will
look at the use of infrared detectors on satellites to look both into space and
back at archeological sites on Earth. The third program, Bucky and the
Nanotubes, will tell the story of the accidental discovery of buckyballs during
the course of basic Astronomy research, and their potentially revolutionary
applications to the development of new materials. Program designs will emphasize
scientific process and people, and illustrate how and why recent advances have
been made. These stories of discovery will be accompanied by science
demonstrations as well as slide and video imagery. Hands-on activities will
accompany each program. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
descriptive programs about science that appeal to public interest. The programs
will highlight scientific areas which appeal to the public, and are expected to
broaden the audience for science. The project will concurrently provide valuable
experience to undergraduate and graduate students in communicating about science
with public audiences. Broad impacts of the project include participating
interns and the audiences they reach. The project will train a diverse group of
interns (18 undergraduates, 6 graduate students and 6 teachers over three years)
in science and informal science education. The programs they develop will
continue to be offered to school groups and the general public at the Science
Center after the life of the grant. Some modules will also be offered at the
Arizona State Museum extending the reach of science programming to a broader
audience. Annual attendance at the Science Center is approximately 60,000, of
which 25,000 are children in groups. Equivalent numbers at the State Museum are
50,000 and 5000. Discovery boxes will be created for teachers and museum docents
to use in the classroom to complement these programs. In addition, program
scripts, images and videos will be made available via the Internet for other
science centers to adapt and use. The project is supported by the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;