* 0227676
* SGER: Routing and Data Compression in Multi-Hop Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Anna Scaglione, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

Anna Scaglione&lt;br/&gt;Cornell University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the size,the
cost and the power consumption of communication devices and integrated circuits
de-&lt;br/&gt;creases designing a system of autonomous sensors,that can monitor
the environment and are capable&lt;br/&gt;of transporting and processing the
information in any point of the controlled area,becomes a
concrete&lt;br/&gt;goal.While the fabrication technology is mature to make
intelligent sensors with wireless communication&lt;br/&gt;interfaces which are
small and inexpensive,the main challenge in the design of these networks is at
the&lt;br/&gt;system level. The scenario analyzed in [4 ]is radically di .erent
from large networks such as the&lt;br/&gt;telephone network that have highly
hierarchical architectures:in [4 ]all the nodes have identical
function-&lt;br/&gt;alities,equal transmission bandwidth and are uniformly
distributed over a circular region of .xed
radius.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However,[4 ]is neglecting one fundamental aspect of
the problem:the nodes samples will be increas-&lt;br/&gt;ingly dependent as the
density of the nodes increases [7 ].This observation was used in [8 ]where it
was&lt;br/&gt;proven that distributed codes,that compress separately the
correlated samples in each node,can reduce&lt;br/&gt;the amount of bits per node
per square meter to an O (N .1 ),i.e.much faster than the transport
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;The limitation of the approach in [8 ]is the high complexity
required to have signi .cant compression gain&lt;br/&gt;without sharing one
single bit of data among the nodes Fortunately,there is no need to impose
such&lt;br/&gt;constraint.After all,the trademark of multi-hop networks is that
power e .cient transmission is achieved&lt;br/&gt;when the data travel through
several intermediate close-by nodes before reaching their .nal
destination.&lt;br/&gt;If neighboring nodes were jointly compressing the data
before forwarding them remotely,they could save&lt;br/&gt;many bits per sample
while transmitting with the same or even greater precision.A good
engineering&lt;br/&gt;design is compelled to exploit this fortunate coincidence
by combining routing and and classical (not dis-&lt;br/&gt;tributed)source
coding.This is the truly novel aspect of our project and,to the best of our
knowledge,&lt;br/&gt;this connection has not been studied before.