* 0227693
* Scanning Bodegas
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* George Bugliarello, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2006
* USD 597,897.00

0227693 Williams

This award is to the Polytechnic University of New York to support the activity
described below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners
include the Polytechnic University of New York (Lead Institution), Bodega
Association of United States Inc. New York, Datasym, All Long Island Cash
Register, Symbol Technologies Inc., South Bronx Overall Economic Development
Corporation, Accion-New York, New York National Bank and Wagner Graduate School
of Public Service-NYU. The goals for this program are: (1) create the necessary
organizational conditions to foster the transformation of knowledge into the
systems and services that will educate underrepresented minority retail owners
on the value of implementing point of service scanning technology, (2) introduce
a point of service scanning technology linked to cash registers in small grocery
stores owned by underrepresented communities in New York City, and (3) conduct
research to understand the resistance of immigrant and minority communities to
using technology. The partnership of companies that make, install and service
the scanners, city organizations responsible for economic development, and
financial institutions to process loans to the store owners has been formed. The
program develops training to overcome the knowledge, skill, and psychological
barriers associated with getting underrepresented minorities to adopt technology
and extends the use of scanned data to identify, record and order inventory.
Bilingual minority students are involved in the research and implementation
stages.

There is a genuine resistance by this minority-dominated retail market sector to
use of technology. The university has the confidence of the retailers
association to manage the installation of the equipment and training of
personnel in its use. The partnership includes financial institutions to make
loans to the retailers to purchase the equipment. The minority-dominated retail
sector will gain from use of this technology. The study of the factors that
cause the resistance to technology and how they were overcome will serve as a
model for technology insertion in other demographic sectors where there is
resistance to it. Extensive involvement of bilingual underrepresented students
in the effort has obvious societal benefits. In addition, the scanning equipment
will lead to increased profit for an estimated 8000 small grocery stores in New
York City by providing inventory control and reduced inventory costs. Retail
scanners have been shown to reduce cashier errors and increase profitability
nationally.