* 0227670
* Dynamics of Growing Networks and Evolving Media
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Sidney Redner, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

0227670&lt;br/&gt;Redner&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
investigations into the structure of growing networks. The networks to be
studied grow incrementally through popularity-based rules in which nodes that
already have a relatively large number of attached links have a higher
propensity for gaining new links. This mechanism appears to underlie a variety
of networked systems, such as the world-wide web, the Internet, and various
biological networks. The primary goal of this research is to develop a
comprehensive quantitative understanding of network structure through the
formulation and analysis of the governing rate equations for the evolution of
prototypical network models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several directions
in which research on network structure will be pursued. The role of decay
processes, such as the removal of nodes or of links at a finite rate, on the
integrity of networks will be studied. Another project will focus on the
percolation properties of networks that grow by independent node and link
creation events. The rate equation approach will also be extended to treat
protein interaction networks in which the growth mechanisms model fundamental
processes of small biological organisms, such as yeasts and bacteria. In
addition to studying local network properties, such as the degree distribution,
effort will be devoted to revealing community structures - tightly linked
subnetworks with weaker linkages between communities - within networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A parallel effort will be devoted to studying porous
networks that evolve due to the interaction of a reactive fluid that flows
through the medium. In the case of filtration, the pore space is gradually
constricted, because of trapping of suspended particles. In dissolution, the
pore space is enlarged by a fluid that gradually consumes the solid matrix. The
principal goal of this research is to understand the role of the coupling
between the pore space geometry and flow properties on long-time dynamical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be accomplished by constructing
simplified models that capture the essence of these processes and upon which
analytical calculations can be performed. The basic intellectual goal is to
elucidate the role of feedback between the time evolution of the flow and the
physical properties of the porous medium. In the problem of filtration, the
focus will be to develop a criterion to determine the useful lifetime of a
filter and to understand the kinetics of filtration due to the trapping of fine
particles. In dissolution, one basic goal is to understand the role of
longitudinal gradients on the basic dynamics of single tube growth. Another
major goal will be to quantify the transition between homogeneous dissolution
and wormhole growth as a function o the relative flow and reaction
rates.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical investigations
into the structure of growing networks. The networks to be studied grow
incrementally through popularity-based rules in which nodes that already have a
relatively large number of attached links have a higher propensity for gaining
new links. This mechanism appears to underlie a variety of networked systems,
such as the world-wide web, the Internet, and various biological networks. The
primary goal of this research is to develop a comprehensive quantitative
understanding of network structure through the formulation and analysis of the
governing rate equations for the evolution of prototypical network
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A parallel effort will be devoted to studying
porous networks that evolve due to the interaction of a reactive fluid that
flows through the medium. In the case of filtration, the pore space is gradually
constricted, because of trapping of suspended particles. In dissolution, the
pore space is enlarged by a fluid that gradually consumes the solid matrix. The
principal goal of this research is to understand the role of the coupling
between the pore space geometry and flow properties on long-time dynamical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;