* 0227995
* Northwest Alliance for Access to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2008
* Denice Denton, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 11/30/2008
* USD 4,154,980.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Washington (UW) requests funding
for the Northwest Alliance for Access&lt;br/&gt;to Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) to increase the quantity
and&lt;br/&gt;quality of people with disabilities in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Qualifications of
Partners&lt;br/&gt;The lead agency is the UW's award-winning DO-IT
(Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking&lt;br/&gt;and Technology) program,
which has conducted successful NSF PPD projects since 1992.&lt;br/&gt;Regional
site teams at the two largest STEM research institutions in the State of
Washington, the&lt;br/&gt;UW and Washington State University (WSU), will
collaborate with K-12 and postsecondary&lt;br/&gt;schools, employers, and
leading STEM research institutions in neighboring states -
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Idaho, the University of Oregon, Oregon State
University, and the University of&lt;br/&gt;Alaska in Anchorage and Fairbanks.
The project will partner with ENTRY POINT! to place STEM&lt;br/&gt;postsecondary
students with disabilities in paid internships. It will collaborate with
MESA&lt;br/&gt;(Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement) adapting for
students with disabilities the&lt;br/&gt;hands-on science activities and teacher
training strategies it uses with racial/ethnic minority and&lt;br/&gt;female
students. The Alliance builds on established collaborations and brings together
practices&lt;br/&gt;that have proven successful individually, to create a
unique, comprehensive set of interventions.&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and examples of
interventions include:&lt;br/&gt;1. The Northwest Alliance will increase the
number of students with disabilities pursuing&lt;br/&gt;STEM academic programs
and careers. Interventions: Motivational college/career transition&lt;br/&gt;and
STEM fairs for precollege students and STEM academic/career activities for
college&lt;br/&gt;students that identify participants for the AccessSTEM Team in
objective 2 interventions.&lt;br/&gt;2. The Alliance will provide on-going
support and encourage high school and college&lt;br/&gt;students with
disabilities who show interest and aptitude in STEM with peer
and&lt;br/&gt;mentor interaction, work experiences, and other activities as they
transition to college,&lt;br/&gt;graduate school, and employment. Interventions:
Students join the AccessSTEM Team to&lt;br/&gt;engage in an on-line community,
mentoring, fields trips, research, paid internships, and
other&lt;br/&gt;activities to assure their success in STEM careers and promote
the success of others.&lt;br/&gt;3. The Alliance will provide precollege
educators and staff with strategies, tools and&lt;br/&gt;support to create more
inclusive programs for students with disabilities, where they
are&lt;br/&gt;encouraged to pursue STEM studies and careers. Interventions:
Training and curriculum&lt;br/&gt;materials through established networks of
MESA, Educational Services Districts, teacher&lt;br/&gt;training programs, and
professional organizations; provide educators with opportunities
to&lt;br/&gt;work with students who have disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;4. The Alliance
will help STEM postsecondary faculty, support staff, counselors,
and&lt;br/&gt;employers fully include students with disabilities in their
courses and programs and create&lt;br/&gt;accessible facilities and electronic
resources. Interventions: Opportunities for faculty to&lt;br/&gt;receive
training and work with students with disabilities in research; assistance in
making&lt;br/&gt;facilities, equipment, distance learning, and Web pages
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;Each intervention is associated with measurables that
provide evidence of effectiveness. The&lt;br/&gt;National Center on
Postsecondary Educational Supports (NCSPES) will evaluate
project&lt;br/&gt;outcomes and impacts, conduct research on factors that promote
success for students with&lt;br/&gt;disabilities, describe replication models,
and help disseminate results.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the
Northwest Alliance&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations with MESA and other programs will
broaden the participation of racial/ethnic&lt;br/&gt;minorities and females with
disabilities in STEM. Wide distribution of a replication model,
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;materials, and other project products and creation of a
searchable Knowledge Base on the project&lt;br/&gt;Web site will enhance
scientific and technological understanding and maximize project
impact.&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes will benefit society by making STEM
opportunities available to all citizens and&lt;br/&gt;increasing the number of
STEM professionals and leaders who have disabilities.