* 0227899
* Northwest Ohio Partnership on Alternative Energy Systems
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Frank Calzonetti, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2006
* USD 600,000.00

0227899 Calzonetti

This award is to the University of Toledo to support the activity described
below for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include the
University of Toledo (Lead Institution), Bowling Green University, Owens
Community College, IQ Systems, First Solar, Cooltech, Dana Corporation, General
Motors Corporation, Owens-Corning, Pilkington, Center for Technology
Commercialization, EISC, Inc, Regional Technology Alliance, NASA Glenn, Regional
Growth Partnership, City of Toledo, COSI-Toledo, and Toledo Zoo. The activities
of the program include the following: (1) improvements in the technical skills
of the workforce by design of the technical programs at Owens Community College
in the area of alternative energies, (2) participation of African American and
Hispanic students from the Toledo EXCEL Program, (3) promotion of related
industrial and business development through support provided by the Regional
Growth Partnership and the Regional Technology Alliance, (4) increased public
awareness of alternative energy systems, (5) development of statewide support
through the Ohio Alternative Energy Development Council, (6) transfer of
alternative energy research and technology from the University of Toledo and
Bowling Green University to the partner companies.

The program will increase academic research on alternative energy systems,
develop the energy systems technologies, make innovations in manufacturing of
these systems, develop the workforce for these companies, increase the
participation of underrepresented populations in alternative energy systems
technology, improve the environment from responsible manufacturing and less-
polluting energy systems, and promote regional cluster development and increased
investment in alternative energy technology.

The region of northwest Ohio is in a state of economic depression. The proposed
effort will provide new technologies, new companies, and new jobs. The creation
of new jobs will have a significant impact on the region, which currently has a
high unemployment. Involvement of underrepresented groups in alternative energy
technology has obvious societal implications. In addition, lowered energy costs
and environmental improvements from less-polluting energy will have societal
benefits.