* 0227221
* Learning to Teach, Teaching to Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Dennis Chaconas, Oakland Unified School District
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 05/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The core partners of the Learning to Teach, Teaching to Learn (LT2L) MSP project
are the Oakland Unified School District and California State University, Hayward
School of Education and Allied Studies and School of Science. The Lawrence Hall
of Science, University of California, Berkeley and the Education Trust are
service providers who are integral to the planning and implementation of this
effort. The Partnership establishes a sustained collaboration to align a
seamless teacher recruitment, preparation and development continuum in
Mathematics and Science across Grades K-12. The program design focuses on the
following goals: a) recruitment of undergraduate mathematics and science majors
and tutors with close ties to Oakland; b) restructuring of preservice programs
to better prepare new teachers entering a diverse and low income urban school
district and to comply with state induction legislation; c) increasing teacher
retention by establishing a culture of collegial support and life-long "learning
to teach," and d) increased student achievement.

Colleagues across experience levels, that is university faculty, inservice
teachers, and preservice teaching candidates, will have more frequent and
substantive exchanges with one another, on-site, at the university and in the
science and mathematics community. Ongoing analysis and evaluation of the
partnership will include the impact on academic achievement in mathematics and
science of students in classrooms involved in the program.

Recruitment focuses on mathematics and science majors as well as current Oakland
tutors. The latter possess B.A.s and work in Project SOAR (GEAR-UP) and
Americorps. Undergraduate STEM majors will be engaged in "Communicating Math"
and "Communicating Science" at UC-Berkeley to engage undergraduates in co-
teaching of mathematics lessons with veteran teachers. Preservice and New
Teacher Preparation will engage college faculty in research on effective teacher
preparation and professional development and look to the development of more
flexible alternative credentialing programs. Retention will be supported through
differentiated professional development experiences driven by teacher
experiences and site needs. This will include Education Trust's Standards-in-
Practice concentrating on the examination of student work to focus the
teaching/learning process, lesson study and peer coaching, principals
instructional seminars, subject matter partners with expertise in mathematics
and science, science and mathematics leadership institutes, middle school
science and mathematics initiatives, and Teaching Fellows.

These efforts to construct a seamless teacher professional continuum are built
upon past work among the partners, but which now will be brought into coherence.
The curricular and professional development offerings from the Lawrence Hall of
Science will be infused along the continuum. The various teacher development
efforts, preservice and inservice will be refocused on the learning expectations
of the K-12 students as well as the State of California credentialing
guidelines. Ultimately, the Partnership intends to improve student achievement
as a result of more highly qualified professionals in classrooms.