* 0227289
* Aperiodic order: spectral theory, combinatorics, and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,07/31/2004
* David Damanik, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 20,914.00

The central object of study are Schrodinger operators with
potentials&lt;br/&gt;displaying aperiodic order. In one dimension there have
been recent&lt;br/&gt;advances in the understanding of their spectral and
quantum dynamical&lt;br/&gt;properties, particularly in the case of the
Fibonacci potential and&lt;br/&gt;related models, so-called Sturmian potentials,
which are the standard&lt;br/&gt;models of one-dimensional quasicrystals. It is
the goal of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;research to extend the theory to larger
classes of potentials in one&lt;br/&gt;dimension and to tackle the higher
dimensional case. A crucial tool in one&lt;br/&gt;dimension is the trace map, an
energy-indexed dynamical system which can&lt;br/&gt;be used to characterize and
study the spectrum of the operators. Along&lt;br/&gt;with combinatorial
partition results and Gordon-type criteria one can&lt;br/&gt;obtain good bounds
on generalized eigenfunctions from which one can deduce&lt;br/&gt;spectral and
quantum dynamical consequences. It appears feasible that this&lt;br/&gt;approach
is applicable to potentials beyond the class of Sturmian&lt;br/&gt;potentials --
sufficiently low complexity should suffice to induce&lt;br/&gt;partitions and
trace maps. In higher dimensions the main goal is to find&lt;br/&gt;an analog of
Gordon's criterion which can serve as a link between&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics and
spectral theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematics of aperiodic order is a
young emerging field that has&lt;br/&gt;sparked a lot of research activity since
the mid-nineties. Researchers&lt;br/&gt;from disciplines as diverse as spectral
theory, group theory, dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems, combinatorics, and algebraic
topology have found a common&lt;br/&gt;ground that was motivated by the
discovery of quasicrystals in 1984&lt;br/&gt;and the subsequent reconsideration
of the nature of order and ordered&lt;br/&gt;structures. By now, quite a number
of structural models for quasicrystals&lt;br/&gt;have been proposed. Joint
efforts are being undertaken to investigate&lt;br/&gt;their properties and shed
light on why quasicrystals exist, how they form,&lt;br/&gt;why they are stable.
Regarding their electronic transport properties, it&lt;br/&gt;is expected that
quasicrystals may exhibit anomalous behavior. It is&lt;br/&gt;therefore planned
to study transport properties of Sturmian and related&lt;br/&gt;models from this
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;