* 0227992
* Integrated Accessible Microscopical Workstation for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Richard Borgens, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 04/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to construct an
integrated accessible microscopical&lt;br/&gt;workstation that will allow
students with disabilities to independently perform common&lt;br/&gt;biological
laboratory techniques, thereby enabling individuals to actively participate
in&lt;br/&gt;scientific experimentation and the opportunity to pursue a career
in the SMET fields.&lt;br/&gt;This multi-purpose workstation is to be used
primarily by persons with mobility&lt;br/&gt;impairments. All aspects of the
integrated workstation will be operated from a central&lt;br/&gt;computer
interface, which will be used to automatically control and monitor
external&lt;br/&gt;peripheral devices so that biological experiments can be
performed. Using a computer&lt;br/&gt;as the user interface and central control
of the accessible laboratory workstation is&lt;br/&gt;ideal, because the
personal computer can accommodate various disabilities using&lt;br/&gt;different
pointing devices and accessibility software utilities. Total keystroke control
of&lt;br/&gt;the integrated workstation will be emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;The intent
of this proposal is to develop an accessible laboratory workstation that
will&lt;br/&gt;allow students and investigators with mobility impairments to
perform the majority of&lt;br/&gt;microscopical and histological laboratory
procedures, most notably in the biological&lt;br/&gt;sciences, with minimal
assistance and setup. The integrated microscopy workstation&lt;br/&gt;will use
software to control all features of operation, including an
automated&lt;br/&gt;microscope, motorized stage, bulk slide autoloader, and
digital video camera. The&lt;br/&gt;workstation will allow a student with a
disability to independently load up to fifty&lt;br/&gt;individual slides, focus,
change objectives, filter wheels, illuminator and condensor,
and&lt;br/&gt;position the microscopy specimen translationally in X and Y
directions and rotationally&lt;br/&gt;using theta control - all controlled
through a computer that will also capture images of&lt;br/&gt;the histological
tissues to be managed and analyzed for anatomical studies. Thus,
the&lt;br/&gt;only assistance the student with a disability requires is for
someone to load the slides.&lt;br/&gt;All other phases of microscopy and image
analysis can be performed without further&lt;br/&gt;assistance.&lt;br/&gt;The
accessible microscopy workstation will be evaluated both in a classroom
setting&lt;br/&gt;that performs typical undergraduate and post-graduate
biological experimentation and&lt;br/&gt;in research laboratory setting that
performs sophisticated laboratory procedures. Ten&lt;br/&gt;high school and
college students with a range of mobility impairments will be
assessed&lt;br/&gt;in the first year by their ability to use a computer and
their specific ergonomics relating&lt;br/&gt;to the construction of the
accessible workstation. In the second year the students will&lt;br/&gt;be tested
on their ability to use the workstation to accomplish a variety of
laboratory&lt;br/&gt;procedures. Educators will also be queried as to their
capability of incorporating the&lt;br/&gt;workstation into the classroom
environment.&lt;br/&gt;University and local high school educators and Special
Education specialists and&lt;br/&gt;statewide organizations, like the Council of
Volunteers/Organizations for Hoosiers with&lt;br/&gt;Disabilities (COVOH) and
Assisting Technology through Awareness in Indiana&lt;br/&gt;(ATTAIN), which
advocate the use of assistive technologies for persons with
disabilities,&lt;br/&gt;will be utilized to disseminate findings and promote the
use of the integrated microscopy&lt;br/&gt;workstation.