* 0227128
* Texas Middle and Secondary Mathematics Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2013
* Lesa Beverly, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,691,275.00

Stephen F. Austin State University and twelve independent school districts
establish the Texas Middle and Secondary Mathematics Project as an effort to
positively impact student achievement in mathematics through better preparation
of teachers to teach mathematics. The partner school districts serve over 40,000
students, with variable percentages of minority students (non-white students
range from 9% to 64% of student population in the different districts) and high
percentages of economically disadvantaged students (28% to 67% of student
population). As is true in Texas as a whole, the teacher workforce in partner
districts does not match the diversity within the student population, and many
new teachers of mathematics are not certified in the discipline and have not
majored in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas Middle and Secondary
Mathematics Project expects to improve the capacity of mathematics teachers in
grades 4-12 to impact student performance within the partner districts
by:&lt;br/&gt;* increasing the number of qualified and certified mathematics
teachers directly as sixty middle school and thirty high school mathematics
teacher will be produced; &lt;br/&gt;* preparing teachers to become Texas Master
Mathematics teachers who will, in turn, provide leadership and mentoring for
other teachers; and &lt;br/&gt;* increasing student performance at higher levels
in mathematics through classroom experience and summer institutes for students.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition, an underlying premise of the partnership is that higher
education mathematics faculty are not generally accustomed to thinking about the
pedagogical needs of the middle or high school teacher. Therefore, the Project
will improve the awareness and involvement of mathematics higher education
faculty regarding preparation and professional development of teachers by
involving mathematics faculty from a variety of higher education institutions
across Texas in the effort, and noting evidence within college/university
mathematics departments of curricular and programmatic changes designed to
better meet the needs of grades 4-12 mathematics teachers.&lt;br/&gt;