* 0227232
* Adaptive Design of Experiments for Optimal Uniformity in Semiconductor Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Demetre Economou, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2006
* USD 335,362.00

&lt;br/&gt;Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineers in the microelectronics
industry are frequently faced with the problem of selecting tool design and/or
operating conditions (recipes) that produce high uniformity in the etching of
thin films. Experiments that determine optimal uniformity conditions are
expensive and constraint on input variables have to be satisfied at the optimum.
Standard response-surface-methodology (RSM) can handle simple but not
complicated constraints. This work is aimed at developing a new algorithmic
approach to inequality constrained RSM with application to plasma etching. This
will include the development of a high-fidelity fundamental plasma reactor
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will consist of:&lt;br/&gt; -Formulation of
the problem as an adaptive sequential design of E-optimal experiments based on
linear, or if necessary, nonlinear models;&lt;br/&gt; -Development of numerical
solution techniques for the above optimization;&lt;br/&gt; -Development of a
high-fidelity model for a dual-coil inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching
tool;&lt;br/&gt; -Investigation of connections between sequential RSM and
adaptive control; and&lt;br/&gt; -Studying the properties of the algorithms
developed through computer simulations and laboratory and industrial
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction with
an industrial collaborator will ensure focus on realistic problems encountered
in the semiconductor industry. The project has potential infrastructure benefits
in that students trained in developing this methodology would be of great use to
industry. Given that over 50% of undergraduates at the University of Houston are
minorities and that the project will have heavy undergraduate participation, the
involvement of students from underrepresented groups can be expected.&lt;br/&gt;