* 0227879
* Virtual Markets in the Wireless Communication &amp; Computation Grid
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Vincent Manno, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2006
* USD 719,477.00

0227879&lt;br/&gt;McKnight &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the Tufts
University to support the activity described below for 24 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include the Tufts University (Lead
Institution), Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Northeastern University, ETH Zurich, Mystic Valley Development Commission,
Btexact Technologies, Cisco Systems, Dialout.net, Fractal Antenna, NimbleMicro,
The Telmarc Group LLC.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed goals are to create a
collaborative pool of Massachusetts research universities in the wireless
communication sector, to improve education and integrating wireless
communication technology into the school system, to investigate the tremendous
value that wireless grid networks offer to increase access to wireless
communication, and to develop new economic sectors utilizing these ubiquitous
networks to access grid networks. Wireless communication and computation multi-
provider and multi service grid services for usability and network, power,
spectrum, and economic efficiency are being designed. The critical
characteristics and features of the service layers that may be required for both
virtual and real organizations to do business across a wireless communications
and computation grid will be identified. The virtual organizations model will be
extended to include the concept of a virtual market across a wireless
communications and computation grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wireless
communication and computation grid services platform, designed for usability as
well as network, power, spectrum, and economic efficiency, will increase access
and engender productivity gains that crosses multiple market sectors. This model
will transform the way that the national research enterprise innovates and help
to create collaborative networks that strengthen local and regional economies.
Communication and computation networks are a necessary part of the
infrastructure for economic well-being and growth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;