* 0227630
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring: SUMS Institute
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Joaquin Bustoz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 03/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

The Strengthening the Understanding of Mathematics and Sciences (SUMS) Institute
at Arizona State University administers the Math Science Honors Program (MSHP)
throughout the state as well as other similar programs. MSHP is a residential
summer program that enrolls students in a college-level mathematics or science
course. SUMS also provides support to its students who enter college and pursue
graduate study. Undergraduates receive mentoring, tutoring, and scholarships or
student employment. They also provide support to the pre-college
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to provide a successful
university experience for students from underrepresented groups and to enhance
their prospects for future academic success. During the first 11 years of its
experience, participants of the Math-Science Honors Program were students from
underrepresented minority groups exclusively. In 1996, the program broadened its
focus and participation was opened to all Arizona high school students meeting
the program's academic and socioeconomic critera. Its participants are now
ninety-seven percent minority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute has had broad
impact through the participation of 1600 minority high school students, half of
whom later enrolled in Arizona State University (ASU). Of those who enrolled at
ASU, 265 have completed their degrees in science or mathematics, including 15
students who have earned graduate degrees. Twenty students are currently in
graduate programs in science and mathematics. A major strength of the project is
its sustained existence over the past 15 years.&lt;br/&gt;