* 0227325
* Vertically Integrated Partnerships K-16 (VIP K-16)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2009
* Nancy Shapiro, University System of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 12/31/2009
* USD 8,300,293.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Propos
al No.: 0227325&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Vertically Integrated Partnerships
K-16&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Nancy Shapiro&lt;br/&gt;Lead Institution:
University System of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;The University System of Maryland (USM)
in partnership with the Montgomery County Public Schools (MCPS) will develop a
sustainable K-16 professional development model for high school science
teachers, prospective pre-service science teaching candidates, and college
faculty. The project, "Vertically Integrated Partnerships K-16" (VIP K-16) has
two major aims (a) To enrich science teacher knowledge in order to improve high
school science instruction to better enable students to meet rigorous state
science standards as measured on the Maryland Science High School Assessments,
and (b) To improve the teaching skills of college science faculty in order to
improve the quality of undergraduate general education science
courses.&lt;br/&gt;USM institutions that will participate as core partners, with
commitments to institutional change, include the University of Maryland College
Park, the University of Maryland Baltimore County, and Towson University.
Montgomery College and the Montgomery County Public Schools complete the core
member partners of VIP K-16. The University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute,
the University of Maryland Universities at Shady Grove, the University of
Maryland Center for Environmental Science, and the University System of Maryland
are service provider partners. Through summer institutes and school-year
collaborative sessions, small professional learning communities-vertically
integrated partnerships (VIPs) consisting of teachers, STEM disciplinary
faculty, graduate students, and undergraduate interns and pre-service science
teachers-will collegially learn about and develop best instructional practices
and instructional materials linked to high school assessments. Phasing in
biology, earth/space science, and physics/chemistry over a three-year period,
VIP K-16 will involve 350 science teachers serving approximately 37,000 high
school students, and substantively involving 36-university
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;The VIP K-16 will bring together high school science teachers
with their peers from Montgomery College and the USM institutions to form the
"Maryland Science Faculty," charged with collaboratively rethinking and
redesigning how science is learned, both in high school and in college. To that
end, the Partnership commits to five key goals: (1) Improve student learning
outcomes, as measured by high school assessments; (2) Improve teacher content
knowledge in the sciences by providing high quality professional development to
inservice high school teachers; (3) Improve college faculty teaching skills by
providing them with expert mentor/master teacher during summer institutes; (4)
Enhance graduate student teaching skills by exposing them to expert
mentor/master teachers during summer workshops, and having them complete
teaching portfolios; and (5) Increase the number of undergraduate science
students who choose teaching as a career&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;