* 0227833
* The Florida Innovation Partnership
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Martin Wanielista, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2004
* USD 600,000.00

0227833&lt;br/&gt;Soileau &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of Central Florida to support the activity described below for 24 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 02060).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include the University of Central Florida (Lead Institution), University of
South Florida, Florida Institute of Technology, Florida Agricultural and
Mechanical University, City of Orlando, City of Tampa, Florida High Technology
Corridor Council, Mid Florida Economic Development Commission, Museum of Science
and Industry, Orange County Government, Orlando Science Center, Tampa Bay
Technology Partnership, Applied Photonics, Central Florida Innovation
Corporation, Central Florida Technology Partnership, Florida/NASA Incubator,
Florida Business Incubator Association, Florida Photonics Cluster, Laser
Institute of America, Team of Professional Internet Entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed goal is to develop the infrastructure in education, technology
transfer, commercialization, and entrepreneurship in the technology sectors of
photonics, space science, and simulation and software. &lt;br/&gt;The following
activities are proposed: (1) develop education and training programs to increase
the number and sophistication of technology entrepreneurs and high tech
entrepreneural start-ups in Florida, (2) identify commercial applications of
developed and developing technology and facilitate and foster technology
transfer, (3) provide special program curriculum and mentors to underrepresented
groups, and (4) provide infrastructure to enable the innovation, technology
commercialization and entrepreneural process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Central
Florida economy is largely dependent on tourism, which provides low-paying
service sector jobs with limited opportunity for advancement. Minorities
constitute a large percentage of the workforce in this industry, but they are
underrepresented in the technology and entrepreneurship sectors. The program has
a strong effort to recruit, educate and train entrepreneurs from the regional
minority academic institutions. The current program will create new start-up
companies and train personnel to work in these companies. The new high-tech jobs
will be considerably higher in pay scales for the employees.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;