* 0227595
* COST-IST (EU)/NSF (USA) Workshop on Networking; September/October 2002, Crete, Greece
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Abraham Matta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 04/30/2004
* USD 45,000.00

We propose to organize a joint COST-IST (EU) / NSF (USA) workshop on Networking
in September/October 2002, in Crete, Greece. There are two main objectives for
the proposed workshop. The first is to discuss and try to shed some more light
into key, new and upcoming networking technologies by focusing on the driving
fundamental aspects and principles. A better understanding could help better
steer the upcoming advancements with the expected benefits in reduced
complexity, improved performance and enhanced services. The second main
objective is to give the opportunity to the networking communities in Europe and
USA to get together and have a first-hand exposure to the advancements and
strengths in the other side of the Atlantic. The targeted balance in the
participation of researchers from the two sides of the Atlantic will help
achieve this cross-fertilization objective, bring the benefits to both
communities and help advance the technology. As funding is a major driving
force, another objective of this workshop is to provide a forum that could help
the workshop-sponsoring funding agencies from the EU and USA identify the key
and required networking technologies and direct their funding accordingly. Key
networking areas represented by the best researchers from EU and USA will be
targeted. The focus of the proposed workshop may be divided into three broad
themes: Internet Modeling and Control Overlay Networks, Content Distribution
Networks, Peer-to-Peer Broadband Wireless, Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, Hybrid
Networks The precise focus will be determined by the makeup of the participants.
Program officers from COST-IST and ANIR-NSF are expected to attend the workshop.
The General Workshop Chair is Ioannis Stavrakakis, University of Athens. The
Program Co-chairs are Ioannis Stavrakakis, Ibrahim Matta (the PI) and Michael
Smirnov (Fraunhofer FOKUS, Germany). Ibrahim Matta will handle the NSF funding
and Michael Smirnov will handle the COST funding for the workshop. After the
conclusion of the workshop, the organizing committee will furnish a report to
the COST-IST (EU) and ANIR-NSF (USA), and will make it publicly available to
participants an others via the workshop site.