* 0227473
* SGER: Fractal Surface Enhanced Chemical & Biological Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,998.00

This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award. It is in response
to the "Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems"
Dear Colleague letter, NSF-02-112. In this project, novel nanostructured fractal
and fractal-microcavity sensors will be fabricated. These sensors are expected
to provide unsurpassed sensitivity in optical detection of molecules in minute
quantities, including small amounts of biological and chemical agents. The
sensors are based on fractal metal-dielectric composites, which can support
various plasmon modes resulting in giant enhancement of optical responses.
Plasmon modes in fractal materials experience localization so that the
electromagnetic energy is accumulated and concentrated in nanometer-scale areas,
"hot spots," leading to the strongly enhanced local fields. The resonating
areas, hot spots, can act as nano-antennas with different resonance frequencies.
Combining the energy-concentrating effects from localized optical excitations in
plasmonic nano-resonators with micro-resonators based on dielectric cavities,
can result in record-high enhancement of optical phenomena. This research could
lead to new optical sensors with unsurpassed sensitivity. The proposed research,
supported by synergistic activities with Center for Sensing Science and
Technology at Purdue will integrate cutting-edge research in sensor science and
technology with top-flight education and training.

This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award. It is in response
to the "Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems"
Dear Colleague letter, NSF-02-112. In this project, novel nanostructured fractal
and fractal-microcavity sensors will be fabricated. These sensors are expected
to provide unsurpassed sensitivity in optical detection of molecules in minute
quantities, including small amounts of biological and chemical agents. The
sensors are based on fractal metal-dielectric composites, which can support
various plasmon modes resulting in giant enhancement of optical responses.
Plasmons represent collective oscillations of electrons in metals and metal-
dielectric composites and they are known to be a major reason for surface-
enhanced spectroscopy, in which plasmonic nanostructures lead to many orders of
magnitude increases in the sensitivities of optical spectroscopies. Plasmon
modes in fractal materials experience localization so that the electromagnetic
energy is accumulated and concentrated in nanometer-scale areas, "hot spots,"
leading to the strongly enhanced local fields. Combining the energy-
concentrating effects from localized optical excitations in plasmonic fractal
modes with micro-resonators based on dielectric cavities can result in record-
high enhancement of optical phenomena. This research can eventually lead to
developing new optical sensors with unsurpassed sensitivity. The research,
supported by synergistic activities with the Center for Sensing Science and
Technology at Purdue will integrate cutting-edge research in sensor science and
technology with top-flight education and training.

