* 0227842
* SGER:    Feasibility Study of Novel Instrumentation With nN Force Resolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Andreas Polycarpou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 09/30/2003
* USD 71,360.00

Feasibility Study of Novel Instrumentation with nN Force
Resolution&lt;br/&gt;NSF SGER Proposal submitted to Dr. Jorn Larsen-
Basse&lt;br/&gt;By Andreas A. Polycarpou, Department of Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering, UIUC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The performance and
durability of many devices that experience contact, especially
micro/&lt;br/&gt;nanodevices is heavily influenced by the surface properties and
interfacial phenomena like adhesion,friction and wear. Research in the areas of
friction, adhesion and nanomechanical properties of advanced engineering systems
and miniature systems, such as the Head Disk Interface (HDI) in magnetic storage
and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), have advanced considerably. As the
size scale of miniature systems shrinks further, finer tolerances are required,
surfaces become smoother, thin-films become thinner and phenomena like strong
intermolecular adhesion forces, high stiction and catastrophic failures at the
interfaces may occur. Even though many of these problems have been alleviated or
resolved, a major issue that remains and will be tackled in this research is the
direct force measurement&lt;br/&gt;with extremely low
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed one year exploratory research
deals with the co-development and purchase of novel instrumentation capable for
direct force measurements with very high resolution of 1 nN. Current state of
the art direct force instruments are capable of 0.5 nN - 1 nN force resolution.
The 3 orders of magnitude improvement in the force resolution will be accomplish
by:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Significantly reducing the mass of the current systems from
over 200 mg to 20 mg (using a&lt;br/&gt; combination of integrated circuit-IC
and MEMS technologies).&lt;br/&gt;(b) Incorporating active vibration
cancellation inside the force transducer.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Improving the drive
electronics of the force transducer and actuator to minimize thermal &lt;br/&gt;
drift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed instrumentation will then be
integrated with an existing multi-mode Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) and will be
used to perform preliminary interfacial nanoscale experiments to demonstrate the
nN force resolution capabilities. Specifically, two types of experiments will be
performed: (a) iasub nanoindentationl-A experiments for extracting material
properties of sub 10 nm ultra thin layers and (b) adhesion and pull-off force
experiments using isidealln surfaces and actual surfaces from microsystems,
e.g., low flying head-disk interfaces from magnetic
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The significance of this research is that it will
enable the feasibility of novel direct force measurement instrumentation capable
of nN and possibly sub nN resolution and the capability of performing
qualitative nanoindentation and adhesion experiments at small scales that were
not possible before. The proposed research is exploratory and high risk due to
the novel prototype low mass direct force transducers. The success of this
research will have a great impact on the future of nanoscale testing and
nanotribology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PI's background in macrotribology and
his approach of applying micro/nano techniques to explain phenomena at multiple
length scales, his strong instrumentation background and his strong relation
with novel sensor manufacturers, and industrial companies place him in a unique
position to develop novel instrumentation capable of nN force resolution and
investigate interfacial phenomena and mechanical properties of sub-nm thick
layers.&lt;br/&gt;