* 0227714
* Undergraduate Diversity in the Society for the Study of Evolution and the Society for Systematic Biologists
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Scott Edwards, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2004
* USD 60,000.00

0227714&lt;br/&gt;Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Society for the Study of
Evolution (SSE) and the Society of Systematic&lt;br/&gt;Biologists (SSB) are the
premier Societies in the US for discussion and&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of ideas
relating to evolution. This proposal will provide&lt;br/&gt;travel costs,
registration costs, and lodging costs to approximately 15&lt;br/&gt;minority
undergraduates for the annual meetings of these societies for
the&lt;br/&gt;years 2003 - 2006. These undergraduates will also present posters
at the&lt;br/&gt;meetings. The proposal is an outgrowth of a pilot program
conducted at&lt;br/&gt;the 2001 meetings which raised awareness and enthusiasm
for the need to&lt;br/&gt;broaden the undergraduate base at the meetings. During
the meetings the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates will be mentored by graduate student
and faculty mentors,&lt;br/&gt;who will help the undergraduate network at the
meetings, help demystify&lt;br/&gt;talks for the undergraduates, and generally
make the students feel more&lt;br/&gt;welcome at the meetings. There will also
be an official mentoring session&lt;br/&gt;for undergraduates, consisting of a
'pep-talk'/seminar that will help&lt;br/&gt;encourage the students to prepare
for careers and/or graduate school in&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary/environmental
biology. These activities will be supplemented&lt;br/&gt;by social activities
not covered by this grant, as well as further efforts&lt;br/&gt;on the part of
both societies for encouraging undergraduate participation,&lt;br/&gt;such as
reduced registration fees, daily fees for attendance by students&lt;br/&gt;at
the host site, and an undergraduate poster session. These
activities&lt;br/&gt;will help increase the amount of minority and other
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;participation at the meetings, and ultimately should
have a positive&lt;br/&gt;effect on minority participation in evolutionary
biology nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;