* 0227557
* Center for Learning and Teaching with a Focus on Research for Developing Instructional Materials in Science
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2010
* Edward Smith, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Gibbs
* 09/30/2010
* USD 10,494,009.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), through its
education reform initiative Project 2061, will partner with Northwestern
University, the University of Michigan, and Michigan State University to create
a Center for Learning and Teaching that focuses on research and development
issues related to improving curriculum materials for K-12 science. This new
Center for Instructional Materials in Science will serve a critical national
need to help all students achieve science literacy. It will help to foster a new
generation of leadership with specific expertise in the analysis of curriculum
materials and in their development, evaluation and implementation. The new
Center will focus on three main goals: 1) to develop the national instructional
materials development infrastructure at the doctoral and postdoctoral level; 2)
to provide relevant inservice and/or preservice training to science teachers and
other professionals; and 3) to conduct research on questions related to
instructional materials for science at the highest level. The project plans to
enroll 30 Ph. D. students (most of whom will be supported for three years under
this award) and support the professional development of an additional 30
postdoctoral students. The professional development program will impact 400
science teachers and will foster the professional development of 30 other
teachers, training them to become teacher leaders.



