* 0227687
* Pre-Alpine Terranes of the Balkan Peninsula, Bulgaria: A Field, Geochronologic and Geothermobarometric Assessment of their Tectonic Significance
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Samuel Mukasa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/28/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This international collaborative research project will bring together
researchers from the United States and Bulgaria. The principal investigators are
Dr. Samuel Mukasa from the University of Michigan and Dr. Ivan Haydoutov from
the Geological Institute of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. They propose to
establish timing constraints on pre-Alpine history of the
Balkans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a 12 month study to date the
crystalization, metamorphic and cooling ages of ophiolitic and metamorphic rocks
from the Rhodope and Srednegorie regions of the Balkan Peninsula, with the goal
of reconstructing the pre-Alpine evolution of this region and the tectonic ties
from pre-Alpine Europe through to Turkey and regions farther south and east. The
Balkan region currently represents a major hole in our ability to reconstruct
pre-late Cretaceous tectonic terranes along the northern and southern margins of
the Tethys ocean, with major uncertainties about correlating events and terranes
between Austria/former Yugoslavia and Turkey. This project is an excellent
opportunity to begin to compile the data that will be needed to unravel the
older tectonic history of the Balkan region and to connect the tectonic terranes
and deformational events from western to eastern
Tethys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in earth sciences research fulfills
the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.