* 0227869
* The Biomedical Engineering Partnership Program at FIU: Fostering Technology Entrepreneurship, Commercialization, and Clinical Implementation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Chin-Sheng Chen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2005
* USD 599,612.00

0227869 Prasad

This award is to the Florida International University to support the activity
described below for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060).

Partners The partners include Florida International University (Lead
Institution), Baptist Health Systems of South Florida, Beckman Coulter, Inc,
Bioheart, Inc, Boston Scientific Corporation, Cardis (Johnson & Johnson), IDEXX
Laboratories, Inc, Medtronic Peripheral Vascular, Miami Cardiac and Vascular
Institute, Miami Children's Hospital, Mt. Sinai Medical Center, Scion Cardio
Vascular, Scion International, Inc, Syntheon, LLC, and The beacon Council.

The program establishes a permanent infrastructure for entrepreneurial and
technology transfer activity at Florida International University with a focus on
the biomedical industry. The infrastructure provides a venue for faculty and
students to engage industry to transfer their developmental projects to
commercialization. The region has a balanced mixture of large and small
entrepreneurial corporations in the medical device and pharmaceutical industries
that rank in the top 13 in the nation. In addition to commercialization of the
research and development output of the university, an activity that will create
economic wealth and new jobs, the activities supported by this award will
educate students in biomedical engineering for the workforce for the regional
industry.

The biomedical industry is growing very rapidly with large investments of
venture capital. South Florida has established this industry as a top priority
for economic growth. The goal of this proposal is to provide the workforce to
enable the industry to grow in the region. The creation of new jobs will have a
significant impact on the region. Florida International University currently
ranks in the top 20 in graduation of Hispanic and African American engineers in
the nation. In addition, the population of the region is high in
underrepresented groups. Hence, the award broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in the technological and economic enterprise of the
region.