* 0227974
* Algebraic Structures in Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 03/28/2002,06/30/2004
* Alexander Voronov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 41,607.00

DMS-0104004&lt;br/&gt;Alexander A. Voronov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to discover and study new algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structures in topology
suggested or motivated by mathematical &lt;br/&gt;physics, in particular,
quantum field theory and string theory. &lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
project aims at discovering a new algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structure on the homology
of an n-sphere space, by which we mean &lt;br/&gt;the space of continuous maps
from the n-dimensional sphere to a &lt;br/&gt;given manifold. This part of the
project, joint with Dennis &lt;br/&gt;Sullivan, generalizes the work pioneered
by Chas and Sullivan &lt;br/&gt;in the case n=1, i.e., that of a usual free loop
space. Another &lt;br/&gt;goal is to establish connection between Chas-
Sullivan's work and Gromov-Witten invariants, which we believe to be a
holomorphic &lt;br/&gt;version of Chas-Sullivan's algebraic structure. Gromov-
Witten invariants come from sigma model of quantum field theory, and Chas-
Sullivan's work "String Topology" may be regarded as a &lt;br/&gt;topological
version of the physical construction. This part of &lt;br/&gt;the project is
suggested to be completed by developing a fusion intersection theory of semi-
infinite cycles in infinite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional manifolds. Finally, part of
the project is&lt;br/&gt;dedicated to relating the above to Kontsevich's
Conjecture, &lt;br/&gt;which generalizes Deligne's Conjecture and unravels a
deep &lt;br/&gt;relation between deformation theory of abstract n-algebras
&lt;br/&gt;and the topology of configuration spaces of points in an
(n+1)-dimensional Euclidean space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main idea of
Algebraic Topology is to be able to recognize&lt;br/&gt;topological properties
of a geometric object by associating &lt;br/&gt;algebraic data or structure to
the geometric object. Sometimes &lt;br/&gt;the geometry is too complicated to
allow immediate understanding &lt;br/&gt;and work with the object, while the
algebraic information is &lt;br/&gt;usually simpler by its nature. This project
suggests some new &lt;br/&gt;algebraic structure for a sphere space, the space
of maps from &lt;br/&gt;an n-dimensional sphere to a manifold. Such spaces are
quite complicated and the classical work of Chen, Segal, Jones,
&lt;br/&gt;Getzler, Burghelea, Fedorowicz, Goodwillie, and others, produced
&lt;br/&gt;not only the computation of the homology of loop spaces, which
&lt;br/&gt;are the particular case of sphere spaces for n=1, but &lt;br/&gt;also
revealed amazing connections with algebra (Hochschild&lt;br/&gt;complex). Also,
recent progress in string theory emphasized &lt;br/&gt;the importance of
invariants associated to holomorphic maps &lt;br/&gt;from the 2-sphere to a
manifold (Gromov-Witten invariants). &lt;br/&gt;In this project we undertake an
analogous study of continuous &lt;br/&gt;maps from the n-sphere to a manifold,
which for n=1 has already &lt;br/&gt;enabled significant progress in
topology.&lt;br/&gt;