* 0227998
* International Workshop on Concept Assessments for Nanoelectronics  September 9-14, 2002 in Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Ralph Cavin, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2002
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed workshop will be held as a part of the International Trends in
Nanotechnology conference. The workshop scope encompasses an assessment of the
probable impact of nanotechnology research on the deployment of new competitive
classes of nanoelectronic circuits based on novel materials, processes and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It does appear that by 2016 we will be nearing the
end of MOS evolution and that continued progress in functionality-cost ratios
will require the invention of replacement technologies. A range of new concepts
for devices, fabrication techniques, and system architectures are emerging today
under the general heading of 'nanoelectronics' that may eventually provide the
basis for continuing the Moore's Law advances in information technologies that
we have experienced for the last three decades. A wide range of new ideas have
been proposed for post-CMOS technologies, such as molecular electronics, quantum
computation etc. Characteristic of any new area, it is difficult to discern
which of these concepts has the potential to provide a technological basis for
information technologies of the future. This workshop will seek to identify
nanoelectronic technologies that have the potential to sustain our tradition of
exponential improvements in cost-performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting
will assess the status of nanotechnologies from the long-term (10 years from
now) perspective of semiconductor industry applications. It will bring together
industry and university researchers to consider the potential of different
concepts in nanotechnology and their potential impact on semiconductor
industry'. The workshop objective is to explore and develop both short- and
long-range strategies for research in nanoelectronic technologies, addressing
the long-term needs of the microelectronics industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be structured to encourage an active interchange of ideas among
participants. Six major nanoelectronics themes have been identified, each of
which is to be addressed by a speaker from industry and a speaker from a
university. The discussion points and speaker presentations will be compiled and
published after the workshop. The desired outcome of the workshop will be to
visualize the direction needed to approach the long-term goals of developing
nanoelectronic technologies: Where we are and what shall be done today for
future nanoelectronics research. Can we think of a "nanoelectronics strategic
plan" with milestones?&lt;br/&gt;