* 0228038
* Deciphering the Andean Knotted-String Records: A Project Aimed at Creating and Querying a Khipu Database
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Gary Urton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 124,000.00

The objective of the two-year project to be undertaken by Dr. Gary Urton at
Harvard University with the support of a research grant from the National
Science Foundation is to create and query a database composed of information
from study of surviving samples of Inka khipu. The khipu (Quechua: "knot"), were
the principal devices used for record-keeping in the Inka empire. There are some
600 surviving samples of these devices in museum and private collections around
the world. These artifacts, which are composed of dyed and knotted cotton and
camelid fibers, were used by Inka administrators to record both statistical data
and narrative information. Although khipu have been studied by researchers for
several decades, these ancient knotted texts remain largely undeciphered.
Working with a database manager, Urton will coordinate efforts to design and
build procedures for entering data recorded by earlier researchers, as well as
new data on khipu construction recorded from recently completed and on-going
museum studies by P.I. Data entry will proceed throughout the '02-'03 academic
year. In Spring, '03, work will begin on two additional components of the
project. First, procedures will be designed to query the khipu database,
searching for patterns in numbers, colors, construction techniques, etc., that
might help researchers to understand how information is organized in the khipu
and, therefore, how one might theorize the nature and procedures of encoding and
decoding (or reading) these ancient records. Secondly, work will be undertaken
on the design and construction of supplementary electronic databases drawn from
two types of textual sources that may help in querying the khipu database; these
sources will be, first, a text written in colonial times in the Quechua language
(probably the Huarochiri Manuscript), and secondly, material from documents
transcribed by Dr. Urton from archival research in Seville, Spain, containing
Spanish transcriptions of khipu readings that were given by native recordkeepers
in the Andes in early colonial times. Data storage and querying procedures will
be developed that will allow researchers to cross-reference and query the khipu
database from information contained in the databases of Quechua textual and
ethnohistorical materials. The khipu database will be posted on the WWW, along
with instructions for how researchers can request queries of the database. The
objective of the project is to attempt -- if not the decipherment of the khipu
-- at least a significant advance in our understanding of this remarkable
indigenous South American recording device.