* 0228660
* ATOL: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Deep Green Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical Methods for Scaling Data from Genomics to Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2008
* USD 642,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Dina F. Mandoli and Richard Olmstead of the
University of Washington to investigate green plant evolution. Humans rely on
green plants for food, shelter, clothing, and for providing the oxygen that is
essential to life. From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and
most diverse branches of the tree of life, green plants provide an unparalleled
system in which to explore interrelationships of living organisms and to
approach some of the most significant and intriguing questions concerning the
diversification of life on earth. Many of these questions relate to fundamental
evolutionary events, such as the transition of organisms from single-celled to
multicellular body plans, the colonization of land, and the derivation of
different life-cycle modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative project,
including principal investigators from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
Sciences, the University of California at Berkeley, Southern Illinois
University, Utah State University, the University of Washington, and Yale
University, the focus will be: 1) resolving the primary pattern of
diversification among green plants; 2) investigating questions relating to the
long evolutionary history of these organisms; 3) providing a model for analysis
that will be applicable to other groups of organisms with extensive evolutionary
histories. The team will emphasize the development of novel analytical methods
that make it possible to conduct analyses across multiple scales and to use all
of the available data from heterogeneous sources. A solid backbone of
relationships based on genomes and structure for 50-100 plants, representing the
critical deep-branching lineages, will enable the integration of previous and
ongoing studies of many more plants into a comprehensive picture of green plant
genealogy. The primary objectives of the project are: 1) complete a matrix of
whole genome sequences for chloroplasts and mitochondria, and develop Bacterial
Artificial Chromosome (BAC) nuclear genome libraries; 2) produce a comprehensive
set of comparable morphological and ultrastructural data for the same plants;
and 3) incorporate inferences from across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green
plants using methods designed to permit scaling across studies. Multiple
integrated training, educational and outreach activities will result in
continual dissemination of the activities and progress of this research group to
the scientific community and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dina Mandoli will
coordinate construction of the BAC and organellar BAC (oBAC) libraries. Richard
Olmstead will coordinate studies of nuclear gene evolution and phylogenic
reconstruction from organellar genome sequences, using the data obtained from
the libraries. To do this work, our team will grow the taxa needed for this
study, generate and assess the quality of the BAC and oBAC libraries, determine
the best nuclear genes for the phylogenetic reconstruction and generate sequence
data for these nuclear genes, and evaluate the characters obtained from
organellar genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;