* 0228651
* ATOL: Phylogenomics:A Genome Level Approach to Assembling the Bacterial Branches of the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Jonathan Eisen, Institute for Genomic Research
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2007
* USD 2,480,000.00

ABSTRACT

DEB-0228651

Drs Naomi Ward, Jonathan Eisen, and Karen Nelson of The Institute for Genomic
Research (TIGR) have been awarded a grant to determine the evolutionary
relationships between and within the major phyla (groups) of Bacteria. This will
be achieved by obtaining and interpreting complete genome sequences from members
of seven or eight diverse bacterial groups that are not represented in current
genome sequencing efforts. To sequence each genome, DNA will be broken into
fragments and the DNA sequence of the fragments determined randomly. The
resulting individual sequences will be assembled into one piece using computer
software that recognizes overlaps between the different sequences. Any gaps left
in the sequence will be filled in to produce a completed genome. Comparisons
will then be made with existing genome databases, to identify the genes present.
A later stage of the project will involve lab-based studies to confirm the
function of the sequenced genes. Some of these genes will be identified as
potential phylogenetic markers - genes that are especially useful for measuring
the evolutionary relationships between organisms. The evolutionary relationships
between the different bacterial groups will be determined using evolutionary
trees inferred from both individual phylogenetic markers, and whole-genome
analyses which consider the presence or absence of all the genes in the genome.

While microscopic in size, Bacteria include the oldest and most diverse forms of
life on Earth. Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a
critical component in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program. The results
of this project are expected to have far-reaching impacts on the scientific
community. A more complete representation of bacterial diversity will provide a
clearer picture of evolutionary relationships within the Bacteria, and how
specific characteristics (e.g., photosynthesis, the ability to live at high
temperatures, or to live without oxygen) evolved. Research on understudied
bacterial groups will be stimulated by making the genome sequence data publicly
available, as well as by providing training in genome analysis to students and
other members of the scientific community.