* 0228309
* IMACS Workshop on Adaptive Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Joseph Flaherty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Mavriplis
* 12/31/2002
* USD 7,500.00

Adaptive methods for partial differential equations (PDEs) are the most
effective computational approach for a large class of PDEs that arise in many
important applications in science and engineering. This area has grown steadily
during the past two decades. This workshop will bring together leading
researchers from around the world to address both theoretical and computational
aspects of adaptive methods for PDEs and to foster stronger collaboration
between mathematicians, engineers and scientists. Topics include a posteriori
error estimation, adaptive h-p refinement, adaptivity with complex geometry,
implementation of adaptive codes, moving mesh techniques and applications,
adaptive spectral methods, nonlinear analysis, adaptive modeling and
applications of adaptive methods. This project will supplement Canadian funding
to support the IMACS Workshop on Adaptive Methods for Partial Differential
Equations to be held at the Fields Institute of Mathematics in Toronto in August
2002. IMACS is the International Association for Mathematics and Computers in
Simulation. This workshop is part of a year-long program focusing on numerical
computation - the first ever at the Fields Institute. The program recognizes the
central importance of numerical analysis in advancing computational science and
engineering, and seeks to expand interactions among mathematicians, scientists,
and engineers. The funds will be used to support travel expenses of researchers
from the U.S., including invited speakers and young researchers at the graduate
or postdoctoral level. Topics discussed at the workshop will be far ranging but
will include optimal adaptive strategies, high-performance computation, error
estimation, implementation issues, geometrical considerations, and applications.
Applications will involve fluid flow, optimal design and manufacturing,
electromagnetic phenomena, and biomechanics and biomaterials.