* 0228655
* ATOL: Collaborative Research:  Deep Green Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical Methods for Scaling Data from Genomics to Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Charles OKelly, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2008
* USD 511,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Charles J. O'Kelly of the Bigelow Laboratory for
Ocean Sciences to investigate green plant evolution. Humans rely on green plants
for food, shelter, clothing, and for providing the oxygen that is essential to
life. From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and most diverse
branches of the tree of life, green plants provide an unparalleled system in
which to explore interrelationships of living organisms and to approach some of
the most significant and intriguing questions concerning the diversification of
life on earth. Many of these questions relate to fundamental evolutionary
events, such as the transition of organisms from single-celled to multicellular
body plans, the colonization of land, and the derivation of different life-cycle
modes. Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a critical
component in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is part of a collaborative project, including
principal investigators from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, the
University of California at Berkeley, Southern Illinois University, Utah State
University, the University of Washington, and Yale University, the focus will
be: 1) resolving the primary pattern of diversification among green plants; 2)
investigating questions relating to the long evolutionary history of these
organisms; 3) providing a model for analysis that will be applicable to other
groups of organisms with extensive evolutionary histories. The team will
emphasize the development of novel analytical methods that make it possible to
conduct analyses across multiple scales and to use all of the available data
from heterogeneous sources. A solid backbone of relationships based on genomes
and structure for 50-100 plants, representing the critical deep-branching
lineages, will enable the integration of previous and ongoing studies of many
more plants into a comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy. The primary
objectives of the project are: 1) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences
for chloroplasts and mitochondria, and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome
(BAC) nuclear genome libraries; 2) produce a comprehensive set of comparable
morphological and ultrastructural data for the same plants; and 3) incorporate
inferences from across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods
designed to permit scaling across studies. Multiple integrated training,
educational and outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of
the activities and progress of this research group to the scientific community
and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charles O'Kelly will oversee the entire
project. He will also have primary responsibilities for collecting and
databasing morphological and ultrastructural data for the green algae included
in this study. He will assist in the interpretation of green algal molecular
data, and in the generation of project-associated websites and related
dissemination tools.&lt;br/&gt;