* 0228618
* Minorities in Marine Science Undergraduate Program at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2009
* USD 863,381.00

This award provides renewed funding for a program called the Minorities in
Marine Science Undergraduate Program (MIMSUP) for academic years 2004-2009.
MIMSUP, operated at Western Washington University's Shannon Point Marine Center
(SPMC) since 1990, will provide marine education to eight under-represented
minority students annually recruited from around the nation. Students will spend
two quarters in residence taking a total of 31 credits that may be transferred
back to their home institutions. During the first quarter, students take a
laboratory/field course in oceanography, a current trends course that introduces
them to modern investigative techniques and the potential professional
opportunities that will be available to them, a research course in which they
plan and execute an independent project under the supervision of a faculty
member. They all participate in a program that involves training in and
application of outreach education in marine science to K-12 school children.
During the second quarter, students will take a scientific research and two
additional courses covering various marine science topics. Students receive full
tuition, housing, travel costs, and a stipend, as well as support to participate
in regional and national meetings. The stipend supports the students'
participation in K-12 outreach activities of about 10 hours per week in local
schools. Western Washington University provides significant institutional
support for this program in faculty salary, laboratory supplies, and access to
boat-time for the students.