* 0228559
* ATOL: Collaborative Research: Archosaur Phylogeny- A Total Evidence Approach at Fine Taxonomic Levels
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* James Clark, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 77,944.00

Collaborative Research: Archosaur phylogeny-a total evidence approach at fine
taxonomic level&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living birds form an extensive, undoubtedly
monophyletic assemblage of vertebrates. Yet even after over 150 years of intense
study the interrelationships of the orders, families, and genera of extant birds
are still poorly understood. Recently it has been&lt;br/&gt;conclusively
demonstrated that birds are nested within theropod dinosaurs. Fossils of some of
these groups have been found that display a number of features that have
previously been thought of as avian (e.g. feathers, brooding behavior,
furculae). We propose to examine the relationships of theropod dinosaurs
(including birds) using a total evidence approach at very fine levels. In the
morphological analysis we will develop a matrix of scoreable characters across
the entire diversity of non-avian theropods and&lt;br/&gt;at fine taxonomic
levels within birds (I.e. near the generic level). Molecular analyses will use
high-throughput sequencing techniques to produce molecular sequences from birds
and outgroup taxa. Nuclear genes will be used predominantly to complement prior
mitochondrial sequencing; the RAG-1 exon will be sequenced for most genera of
extant birds, and additional genes such as RAG-2, MC3R, and cMOS will be
sequenced for exemplars to establish deeper level relationships. Analysis of
these data will result in a fine-grained phylogenetic hypothesis of living and
fossil birds and their close theropod relatives. Such a phylogeny will have
obvious importance for the study of a broad range of evolutionary questions
within theropods. A major focus of this grant is the development of a
'supermatrix'. We envision this matrix to be a virtual archive for all the
character information that we generate during this study. Several different
kinds of data will be stored here. Digital images of specimens will allow
character conditions to be examined within the context of the matrix. Molecular
information will be available as well. Capabilities for the development and
export of character matrices into formats conventionally used for phylogenetic
analysis will also be available. As this information&lt;br/&gt;is published it
will be made available over the www.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;