* 0228058
* U.S.-Brazil Collaborative Research: Non-Equilibrium and Isospin Effects in Nuclear Fragmentation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* ManYee Tsang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Evan M. Notman
* 03/31/2007
* USD 15,800.00

In this U.S.-Brazil collaborative project funded by the Americas Program,
William G. Lynch and ManYee B. Tsang of Michigan State University and William A.
Friedman of the University of Wisconsin will work with Raul Donangelo and Sergio
Souza of the theory group at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. These
researchers will make a coordinated study to interpret experimental
multifragmentation data. The major focus of this investigation is on the
identification and modeling of non-equilibrium phenomena that influence
investigations of the isospin dependence of the liquid-gas phase transition and
of the nuclear equation of state. The research involves detailed comparisons of
data to state-of-the-art equilibrium Statistical Multifragmentation Models and
to the Expanding Evaporating Source models that have been developed by the PI's.
It also involves comparisons to new non-equilibrium models that will be
developed by this collaboration during the project. The results will help to
determine the degree to which the equilibrated freezeout configuration assumed
by most equilibrium models is accurate and to develop formalisms with which one
can analyze data with significant non-equilibrium
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative investigation of non-
equilibrium phenomena is a well-focused theoretical effort that extends the
experimental work done at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL) at Michigan State University as well as at other laboratories. The
project requires the expertise of both the U.S. and Brazilian principal
investigators and is key to interpreting data from not only reaction programs at
NSCL but also research at other in-flight rare isotope facilities.&lt;br/&gt;