* 0228882
* HPNC:  High Speed Internet Connectivity at Baylor University
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Walter Wilcox, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 12/31/2006
* USD 175,000.00

Baylor University proposes to access a high performance network connection to a
GigaPOP in Texas (UTD) in order to establish a local connection to the Abilene
network. This high-speed connection will allow the university access to
Internet2 providing Baylor researchers and students with a powerful array of
previously unavailable tools, linkages and information sources. The Baylor
Internet2 project will include as a collaborator, Texas State Technical College
Waco (TSTC). TSTC is a regional data and video network hub with significant
existing hardware and personnel support infrastructure. The combined human and
technical resources of Baylor University and TSTC along with the commitment of
both institutions to use the Abilene network connection to enhance existing
research, workforce development and educational outreach efforts will provide a
framework to support continuation of these exciting applications well beyond the
life of this project. The HPNC Proposal is an integral part of Baylor
University's Vision 2012, an ambitious ten-year plan for moving the university
forward in both innovative education and pure research. Vision 2012 includes a
significant investment on the part of the university administration in new
tenure-track faculty and post-doctoral positions, faculty research release time
and lab infrastructure. As part of this vision, a state of the art science
facility (~$110 million dollars) will come on-line during the same time that the
HPNC Proposal is scheduled for implementation. Immediate impact areas for the
HPNC Proposal include theoretical modeling in plasma and shock physics,
theoretical modeling in superstring and m-theory, STEM educational outreach
projects, advanced data connections, scalable multicast key exchange for layered
data delivery, multicast protocol components, virtual routing infrastructure,
spatial analysis and visualization, and innovative applications of distance
learning technology. Baylor's collaboration with TSTC enhances the overall
proposal by providing another layer of use for the HPNC project while also
leveraging an NSF investment. With its focus on workforce development, a
connection to Internet2 would allow TSTC to provide incumbent worker training in
a wide variety of technical areas such as robotics, electronics, chemical
instrumentation, safety, and certification standards to name but a few.
Additionally, the college could enhance its existing coursework in e-commerce,
computer networking and computer architecture. New areas of endeavor (already in
the planning stage) such as virtual reality technology for simulation and
training would also be made possible through this technology. A final area of
impact for TSTC would involve its deaf and hearing impaired student population.
For such students, classroom experiences and real-time interpreting services via
Internet2 as well as the transition into the workplace would be greatly
facilitated by the increased bandwidth and resulting real-time video linkage
possibilities provided by such a connection.