* 0228729
* ATOL: Collaborative Research:  Deep Green Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical Methods for Scaling Data from Genomics to Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Brent Mishler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2008
* USD 683,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brent Mishler of the University of California,
Berkeley to investigate green plant evolution. Humans rely on green plants for
food, shelter, clothing, and for providing the oxygen that is essential to life.
From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and most diverse branches
of the tree of life, green plants provide an unparalleled system in which to
explore interrelationships of living organisms and to approach some of the most
significant and intriguing questions concerning the diversification of life on
earth. Many of these questions relate to fundamental evolutionary events, such
as the transition of organisms from single-celled to multicellular body plans,
the colonization of land, and the derivation of different life-cycle modes.
Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a critical component in
the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
is part of a collaborative project,, including principal investigators from the
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, the University of California at Berkeley,
Southern Illinois University, Utah State University, the University of
Washington, and Yale University, the focus will be: 1) resolving the primary
pattern of diversification among green plants; 2) investigating questions
relating to the long evolutionary history of these organisms; 3) providing a
model for analysis that will be applicable to other groups of organisms with
extensive evolutionary histories. The team will emphasize the development of
novel analytical methods that make it possible to conduct analyses across
multiple scales and to use all of the available data from heterogeneous sources.
A solid backbone of relationships based on genomes and structure for 50-100
plants, representing the critical deep-branching lineages, will enable the
integration of previous and ongoing studies of many more plants into a
comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy. The primary objectives of the
project are: 1) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences for chloroplasts and
mitochondria, and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) nuclear genome
libraries; 2) produce a comprehensive set of comparable morphological and
ultrastructural data for the same plants; and 3) incorporate inferences from
across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods designed to
permit scaling across studies. Multiple integrated training, educational and
outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of the activities and
progress of this research group to the scientific community and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brent D. Mishler will have primary responsibilities for
coordinating the research with DEEP GENE and other related green plant
phylogenetic projects, help develop tools for phylogenetic analysis and
databases, and carry out analyses of organellar genomic data and bryophyte
morphological data ; Jeffrey L. Boore will supervise the shotgun cloning; as
well as automated sequencing, assembly, and annotation. Alan R. Smith will
assist in plant material collection and identification as well as analysis of
morphological data for ferns and allies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;