* 0228854
* Nonlinear elliptic boundary value problems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Eun Heui Kim, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2005
* USD 50,462.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103823 Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Elliptic
Boundary Value Problems

Abstract

DMS-0103823 Keyfitz

The major focus of this project is to develop systematic theories to understand
the solution structures of nonlinear elliptic boundary value problems arising
from change-of-type systems in multidimensional conservation laws, and from
experiments in morphogenesis and ecological systems. It is a distinctive feature
of multidimensional conservation laws in self-similar coordinates that they
change type, being hyperbolic far from the origin but of mixed type near the
origin. Analysis of behavior near the origin gives rise to interesting open
problems in elliptic partial differential equations, including nonlinear free
boundary value problems, degenerate oblique boundary problems, and quasilinear
degenerate elliptic systems. Such problems arise in many different combinations
in the study of two-dimensional Riemann problems, including those for the
compressible Euler equations of gas dynamics. This project also investigates a
class of singular non-quasimonotone elliptic systems that arise in models of
biological morphogenesis experiments and certain predator-prey interactions.

Multidimensional conservation laws are mathematical models for fundamental
processes in physics and engineering, such as high-speed flows and supersonic
jets. While tools for numerical simulations of multidimensional conservation
laws have been developed extensively, there is very little analytical theory
available. It is our goal to establish parts of the needed theory and to
investigate the structure of solutions for such problems. The results of the
project will have application to a wide a variety of physical systems.