* 0228229
* U.S.-Mexico Dissertation Research:  Ontogenetic Variation In Plant Response:  Consequences For Herbivores and Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Robert Marquis, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2004
* USD 5,700.00

0228229&lt;br/&gt;Marquis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program thesis
enhancement project will support dissertation research by Ms. Karina Boege,
under the supervision of Dr. Robert J. Marquis of the University of Missouri-St.
Louis, with the assistance of Dr. Rodolfo Dirzo of the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico, UNAM in Mexico City. The research will evaluate the
consequences of changes in plant quality, architecture, and tolerance associated
with plant development. Changes in plant quality and architecture may modify the
relative importance of plants as food (i.e., bottom-up forces) and shelter
(i.e., influencing top-down forces) as they affect herbivores. As a result, the
amount of herbivory a plant suffers may vary during plant ontogeny. Moreover,
changes in tolerance will influence plant performance at different developmental
stages as affected by herbivore attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives
of this study are to: 1) quantify developmental changes in defensive and
nutritional traits of Casearia corymbosa, a neotropical tree in the tropical dry
forest of Chamela, Mexico; 2) evaluate how ontogenetic variation in defensive
traits, plant size, and resource availability for C. corymbosa affects herbivore
density, community structure, and leaf damage, through the modification of plant
quality as food for herbivores and the impacts of one component of the third
trophic level (insectivorous birds); 3) assess the consequences of such changes
for plant performance at different developmental stages; and 4) determine the
degree to which different ontogenetic stages differ in tolerance to herbivore
attack, and evaluate if such differences are promoted by changes in carbohydrate
allocation to different plant organs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of the
interactive impacts of bottom-up and top-down forces as influenced by plant
ontogeny provides an opportunity to describe the simultaneous effects of factors
that have been identified to independently influence herbivory received by
plants. In addition, the evaluation of both defensive and tolerance strategies
at different ontogenetic stages allows a clearer understanding of the impacts of
herbivory on plant fitness, integrating the different resistance strategies that
plants may express during life-history to reduce the negative impacts of
herbivory. Overall, this study will contribute to our understanding of the
factors that may influence the evolution of plant resistance traits mediated by
herbivores and their natural enemies. &lt;br/&gt;