* 0228969
* 2002 Gordon Research Conferences on Solid State Studies in Ceramics; Meriden, NH; August 11-16, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in Ceramics in the summer
of 2002 will focus the effect of length scale of the microstructure on
processing, characterization and properties of ceramics. This subject lies at
the heart of our emerging ability to design ceramic materials with specific
microstructures and properties. Recent research activities among ceramists and
the growing number of publications in this area indicate that a meeting on this
topic is especially timely. Key researchers in the field have committed to
attend this meeting and describe their most recent findings (please see
http://www.grc.uri.edu/programs/2002/ceramics.htm for the program). To augment
the traditional technical presentations, additional program initiatives, namely
an invited poster session for young scientists and enhanced participation of
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. The conference will gather scholars
and educators at all career levels in an atmosphere conducive not only to making
technical progress, but also for establishing sustainable collaborations and
professional relationships. The meeting setting and atmosphere provides ample
time for discussions and networking.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This conference has
significant broad impact for the ceramics community through the identification
of key research areas, establishment of new collaborations, reinforcement of
existing connections, and encouragement of a young and diverse group of
professionals. The NSF funding will be used to encourage the participation of
graduate students, post doctoral associates and other young scientists and
engineers at the start of their professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;