* 0228924
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Positional Behavior and Limb Use in Cebus, Alouatta, and Ateles
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Mary Morbeck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2004
* USD 7,800.00

Studies of positional behavior (locomotion and posture) are central to key
issues in biological anthropology including primate origins and arboreal
adaptations, hominoid climbing, and hominid bipedalism. The study of locomotion
and posture provides critical information concerning ecological, anatomical and
evolutionary relationships in living species, a comparative framework for
interpretation of the fossil record, and as an educational tool for conservation
and ecological planning. This research examines the ontogeny (the life history
of an individual) of positional behavior and details of limb and prehensile-tail
use in three New World primate species (Ateles geoffroyi, Alouatta palliata, and
Cebus capucinus) inhabiting a tropical rainforest in Costa Rica.&lt;br/&gt;
During the course of growth and development, individuals face different
challenges in exploiting their environment. Ontogenetic data allow assessment of
behavioral and morphological changes as they occur and developmental constraints
on positional behavior among closely-related species. While ontogeny is critical
to our understanding of positional behavior, there are no field studies that
assess its effects on New World primates. White-faced capuchins (Cebus), black
handed spider monkeys (Ateles), and mantled howling monkeys (Alouatta) will be
examined at La Suerte Biological Research Station in Costa Rica. Behavioral
observations in conjunction with digital video recording will be used to
document positional strategies during infancy, juvenescence, and adulthood to
address the following objectives. First, this research will provide a
comprehensive, systematic, and quantified description of expressed behavior,
functional morphology, and ecological context of three prehensile-tailed
species. Second, data on juvenile and adult positional strategies will provide
information on how growth and development may influence feeding and foraging
strategy, social behavior, and ultimately survival during the juvenile period.
Third, because the prehensile tail has evolved independently in the subfamily
Atelinae (Alouatta, Ateles, Brachyteles, and Lagothrix) and Cebus, this study
will allow comparison of the prehensile tail as a shared-derived feature in two
more closely-related species (Ateles and Alouatta), and as an analogous feature
in the more distantly- related Cebus. Closely-related howler and spider monkeys
are biobehavioral variations on the ateline theme, that is, large-bodied, long-
tailed New World primates with extensive gripping capabilities. Capuchin
monkeys, also with prehensile abilities of the tail, differ in body size and
tail anatomy (and evolutionary history). &lt;br/&gt; This project will
contribute a comprehensive, systematic, and quantified description of expressed
behavior and ecological context in three New World primates inhabiting the same
rainforest. By focusing on questions of ontogenetic differences in positional
behavior, this study examines the degree to which adult-like patterns of
locomotion and posture develop in primate ontogeny and how patterns may differ
within and between age and sex categories. Finally, the results of this research
will be used in the conservation planning and maintenance of the rainforest
surrounding La Suerte Biological Research Station. As part of these efforts,
results will contribute to educational programs in the surrounding community and
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;