* 0228804
* Balanced Dynamics and Cyclone-Anticyclone Asymmetry
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Gregory Hakim, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2006
* USD 249,893.00

This project will investigate the dynamics associated with the cyclone-
anticyclone asymmetry, namely, why cyclones tend to have larger amplitude and
isolated cores in comparison to weaker and broader anticyclones. The research
will be based on an idealized theoretical framework that is valid an order
beyond the quasigeostrophic (QG) model in the Rossby number expansion, i.e., the
QG+1 system. The PI will extend his prior study on the QG+1 system that has the
tropopause as a boundary to include, in addition, a rigid-surface as another
boundary to have two boundaries in the system (thus named a 2sQG+1 system). The
PI will test the hypothesis that the control parameter of the 2sQG+1 system is
the distance between the two boundaries in that it would regulate the relative
importance of baroclinic and barotropic dynamics. The second hypothesis to be
tested is that the 2sQG+1 system will show that cyclones have a weaker energy
transfer to larger scales and thus will maintain robust structures confined to
the boundaries, whereas anticyclones, which have a strong upscale energy
transfer, will span the troposphere. These hypotheses serve to provide
explanations of the cyclone-anticyclone asymmetry in nature. The idealized
theoretical modeling work will then be tested with the National Center for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP) analysis data using the statistics of polar
lows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results have the potential of improving our
understanding of scale interactions between baroclinic and barotropic dynamics,
and nature of cyclone-anticyclone asymmetry. The planned research will provide
good educational opportunities for graduate studies.