* 0228878
* Space, Culture, and Urban Policy: Integrating GIS into Social Science Research Methods Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Richard LeGates, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2008
* USD 431,513.00

(89) Social Science Other This project proposes to create two instructional
modules to introduce undergraduate students in upper division social science
research methods and data analysis courses to visualizing quantitative data and
doing spatial analysis using Geographical Information Systems (GIS) software.
The project is integrating technology into education and is addressing several
problems: - the failure of the undergraduate social sciences other than
geography to address spatial aspects of data; - the fear expressed by many
social science students of research methods and data analysis courses - to the
point of discouraging students from majoring in the social sciences; and -
faculty difficulties in balancing conventional and hi-tech teaching methods.

The objective of the project is to create two instructional modules -- each
consisting of a textbook, CD-ROM, and website -- to augment conventional
research methods and data analysis courses. The first module is being designed
for social science research methods courses. The second is aimed at social
science data analysis courses. The modules are using six main sources of data
about cities, culture, and urban policy: United Nations Commission on Human
Settlements data on cities, the 2000 U.S. Census of Housing and Population, The
State of the Nation's Cities (SONC) database from the Rutgers Center for Urban
Policy Research, General Social Survey (GSS)data from the National Opinion
Research Center, the Roper Social Capital Benchmark 2000 data (developed under
the direction of Robert Putnam of Harvard University), and state and local
voting data. A five-person team will work with a national advisory panel,
assisted by faculty from seven universities who will test the modules. The
project involves collaboration between faculty from San Francisco State
University and San Jose State University with faculty from the seven other
institutions: The University of Cincinnati; Howard University; The University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; Medgar Evers College of the CUNY System; Georgia
Institute of Technology, The University of Pittsburgh, and Cleveland State
University. Experts from the University of California, Berkeley; University of
California, Santa Barbara; and the Metropolitan Area Research Corporation will
assist the project.