* 0228112
* US-Africa Planning VIsit:    Assessment of  Opportunities and Capabilities for Manufacturing Research in Africa
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Daniel Nosenchuck, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2004
* USD 32,000.00

This international travel grant will explore opportunities for collaborative
research on manufacturing between Africa and the U.S. Three U.S. engineers will
visit countries in the North, South, East and West of Africa. During these
visits, they will meet with local African researchers, industrial and technical
leaders. They will also visit selected local universities and industries to
assess the local capabilities for collaborative research and the future
development of manufacturing enterprise systems. In an effort to distinguish
between the manufacturing opportunities at different scales, the visiting
engineers will assess the capabilities for manufacturing research related to
small, medium and large-scale industries. The existing infrastructure for
research will also be assessed along with the areas of strength for future
collaborative research. A special effort will be made to identify areas of
collaboration that could result in societal impact in the U.S. and in Africa. As
such, these could include: manufacturing enterprise systems for the development
of export-based manufacturing to the U.S.; the integration of research and
education in ways that could impact the local training of a larger pool of
African manufacturing expertise, and the development of indigenous manufacturing
capabilities at different scales. Following the visits, the group will prepare a
preliminary report of its findings and recommendations for future collaborations
in manufacturing/manufacturing research. This will be presented to the NSF and
the participants at the Africa MRS meeting in Dakar, Senegal. The
inputs/feedback received from these two groups will then be incorporated into
the final report and a technical paper that will be disseminated widely, and
made available on the worldwide web.