* 0228865
* International: Experimental Evaluation of Coordinated Flexible Satellite Control
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* William Singhose, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 12/31/2003
* USD 7,995.00

0228865&lt;br/&gt;Singhose&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
collaborative international dissertation enhancement project. The principal
investigator for the project is William Singhose at Georgia Tech in Atlanta. The
Japanese collaborator is Saburo Matunaga at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.
They will be undertaking research on an experimental evaluation of coordinated
flexible satellite control. The precise control of spacecraft with flexible
appendages is extremely difficult. The complexity of this task is magnified many
times when several flexible spacecraft must be controlled precisely and
collaboratively as in formation flying. Coordinated satellite control requires a
group of spacecraft to fly in a desired trajectory while maintaining relative
position and velocity with respect to each other. The Two-Dimensional Spacecraft
Dynamics Simulator at the Tokyo Institute of Technology was constructed to
verify the Robot Satellite Cluster Systems. The two objectives of the project
are to: 1) evaluate vibration reducing on-off thruster profiles for three
coordinated satellites and 2) evaluate vibration reducing on-off thruster
profiles for three coordinated satellites that are connected by tethers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
collaboration will offer great mutual benefits and could advance the research
field in three ways: 1) experimental verification of the proposed satellite
thruster control method will enable a significant advancement in satellite
control system design; 2) the extension to multiple, coordinated spacecraft will
greatly expand the utility of the on-off thruster control methods developed
previously for single, independent spacecraft and 3) satellites equipped with
on-off thrusters will be able to maneuver faster, more accurately, and with less
residual vibration. The project advances international human resources through
the participation of a graduate student. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. Results of the research will be
disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;