* 0228181
* Workshop on Dynamics and Bifurcations of Patterns in Dissipative Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Gerhard Dangelmayr, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2004
* USD 17,400.00

Progress in nonlinear science achieved during the last decades has brought
mathematicians and physicists a better understanding of the variety of
structures observed in systems far from equilibrium. The emergence of
macroscopic order and the spontaneous breaking of spatiotemporal symmetries are
features common to many natural phenomena. Virtually every structure seen in our
world can be considered the result of a long sequence of successive symmetry-
breaking instabilities of a complex nonlinear system under nonequilibrium
conditions. The interdisciplinary field of pattern formation seeks a common
understanding of such spontaneous formation of spatial and spatiotemporal
patterns in systems from areas as diverse as fluid mechanics, solid state
physics, nonlinear optics, chemistry, and biology. While much progress towards
understanding pattern formation has been made in recent years, fundamental
challenges remain.

This award supports participants in the Workshop on Dynamics and Bifurcations of
Patterns in Dissipative Systems, held at Colorado State University in the spring
of 2003. The goal of the workshop is to bring together theorists and
experimentalists from different fields, from applied mathematics to theoretical
and experimental physics, unified by their interest in nonlinear phenomena and
in search of a deeper understanding of pattern formation and dynamics in complex
systems. The workshop will stimulate communication and collaboration between
experts, advanced graduate students, and young researchers in identifying key
ideas, new advances, and open questions in the mathematical analysis of
spatiotemporal patterns in dissipative systems. Topics of interest include
stability, bifurcation, and dynamics of patterns, reduction of governing
equations, and the role of symmetry. The presentations and roundtable
discussions will stimulate further theoretical and applied investigations in
pattern formation and analysis. The extremely rapid pace of developments in the
science of patterns, identified as one of the six grand challenges for physics
in a new era, lends urgency to the goals of the workshop.