* 0228752
* Water Diffusion in Dacitic Melt and Glass, and Explosive Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 300,001.00

Zhang&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0228752&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas-driven volcanic eruptions
are a major natural hazard. These eruptions are powered by the exsolution of H2O
and other volatiles from magma. The process is complex, and understanding it
requires quantification and modeling of a number of variables and processes,
especially the diffusion of water. After many years of work, most of the
fundamental data for high-silica rhyolite--a magma with 77 wt% silica--has been
experimentally determined. However, there is a critical need for experimental
studies of dacitic magmas, containing around 65 wt% silica and common to
explosive eruptions such as the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, the 1991
eruption of Mount Pinatubo, and the 1991 eruption of Mount Unzen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this grant, water diffusion in dacitic melt and
glass will be investigated using dehydration and diffusion couple experiments
over a wide range of temperature, pressure, and H2O contents. Experiments will
be performed in one-atmosphere furnaces, rapid-quench cold-seal pressure
vessels, internally-heated pressure vessels, and a piston-cylinder apparatus.
Hydrous species concentrations will be analyzed by Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy, and diffusion profiles modeled using a nonlinear diffusion
equation. The results will be used to model bubble growth and magma
fragmentation in dacite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;