* 0228911
* Development of Screening and Modeling Tools for Colloid-Facilitated Transport of Contaminants in the Subsurface
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 06/30/2006
* USD 252,357.00

0228911 Eliimelech Contaminant transport models substantially underestimate
migration distances of strongly sorbing contaminants when neglecting colloid-
facilitated transport. Since the mechanisms of colloid-facilitated transport are
relatively poorly understood, it is quite challenging to predict the potential
for colloid-facilitated transport in a contaminated subsurface environment.
Hence, there is a critical need for a set of conservative criteria that will
enable prediction of the potential for colloid-facilitated
transport.&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of the proposed research are: (i) to
develop a set of criteria for quantifying&lt;br/&gt;the effect of various
relevant chemicals (Na + , K + , Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , pH, ligands, organic acids,
humic and fulvic acids) on colloid mobilization (release), (ii) to develop a
simple approach to determine colloid deposition rates in natural subsurface
environments, and (iii) to establish a set of conservative criteria and
screening tools for prediction of the potential for colloid-facilitated
transport.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the work outlined above and the following
related hypotheses provide the&lt;br/&gt;foundation for this proposed research:
(a) The worst-case scenario for colloid-facilitated transport can be obtained by
considering irreversible adsorption of contaminants to the mobile colloidal
particles. (b) In soils and several types of aquifer sediments, the mobilized
colloidal particles have similar chemical properties as the stationary solid
matrix. Hence, conservative criteria for the potential of colloid-facilitated
transport can be derived from simple colloid aggregation rate measurements by
light scattering drawing on the analogy between aggregation and deposition
kinetics. Fast colloid aggregation kinetics may suggest limited colloid
transport whereas slow aggregation kinetics may suggest the potential for
colloid-facilitated transport. Completion of the proposed work will involve the
following research tasks: (1) selection of representative subsurface solid
materials and their characterization, (2) studying the effect of solution
chemistry on colloid mobilization, (3) studying the deposition behavior of the
mobile colloidal particles, (4) characterization of the mobile colloidal
particles, (5) development of a rapid method for measuring deposition rate of
mobile colloids, and (6) modeling colloid transport and possible scenarios of
colloid-facilitated transport.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The majority of
requested funds are directed toward the training of a
doctoral&lt;br/&gt;student. The student will be utilizing state-of-the-art
experimental (e.g., multiangle light scattering) and analytical tools. At Yale,
it is mandatory for all undergraduate students to carry out an original project
(thesis) during their senior year; one undergraduate student will carry out
her/his senior thesis as part of this project. Outreach will involve work with
LEAP (Leadership, Education, and Athletics in Partnership), a non-profit
organization operating in New Haven, that seeks to help children aged 7 to 14
from high-poverty urban neighborhoods develop academic skills and self-
esteem.&lt;br/&gt;