* 0228105
* SGER:  Monitoring Anacapa Island Deer Mice: Population Bottleneck, Release, and Reestablishment
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Mary Ashley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2004
* USD 51,668.00

This project will take advantage of a unique opportunity to monitor the progress
of a controlled population bottleneck and its aftermath during a capture,
release, and recovery program for a threatened mammal, the Anacapa Island deer
mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus anacapae). This deer mouse is an endemic
subspecies that occurs only on the three small islets that comprise Anacapa, one
of the California Channel Islands. The Channel Islands National Park is
currently conducting a program to eradicate the introduced rat, Rattus rattus.
Rat eradication is conducted by large-scale poisoning with a potent rodent
poison; deer mice as well as rats will be extirpated. Previously Dr. Ashley had
conducted a conservation and management study using a combination of approaches
that included molecular genetics, morphological measurements and population
viability analysis (PVA). As a result, recommendations were made to the Park
Service to capture a minimum of 333 mice from each of the islets, hold them in
captivity, and use then as stock for reintroduction. According to research, this
scenario would produce a population with high probability of persistence that
maintained genetic variation, and yet represented a feasible undertaking. This
plan is currently being implemented. Here Dr. Ashley proposes to take advantage
of this unique opportunity to monitor the recovery of these populations. She
will sample and genotype every mouse reintroduced, census the population
regularly, and resample biannually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this
research extends well beyond the management of an island endemic. The project
will test the outcome of a PVA, compare predictions of population genetic theory
to the real world, and will evaluate a captive breeding and reintroduction
program. Most species management projects involve one or more of these
practices, but outcomes are rarely evaluated or field-tested. By monitoring the
numbers, distributions, and genetic variation in deer mice as they are
reintroduced and during their recovery, the results of this study will provide
important new information that can be directly applied to management and
conservation of other endangered vertebrate species. &lt;br/&gt;