* 0228295
* Scaling Up Standards-Based Accountability
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Brian Stecher, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2008
* USD 5,534,731.00

Arguably the largest scale-up of an educational program occurring in the United
States at the &lt;br/&gt;present time is the implementation of standards-based
accountability (SBA) in all 50 states as a &lt;br/&gt;result of the No Child
Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB). SBA involves several elements
&lt;br/&gt;including content and performance standards, aligned assessments, and
a set of consequences &lt;br/&gt;tied to assessment results. The utility of
standards-based accountability was demonstrated in a &lt;br/&gt;few pioneering
states in the 1990s, and a number of studies suggest that SBA systems may
&lt;br/&gt;influence both student learning and instructional practices. The
government cited the success of &lt;br/&gt;these accountability systems as
justification for requiring SBA in all states. This investigation is
&lt;br/&gt;designed to identify factors that enhance the implementation of SBA
systems, foster changes in &lt;br/&gt;school and classroom practice, and promote
improved student achievement. It addresses four &lt;br/&gt;broad questions:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; What strategies are used in implementing SBA at the
state, district, and school levels? &lt;br/&gt;Which state, district, and school
implementation strategies are associated with &lt;br/&gt;changes in classroom
practice? &lt;br/&gt; How valid are the standards-based test scores as
indicators of changes in student &lt;br/&gt;achievement? &lt;br/&gt; Which
features of SBA implementation are associated with student attainment of
&lt;br/&gt;academic standards? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study involves three
states that vary in their approaches to SBA. Data will be collected from
&lt;br/&gt;state and district officials, principals, and teachers using a
combination of questionnaires, &lt;br/&gt;interviews, and artifact examination.
The data collection approach is longitudinal, and is &lt;br/&gt;designed to
provide information on SBA implementation at all levels, as well as on factors
that &lt;br/&gt;influence implementation, such as the clarity of the standards
and the methods for promulgating &lt;br/&gt;them, teachers. and principals.
understanding of the SBA policies, and the professional climate &lt;br/&gt;of
the school. Student achievement data will also be collected to address the third
and fourth &lt;br/&gt;research questions. The evaluation of the validity of
standards-based test scores involves &lt;br/&gt;examination of the content and
format of test items as well as a comparison of score trends on &lt;br/&gt;the
standards-based test and on other tests such as the National Assessment of
Educational &lt;br/&gt;Progress (NAEP). Relationships among implementation,
practices, and student achievement will &lt;br/&gt;be explored using
longitudinal multilevel modeling techniques. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Answers to
the four research questions will help policymakers, educators, and researchers
&lt;br/&gt;understand the ways SBA policies are implemented at all levels of the
system; explain &lt;br/&gt;relationships among implementation, instructional
practices and student achievement; and &lt;br/&gt;identify successful practices
that can be promulgated to make SBA function more effectively. &lt;br/&gt;Over
the next three to five years, SBA will affect every public school student in the
country, so &lt;br/&gt;insights gained from this research will have wide
applicability.