* 0228671
* ATOL: Collaborative Research: Assembling the Fungal Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* David McLaughlin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* P. Bryan Heidorn
* 12/31/2007
* USD 535,206.00

0228671&lt;br/&gt;McLaughlin&lt;br/&gt;Fungi make up one of the major lineages
of life, and include important decay organisms and pathogens of humans, plants,
and animals. There are roughly 80,000 described species of Fungi, but the actual
diversity in the group has been estimated to be as high as 1.5 million species.
This collaborative project by five major investigators and their numerous
colleagues worldwide will generate the first global synthesis of the
phylogenetic history of the fungi, which is necessary to expand our knowledge of
the history of life on Earth as well as the origin of ecosystems and adaptive
features that can have a direct impact on human health. Assembling the Fungal
Tree of Life (the AFToL project) will significantly enhance our understanding of
the fungal kingdom, especially ancient relationships that are not resolved among
the chytrids, zygomycetes, ascomycetes, and basidiomycetes. The AFToL project
will develop large data sets of molecular and non-molecular (morphological,
anatomical, life-history) characters, which will be accessible via the world-
wide web in continuously updated databases. Molecular characters to be acquired
include DNA sequences for seven nuclear genes sampled from approximately 1500
species, representing all major groups of Fungi. Nonmolecular characters to be
sampled include cellular machinery associated with nuclear and cell division and
cell wall biochemistry. The AFToL project will be based in five laboratories at
four universities with the core responsibilities of the participating
laboratories as follows: David Hibbett (Clark University), collection of
molecular data from Basidiomycota; Francois Lutzoni (Duke University),
collection of molecular data from Ascomycota including lichens and
bioinformatics; David McLaughlin (University of Minnesota), collection and
databasing of morphological characters; Joseph Spatafora (Oregon State
University), collection of molecular data from Ascomycota; and Rytas Vilgalys
(Duke University), collection of molecular data from Chytridiomycota and
Zygomycota. The AFToL project will involve more than 115 members of the
international fungal systematics community in 23 countries for all stages of the
project, from selection of taxa to collection and analyses of data. It will be
the policy of the AFToL project that all validated data will be released via the
web as soon as they have been generated. &lt;br/&gt;Fungi play crucial
ecological roles as decayers, mutualistic symbionts, and pathogens, including
pathogens of humans. The economic significance of fungi is almost incalculable;
they perform vital "ecological services" and their functional roles are the
subject of diverse applied disciplines, including agriculture, medicine, and
drug discovery, to name just a few. A phylogenetic database for Fungi will
facilitate the creation of powerful diagnostic and forensic tools for
environmental surveys and other applications, and will enable the discovery of
the many fungal species that remain undescribed. Training and outreach
activities are an important aspect of the AFToL project and will take several
forms including graduate and post-doctoral training, support for visiting
graduate students, undergraduate training, summer courses for high school
teachers, and website resources for K-12 educators.&lt;br/&gt;