* 0228853
* Collaborative Research: Anabranching Channels in Jointed Bedrock:  An Integrated Flume and Field Study
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2006
* USD 124,781.00

0228853 Wohl Our primary research objective is to quantitatively describe the
interplay of the processes and rates of change in bedrock channels formed on
jointed, resistant rock with particular reference to anabranching rivers. An
anabranching river reach has multiple channels that branch and rejoin and are
separated by surfaces that are dry or rarely flooded. We will use flume
experiments and field studies of the Orange River in South Africa to explore the
relationship of channel geometry developed on jointed, resistant rock to
sediment discharge, lithology, tectonic regime, and joint spacing. The flume
experiments and fieldwork will allow us to determine the conditions under which
anabranching bedrock channels form and persist. Multiple substitutions of
variables, accomplished by space substitution in the field and run design in the
flume, will allow us to directly infer the relative influences of each variable.

By conducting a systematic examination with experimental and field studies, we
will increase our ability to establish cause and effect. This will benefit
studies of bedrock rivers in general by directly contributing to the ability to
parameterize bedrock channel processes, and ultimately the ability to model
landscape evolution. Furthermore, we will use this project as an opportunity to
train young scientists and to foster scientific and cultural exchange between
South Africa and the United States. Graduate students will be integral parts of
the research program and we will work collaboratively with colleagues in South
Africa and from Wales. The graduate students will gain important scientific and
cultural knowledge, we will gain valuable international experience, and our
South African and Welsh colleagues will gain international exposure through our
work.