* 0228966
* Symposium:  The Role of Tissue Mechanics in Biological Responses to Mechanical Loading, Notre Dame, Indiana
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Glen Niebur, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0228966 Niebur This symposium is designed to explore the function of biological
tissues as modulators of mechanical stimuli applied to cells and as transducers
of mechanical forces. A wide variety of lectures will be presented, ranging from
tissue formation and remodeling, to methodologies for probing the mechanical
properties of tissues and cells. Speakers with expertise in a wide range of
biological systems will develop a broad understanding of mechanobiological
processes. By promoting discussion and presenting current research, the
proceedings will advance our current understanding of mechanobiology and foster
new research by exposing gaps in current knowledge.

The meeting will bring together acknowledged experts in the field of tissue
mechanics to provide training, insight, and advice to those interested in
becoming involved in this field of research. It will also provide a forum for
discussion and debate of the current state of knowledge of mechanics and
mechanobiology for different tissues. Tutorial lectures on bone, cardiovascular,
and cartilage remodeling will provide attendees with a view of the current state
of the art in each of these fields, and emphasize important areas of future
research. The meeting is to promote interaction between engineers, physicists,
mathematicians, biologists, and chemists with interests in biomechanics and
mechanobiology. Also, it provides a forum for junior faculty and graduate
students to interact with a wide range of experts in the field of tissue
mechanics and mechanobiology.

Proceedings of the conference will be compiled and disseminated to all
participants, and will be made available electronically over the world-wide-web.