* 0228926
* HPNC:   HPNC for Science Research at Loyola University Chicago
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* F. Pickett, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 09/30/2005
* USD 150,000.00

This project will connect Loyola University Chicago to the Abilene high
performance network via the Metropolitan Research and Educational Network (MREN)
in Chicago. &lt;br/&gt;This advanced network connectivity will deliver high
performance network services to the laboratories, research work areas and desks
of researchers at Loyola University Chicago for carrying out meritorious science
research projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The requirements for this advanced
network connectivity are driven by four proposed science research projects: one
in neuroscience, one in biology and two in computer science. The four
researchers are co-PIs. The Vice President for Information Services at Loyola
University Chicago will be the principal investigator. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;These meritorious science research projects are presently constrained
by high latency, limited bandwidth and problems with prioritization in using
Internet 1 (or now called the commodity Internet). To proceed, these projects
need high performance network connectivity through the Abilene network because
they require high bandwidth, very low latency and the full breadth of Quality of
Service (QoS) initiatives. Moreover, these projects involve essential
collaboration with connected Internet 2 universities and research centers,
nationally and internationally. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Loyola University Chicago
has developed a plan to extend the use of the proposed high performance network
connection beyond the early adopters, i.e., these four research projects. This
plan will enable researchers from the Chemistry department, and the schools of
nursing, education and medicine to access and use the advanced networking
resources to conduct their meritorious research that will require services, such
as distributed high performance computing, remote visualization and imaging, and
tele-collaboration, and involved collaboration with universities and research
centers who are connected to Internet 2, nationally and internationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;