* 0228007
* PGE/RES  Women's Participation and Experiences in Chemical Business and Industry in the U.S.
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Sandra Greer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 02/29/2008
* USD 497,384.00

University of Maryland College Park will study the experience of S&amp;E-trained
women in the chemical industry. There are three areas of study: Contextual
Patterns, Individual Experiences, and Effective
Interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Issues:&lt;br/&gt;* What
contextual patterns and influences exist with respect to the role of
S&amp;E-trained women in the chemical industry?&lt;br/&gt;* What have been the
individual experiences of S&amp;E-trained women in the chemical industry, and
what vocationally-inhibitory and -facilitative factors can be identified from
their reports?&lt;br/&gt;* What formal and informal strategies currently are
being used to increase S&amp;E-trained&lt;br/&gt;women's participation in the
chemical industry, and how effective are they?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contextual
Patterns will be assessed through quantitative investigation of organizational
patterns of women's participation in chemical business and industry in the U.S.
over time. This will include identifying a national, representative sample of
chemical businesses, gaining access to archival and current organizational data
on male and female employment patterns, and administering an organizational
survey to management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual Experiences will be
assessed through both quantitative (survey) and qualitative (interview)
investigation. A survey will be administered to a large, national,
representative sample of women in chemical business and industry to assess their
self-reported experiences in occupational preparation, entry, and advancement. A
representative sub-sample of these participants (diverse in race/ethnicity, age,
work setting, S&amp;E sub-field, and education) will be interviewed to explore
more specifically the variables that have inhibited or facilitated their career
trajectories in the chemical industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective
Interventions will be assessed through both quantitative (survey) and
qualitative (interview) investigation, as well as literature review. The
quantitative portions of Studies 1 and 2 and the qualitative portion of Study 2
will include assessment of formal and informal strategies currently used by
companies to increase women's participation; interviews also will be conducted
with a sub-sample of management personnel from Study 1 regarding their
perceptions of intervention strategies, to compare to the responses from
individual women. These data will be combined with a literature review to
identify best practices interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science and
engineering (S&amp;E) fields are considered crucial to U.S. economic growth and
are expanding rapidly. Demographic trends indicate that women and minorities
represent the greatest increases in workforce participation; however, the
continued under-representation of women (including minority women) in S&amp;E
fields is well documented. Much of the attention to women's relative absence
from S&amp;E fields has focused on women in academe, and very little is known
about women in other S&amp;E settings. Industry is the largest employer of
S&amp;E workers, but women are less likely than men to be employed in the
industrial sector. Data regarding why women fail to enter industrial settings in
predictable numbers and what happens to them there are virtually non-existent.
Moreover, very little is known about the prevalence or effectiveness of
strategies currently being used to address the paucity of women in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the study
include:&lt;br/&gt;* Providing a model for the study of demographic diversity in
one industry&lt;br/&gt;* Identification of "best practices" interventions to
enhance the careers of women in S&amp;E business and industry.&lt;br/&gt;*
Training of graduate and undergraduate students in research methods of the
social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;