* 0228223
* SGER: Columbia Glacier Photogrametry
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* W. Tad Pfeffer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/2004
* USD 44,147.00

Pfeffer&lt;br/&gt;0228223&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted as a
Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to document to continuing retreat of
the Columbia Glacier, in southeast Alaska by rapid calving. The Glacier is
presently retreating at a rate of approximately .74 kilometers (km) per year.
This rapid retreat has been accompanied by flow speeds up to 33 meters (m) per
day, making it the world's fastest-moving glacier. Since 1982, the glacier
terminus has retreated more than 13 km since the mid-eighteenth century. It
discharges ice into Prince William Sound in excess of 22 km3 .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant changes may be occurring in the glacier's
pattern and speed of retreat during the next year as the glacier terminus passes
through a gap which confines its flow. The activities over the next few months
may provide important clues about the longer-term fate of Columbia Glacier as
the retreat progresses up the channel where the glacier bed lies below sea-
level. The Principal Investigators are continuing their analysis of
photogrammetric data from 1999, 2000, and 2001 and will submit a proposal to
OPP/ANS in August 2002. However, the present terminus position and newly
calculated subglacial topography may mean that that the glacier is at a critical
state in its retreat, and that significant events may occur before the end of
2002. The funds will allow them to continue the aerial photography through 2002
when important changes may occur as the terminus enters deeper water and passes
a major lateral constriction.&lt;br/&gt;