* 0229358
* Intertidal Marsh Hydrology and Geomorphology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Raymond Torres, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2005
* USD 110,996.00

0229358&lt;br/&gt;Voulgaris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea level rise and coastal
urbanization have unknown effects on tidal creek habitats because feedback
between tidal forcing and marsh morphology are not well constrained. In the
south Atlantic Bight, tidal creek networks etch marsh surfaces and produce
subtle but well-defined drainage basins. We propose to conduct exploratory
research designed to elucidate the interactions between process and form in a
pristine marsh, representative of marshes in the south Atlantic Bight. The
objectives of this proposal are to analyze the linear, aerial and 3-D structure
of a marsh basin, and investigate how interactions between tidal flow and
topography influence basin evolution and stability. Our research goal is based
on the modification and application of terrestrial geomorphology models that
rely on the watershed basin area (process) to explain river networks (form). In
a similar manner we seek to identify if a creek basin area can be used to
characterize creek form and further to define such creek basin area. This can be
accomplished using high-resolution DTM (digital terrain model) of a marsh area
and evaluating the morphology of its tidal creek basins Delineation of basins
identified in the DTM (using topographic highs) will be compared to basins
defined by flow divides, which in a tidal environment might not coincide with
the marsh topographic highs. Flow divides will be defined for various tidal
stages and ranges using a 2-D depth averaged, finite element hydrodynamic model.
Both types of basins will be compared and analyzed for creek length, basin area,
slope and drainage density, hypsometry and inundation frequency, and these
parameters will be tested for scale invariance. This initial pilot study will be
carried at a location in North Inlet, SC a pristine marsh system. The results of
this work will help set guidelines for intertidal zone habitat restoration and
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;