* 0229292
* Dynamics of Ice Streams: A Physical Statistical Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Cornelis van der Veen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Julie Palais
* 11/30/2006
* USD 366,525.00

Ice streams are believed to play a major role in determining the response of
their parent ice sheet to climate change, and in determining global sea level by
serving as regulators on the fresh water stored in the ice sheets. Ice streams
are characterized by rapid, laterally confined flow which makes them uniquely
identifiable within the body of the more slowly and more homogeneously flowing
ice sheet. But while these characteristics enable the identification of ice
streams, the processes which control ice-stream motion and evolution, and
differences among ice streams in the polar regions, are only partially
understood. Understanding the relative importance of lateral and basal drags, as
well as the role of gradients in longitudinal stress, is essential for
developing models for future evolution of the polar ice sheets. In this project,
physical statistical models will be used to explore the processes that control
ice-stream flow, and to compare these processes between seemingly different ice-
stream systems. In particular, Whillans Ice Stream draining into the Ross Ice
Shelf, will be compared with Recovery and RAMP glaciers draining into the Ronne-
Filchner Ice Shelf, and the Northeast Ice Stream in Greenland. Geophysical
models lie at the core of the approach, but are embellished by modeling various
components of variability statistically. One important component comes from the
uncertainty in observations on basal elevation, surface elevation, and surface
velocity. In this project new observational data collected using remote-sensing
techniques will be used. The various components, some of which are spatial, are
combined hierarchically using Bayesian statistical methodology. All these
components will be combined mathematically into a physical statistical model
that yields the posterior distribution for basal, longitudinal, and lateral
stress fields, and velocity fields, conditional on the data. Inference based on
this distribution will be carried out via Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques,
to obtain estimates of these unknown fields along with uncertainty measures
associated with them.



