* 0229323
* Seismological Investigations of Deep Earth Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 531,739.00

EAR-0229323&lt;br/&gt;Peter M. Shearer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing
availability of large numbers of high-quality digital records from the global
seismic networks has made possible a variety of new ways to study deep Earth
structure. By analyzing hundreds or thousands of seismograms, it is often
possible to resolve new features in the data, or to perform more comprehensive
analyses of problems that were previously addressed on smaller scales. This
project will continue and extend analyses of global seismic data at U.C. San
Diego to address a variety of geophysical issues. These include: (1) Resolution
of seismic discontinuities in the upper mantle using reflected and converted
seismic phases, (2) Integrated inversions for discontinuity topography and
three-dimensional seismic velocity variations in the mantle, (3) Analyses of
both compressional and shear waves to resolve details of mantle attenuation
structure, (4) A search for hypothesized mid-mantle discontinuities that may
separate the mantle into different convecting cells, (5) Study and modeling of
high-frequency waves scattered from small-scale mantle structure, and (6)
Development and application of waveform cross-correlation and cluster analysis
techniques to long-period waveforms. This research is likely to lead to improved
methods for seismic data analysis and new constraints on deep Earth structure,
composition and evolution. The bulk of the funding will provide graduate student
and postdoc support that will further education in the Earth Sciences.