* 0229098
* Conference:  Microbial Forensics:  A Scientific Assessment, to be held in Burlington, Vermont, Summer 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Abigail Salyers, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2003
* USD 20,800.00

Microbes and their products have important uses in forensics. Diatoms have been
used to identify where drowning victims went into the water and PCR tests have
established paternity and relationships between crime victims and alleged
perpetrators. New technologies, like PCR and genome sequencing, could be used to
establish the origin of an infectious disease outbreak, whether natural or due
to intentional human intervention (bioterrorism). Questions of how to interpret
molecular data should not wait until case law determines their validity. For any
new technology to be accepted, it is first important to determine what standards
should be applied. Knowledge of the genome sequences of Bacillis anthracis (the
cause of anthrax) and other pathogens on the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) list of potential bioterrorism agents must be augmented by
knowledge of how this information can best be used. While there are well-
established criteria for evaluating and interpreting the results of such
classical methods as cultivation or serological testing, no similar criteria
have been developed for the new molecular methods. This colloquium will 1)
consider the use of microbial forensics in responses to disease outbreaks
(including bioterrorist attacks on human populations or agriculture); 2) assess
when and under what conditions new molecular techniques might be appropriate and
whether they could be used in conjunction with more traditional approaches; 3)
determine how genome sequences and other molecular data can be best used and
interpreted; 4) suggest which standards can be defined and which cannot; and 5)
identify potential problems and areas that need to be addressed experimentally
so that criteria may be defined.

The American Academy of Microbiology, the honorific leadership group of the
American Society for Microbiology, will convene a colloquium June 6-9, 2002, in
Burlington, Vermont. The colloquium will bring together 25-30 interdisciplinary,
expert scientists representing evolutionary microbiology, ecology, genomics,
genetics, bioinformatics, forensics, chemistry, and clinical microbiology for
structured deliberation on issues in microbial forensics. Participants will
consider several theoretical scenarios and survey current molecular
technologies, including genome sequencing, with a view to recommending standards
for evaluation and validation of the data these technologies produce. The
colloquium will produce the intellectual material for a published report with
unbiased statements of the issues and practical recommendations for the future.