* 0229775
* The Development of Olfactory Foraging Strategies in Antarctic Procellariiform Seabirds
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Gabrielle Nevitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 12/31/2006
* USD 136,515.00

Procellariiform seabirds (petrels, albatrosses, shearwaters) are distinguished
by their acute sense of smell. These birds have pelagic lifestyles and forage
over thousands of miles of ocean to find patchily distributed resources. This
project will explore the hypothesis that, during development chicks become tuned
to odors associated with feeding in a manner analogous to olfactory imprinting.
The development of olfactory sensitivity in burrow-nesting procellariiform
seabirds will be studied within the Kerguelen Archipelago. There are three
primary objectives. First, behavioral responses of chicks to two prey-related
odors (dimethyl sulfide and cod liver oil), one novel odor (phenyl ethyl alcohol
- rose scent) and burrow-related odors (burrow and colony dirt) will be
characterized using videotape documentation. Second, it will be determined
whether chicks can learn odor cues by pre-exposing chicks to a non-prey related
odor during the egg stage, and then testing for increased sensitivity to that
odor post-hatching. Finally, key behavioral responses induced when a chick is
exposed to an odor plume within a portable wind flume will be quantified. Only a
handful of studies have addressed olfactory abilities of procellariiform
seabirds, or indeed any bird. Results from the proposed research will be among
the first to address the development of olfaction in an ecologically important
context. Overall, the results will greatly extend our knowledge of the foraging
ecology of these fascinating birds. Such knowledge not only is useful to basic
science, but also may help bolster efforts to ensure the conservation of
procellariiforms, given the threatened or endangered status of many species. The
broader impacts of this work include research experience for a graduate student
and an active international collaboration with the French Institute for Polar
Research and Technology. Furthermore, the results may be transferable to other
potentially important organisms such as salmon and insects, where there is
commercial importance in understanding the developmental stages of olfaction.