* 0229698
* Vertebrate Paleontology of the Triassic to Jurassic Sedimentary Sequence in the Beardmore Glacier Area, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* William Hammer, Augustana College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 219,109.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate Triassic and
Jurassic dinosaurs and other vertebrates from the central Transantarctic
Mountains of Antarctica. A field program to search for Upper Triassic to
Jurassic age fossil vertebrates in the Beardmore Glacier region will be carried
out in the 2003-04 austral summer. Initially, field efforts will concentrate on
the Hanson Formation that has produced the only Jurassic dinosaur fauna from
Antarctica. Further excavation of the Hanson dinosaur locality on Mt.
Kirkpatrick will occur, followed by an extensive search of other exposures of
the Hanson, Falla and Upper Fremouw Formations in the Beardmore area. A field
party of six persons will allow two smaller groups to work independently at
different sites. This group will operate for 3-4 weeks out of a small helicopter
camp located in the Beardmore area. In addition to collecting new specimens an
interpretation of the depositional settings for each of the vertebrate sites
will be made. The second and third years of this project will be dedicated to
preparation and study of the vertebrates. Antarctic vertebrates provide a unique
opportunity to study the evolutionary and biogeographic significance of high
latitude Mesozoic faunas and this project should result in significant advances
in knowledge in this field.