* 0229462
* Drinking and Na/K-ATPase Alpha-Subunit Isoform Expression in Antarctic Fish
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Frank Dowd, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 07/31/2007
* USD 407,069.00

Nototheniid fishes inhabiting the near freezing (-2C) waters of McMurdo Sound
have some of the highest serum and cellular sodium (Na) concentrations and
lowest gill sodium/potassium-ATPase (Na/K-ATPase, the sodium/potassium pump)
activities of any marine teleost. The enzyme Na/K-ATPase regulates the Na
concentration in the cells of many organisms. Maintaining a high salt content in
the cells of these fish lowers the freezing point to allow habitation of cold
Antarctic waters and reduces the salt gradient between the fish and the
seawater. Based on previous studies of temperature effects, it is hypothesized
that Antarctic nototheniids have lower drinking rates, lower salt excretion
rates and a higher proportion of the low intracellular Na affinity for a
specific subunit of the Na/K-ATPase (a3-isoform) compared to New Zealand
nototheniids that inhabit warmer waters. These unique osmoregulatory properties
explain the high serum and cellular Na concentrations found in nototheniids
south of the Antarctic Polar Front. The proposed studies will compare and
contrast the unique osmoregulatory mechanisms of Antarctic nototheniids with
those of New Zealand nototheniids with respect to 1) seawater drinking rates and
serum and cellular chemical composition of the fish, 2) enzymatic properties and
expression pattern of mRNA and protein and 3) temporal and spatial localization
of the Na/K-ATPase a3-isoform subunit in the fish gills. To accomplish these
objectives four species of nototheniids, representing ecologically diverse
habits above and below the Antarctic Polar Front will be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include increasing our
knowledge about the role of Na-K-ATPase in the cellular function in many
organisms, strengthening our understanding of the biochemical and physiological
adaptations of the Antarctic nototheniids that allow them to survive and thrive
in the ice-laden waters south of the Antarctic Polar Front, providing field and
laboratory research experience for graduate and undergraduate students, and
significant outreach activities in science education to elementary and high
school students and teachers.