* 0229220
* SGER:  Reactive Saturation Behavior and Oxidant Induced Coagulation of Pathogenic Mycobacterial and Bacterial Spores
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Mark Hernandez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 12/31/2004
* USD 54,577.00

0229220 Hernandez The last several decades, numerous disinfection studies have
been executed to determine the inactivation response of many different types of
microorganisms exposed to various disinfectants. EPA's current disinfection
standards, which regulate the performance of public water treatment systems,
have been built upon such studies (AWWA, 1999). Of notable concern in the water
treatment field is the fact that current federal disinfection standards are
generalized criteria that must be applied to a wide range of source waters, each
with their own characteristics. While both the scientific and regulatory
communities clearly recognize that disinfection performance can be significantly
impacted by source water characteristics, only recently have disinfection
studies been chartered (Dow, 2001) to determine the impact of common water
quality parameters (e.g. turbidity and natural organic matter (NOM) content) on
the inactivation of "emerging" bacterial pathogens, bacterial spores, and
protozoan (oo)cysts by ozone. &lt;br/&gt;The main engineering "process"
variables affecting the disinfection performance of water treatment works are
disinfectant dose, mixing regime, and residence (contact) time - these
parameters form the basis of the modern "CT" concept, which was first introduced
by Chick and Watson (Gyurek and Finch, 1998) nearly a century ago. The CT
concept was originally derived from observations of vegetative bacterial cells
(i.e. not spores) and has been widely accepted as a robust engineering tool for
disinfection system designs. Over the last generation, conventional CT
disinfection models used for chlorine have been extended to include O3.
&lt;br/&gt;The engineering of ozone (O3) disinfection systems for public water
supplies has received increasing scientific and regulatory attention because of
the potential for chlorine to form by-products, which present significant human
health risks. While ozone is gaining popularity in full-scale disinfection
applications, its germicidal abilities have been studied for many years. O3
appears to be more effective than chlorine-based disinfectants against the most
oxidant-resistant microorganism physiologies - bacterial spores and protozoan
(oo)cysts. However, ozone is extremely reactive and the kinetics of ozone-
associated disinfection reactions is so rapid, that understanding ozone
inactivation mechanisms with different microorganisms is extremely challenging
(Elovitz et al., 2000). Ozone can induce the aggregation of organic particulate
matter (Chandrakanth, 1996), but because of culturing artifacts, its potential
for inducing coagulation of bacteria, has not been documented.
&lt;br/&gt;Motivation and Research Needs. Modern disinfection engineering
remains rooted in a CT response model that is predominantly based on the
observations of culturing dispersed vegetative bacterial cells from synthetic
waters. While conventional CT models have extended some reasonable protection
for water supplies using chlorine, their predictive capacity needs to be more
comprehensive in order to leverage the disinfection capabilities and advantages
of ozone. Projected increases for ozone use provide motivation to study its
coagulation effects and disinfection efficacy against emerging pathogens, with a
focus on its inactivation mechanisms against resilient physiologies. &lt;br/&gt;