* 0229243
* Statistical Physics in Random Media
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Daniel Fisher, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2007
* USD 405,000.00

0229243&lt;br/&gt;Fisher&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on
the statistical physics of random media. Quenched randomness drastically alters
the properties of many systems, especially their dynamics. A variety of systems
in which many degrees of freedom interact in random media will be studied
focusing on long time scale universal aspects of their
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One class of such system can undergo equilibrium
phase transitions but they evolve extremely slowly towards equilibrium because
of the necessity of overcoming large free energy barriers. For these, in
particular spin glasses, both the nature of the non-equilibrium configurations
that dominate observations and the equilibrium states towards which they strive
are of interest. Many fundamental questions remain unanswered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second class of random systems are those in which the
dynamics and equilibrium properties are inextricably linked because of quantum
mechanics. The destruction of superconductivity by quantum fluctuations will be
investigated, focusing on the combined effects of randomness, quantum mechanics
and dissipation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third class, driven systems which are
intrinsically far from equilibrium, can undergo novel types of non-equilibrium
transitions, such as depinning from a stationary to a sliding "phase." Progress
towards a better understanding of such transitions will be used to investigate
the dynamics and statistics of earthquakes both on single faults and on
interacting faults. Related issues in laboratory scale fracture will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research will study a variety
of random systems ranging from magnetic glasses to earthquakes. The research
addresses fundamental issues. The results of these studies may have broader
applications to real materials.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;