* 0229583
* Intracrystalline Boron Isotope Fractionation in Illite/Smectite:  A Potential Geothermometer and Paleo-Fluid indicator r
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Richard Hervig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2007
* USD 281,945.00

Intra-crystalline Boron Isotope Fractionation in
Illite/Smectite&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron is found in two different
crystallographic sites of the 2:1 clay minerals illite/smectite. Boron is
present in the interlayers of these clay minerals and also substitutes in the
tetrahedral layers. Our pilot study (NSF SGER #0108852) developed a technique to
analyze the boron isotopic ratio in these two sites, and we found that in
natural samples the difference in the B-isotope ratios between each
crystallographic site can be as high as 40. The present work is to study the
factors that affect intra-crystalline B isotope variations. These results have
the potential to provide a major advance in our understanding of clay mineral
diagenesis and may also be a useful low temperature geothermometer. The research
combines two different approaches: the synthesis of illite/smectite under
carefully controlled conditions of temperature, pressure, and fluid composition
and the analysis of natural samples from well-characterized
localities.&lt;br/&gt;Our experimental work will react a variety of smectites to
illite in the presence of fluids with different aqueous d11B starting
compositions. In order to test the B selectivity for tetrahedral sites, we will
examine beidellite and montmorillonite compositions and di- and tri-octahedral
clays to determine the effect of octahedral cation exchange relative to
tetrahedral cation exchange on the d11Bint compositions. Isotope equilibration
of I/S phases can be tested in experimental samples by changing the fluid d11B
during reaction progress.&lt;br/&gt;It is critical to compare the experimental
work to natural I/S undergoing illitization in different hydrothermal regimes.
The mechanisms of illitization may be different for closed (mudstone or
bentonite) versus open (sandstone or geothermal) systems. We need to test the
dependence of the intracrystalline d11B variations in different thermal regimes
and varying the fluid/rock ratio. To do this we propose to study samples from a
bentonite (closed system), a rapidly buried shale versus slowly buried mudstones
and geothermal samples from 180-400C (open system). The geothermal system holds
the most promise for finding fluids and natural I/S in
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;The combined experiments and analysis of natural samples
will allow us to assess the role of fluid composition, mineral composition,
temperature, temperature gradient, and fluid/rock ratios on the composition of B
in the interlayers and tetrahedral layers of I/S. This new research will produce
important information relating to the illitization process and may prove the
potential for a novel low-temperature geothermometer.&lt;br/&gt;