* 0229185
* The Structure and Evolution of the Antarctic Plate (SEAP) 2003 Workshop; March 3-5, 2003, Boulder, CO
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 62,875.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science
Foundation, provides support for a research-planning workshop for Antarctic
lithospheric research. The workshop, entitled "The Structure and Evolution of
the Antarctic Plate (SEAP) 2003 Workshop," will be held in Boulder, Colorado,
between March 3 and 5, 2003. There are five principal purposes for the
workshop:(1) to highlight outstanding scientific problems for the next 10 years
concerning the structure and evolution of the Antarctic Plate;(2) to discuss the
feasibility of an ambitious initiative in the Austral geosciences, seen as the
next generation of earth-based geophysical instrumentation on Antarctica and on
and beneath the Austral seas, with primary emphasis on the broad-band seismic
component ''Antarctic-Array'');(3) to identify auxiliary program needs to
complement Antarctic-Array, in particular the roles of marine geology/geophysics
and geodynamical modeling;(4) to discuss the relationship to other research
initiatives that have originated both within (e.g., REVEAL, ANDRILL, ANTEC) and
outside of the traditional Antarctic geoscience community; and (5) to develop a
preliminary SEAP science plan. The workshop is expected to draw participants
from both the US and international research communities. A report of the
workshop will be produced within a few months after the workshop concludes.