* 0229955
* Collaborative Research: Extrusion and Rotation during Intracontinental Deformation: The Role of the Kunlun Fault in the Indo-Asia Collision
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Eric Kirby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2008
* USD 257,142.00

Despite recent advances in understanding of the mechanical and thermal response
of&lt;br/&gt;continental lithosphere to collisional orogenesis, important
controversies remain. One of these centers on the role of large strike-slip
faults during intracontinental deformation, and whether these structures 1)
control the lateral 'escape' of quasi-rigid blocks in response to continental
convergence (e.g., Tapponnier et al., 1982), or 2) reflect the passive
localization of strain in a pervasively deforming and shearing crust (e.g.,
England and Molnar, 1990). The models make very different predictions regarding
the variation of displacement along strike-slip faults, the relationship of
fault displacement to deformation of the surrounding crustal blocks, and the
nature of accommodation of slip at the terminations of the faults. In eastern
Tibet, continuing debate over the nature of active deformation reflects, to a
large degree, the limited number of rigorous geologic tests of these
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kunlun fault is a first-order structural
feature in the central and eastern Tibetan Plateau, where it presents a key
opportunity to test among competing hypotheses for the role of strike-slip
faults in the active deformation of eastern Tibet. Although Holocene slip rates
appear to be uniform at ~11mm/yr along the central portion of the fault (Van der
Woerd et al., 2000), several observations suggest that significant left-lateral
shear along the eastern Kunlun fault does not reach the margin of the Tibetan
Plateau: 1) the active trace of the fault on remote sensing (e.g., Tapponnier
and Molnar, 1977) cannot be distinguished east of ~102 E; 2) field observations
(Kirby) confirm that scarps associated with the Kunlun fault are not present
east of this region; and 3) geodetic surveys indicate that, at present, little
resolvable left-lateral shear passes through the eastern margin of the plateau
(Chen et al., 2000). Determining what happens to left-lateral shear along the
easternmost portion of the Kunlun fault is critical if we are to understand its
kinematic and dynamic role in deformation of eastern Tibet and more generally
the role of strike-slip faults during intracontinental
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to test several hypotheses
regarding the mechanisms of transfer and/or&lt;br/&gt;accommodation of
displacement at the apparent termination of an intracontinental strike-slip
fault: ce Hypothesis 1: Displacement is transferred to kinematically linked,
strike-slip faults that:&lt;br/&gt;a. transmit displacement across and beyond
the plateau margin, or&lt;br/&gt;b. transmit displacement to shortening
structures at the plateau margin.&lt;br/&gt;ce Hypothesis 2: Displacement is
absorbed by distributed shortening within the plateau resulting in crustal
thickening.&lt;br/&gt;ce Hypothesis 3: Displacement represents passive rotation
of faults in response to a diffuse, clockwise regional
shear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testing these hypotheses will focus on the following
tasks:&lt;br/&gt;ce Determining Late Pleistocene-Holocene slip rates along the
easternmost segment of the Kunlun fault, with special attention to potential
variations along strike.&lt;br/&gt;ce Establishing the geometry, kinematics, and
rates of displacement on candidate accommodation structures (both within the
plateau and at its margin).&lt;br/&gt;ce Assessing the magnitude and
distribution of differential rock uplift and river incision in the Anyemaqen
Shan (the prime candidate for shortening within the plateau)&lt;br/&gt;This
study promises to bring a detailed chronologic perspective to bear on the nature
of&lt;br/&gt;accommodation of strain at the terminations of large,
intracontinental strike-slip faults. The PI's will document the presence or
absence of displacement gradients present near the ends of such structures. The
study will define the relationship of fault displacement to regional deformation
patterns and will determine some of the mechanisms by which displacement is
transferred to other structures. Finally, it will determine to what degree fault
displacements are linked to deformation of the bounding blocks. The combined
results will yield critical new insights into the problem of extrusion versus
rotation during continental deformation.