* 0229629
* Collaborative Research: Tidal Modulation of Ice Stream Flow
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Donald Voigt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2007
* USD 363,834.00

This award supports a project to investigate the new-found, startling
sensitivity of two major West Antarctic ice streams to tidal oscillations to
learn the extent and character of the effect and its ramifications for future
ice-stream behavior. Ice streams D, C and Whillans (B) all show strong but
distinct tidal signals. The ice plain of Whillans is usually stopped outright,
forward motion being limited to two brief periods each day, at high tide and on
the falling tide. Motion events propagate across the ice plain at seismic wave
velocities. Near the mouth of D, tides cause a diurnal variation of about 50% in
ice-stream speed that propagates upglacier more slowly than on Whillans, and
seismic data show that C experiences even slower upglacier propagation of tidal
signals. Tidal influences are observed more than 100 km upglacier on C, more
than 40 km upglacier on D, and may be responsible for fluctuations in basal
water pressure reported 400 km upstream on Whillans, nearly the full length of
the ice stream. During the first year, the spatial extent of this behavior will
be measured on Whillans Ice Stream and ice stream D by five coordinated seismic
and GPS instrument packages at 100-km spacing on each ice stream. These packages
will be deployed by Twin Otter at sites selected by review of satellite imagery
and will operate autonomously through a combination of solar and battery power
for two lunar cycles to study the sensitivity of the ice stream motion to spring
and neap tides. Additionally, existing data sets will be examined further for
clues to the mechanisms involved, and preliminary models will be developed to
reconcile the seemingly contrasting behaviors observed on the ice streams. The
second and third field seasons will examine in greater detail the tidal behavior
of Whillans (year 2) and D (year 3). Work will especially focus on detailed
study of at least one source area for events on Whillans, assuming that source
areas inferred from preliminary data remain active. Vertical motions have not
yet been detected, but differential GPS will increase our detection sensitivity.
Seismic instrumentation will greatly increase temporal resolution and the
ability to measure the propagation speed and any spatial heterogeneity. Modeling
will be refined as more is learned from the field experiments. The project
should yield numerous broader impacts. The improved knowledge of ice-stream
behavior from this study will contribute to assessment of the potential for
rapid ice-sheet change affecting global sea level with societal consequences.
Results will be disseminated through scientific publication and talks at
professional meetings, as well as contacts with the press, university classes
taught by the PIs, visits to schools and community groups, and other activities.
Two graduate students will be educated through the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;