* 0229885
* Mapping Chemical Plumes from Bottom to Top
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Donald Helmberger, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 10/31/2005
* USD 285,226.00

Helmberger&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229885&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable progress has
been made in mapping out lateral variation in the Earth, demonstrating the
active dynamic processes going on beneath us. Advances in seismic tomography in
terms of travel time and waveform methodology has allowed major structures in
the mantle to be determined. Relatively fast velocities ring the Pacific derived
from Global long-period studies and further resolution into sharper sheet-like
features with shorter wavelength bodywaves and higher-mode efforts. The
velocities beneath the slowest lower mantle structures, mid-Pacific and South
Africa can be modeled by a D" (roughly 300 km thick) with about 3% drop in shear
velocity in basic agreement with some recent tomography studies. Beneath
southern Africa, a large structure about 1200 km across extends upward about
1500 kms with about the same S-velocity reduction of 3%. The boundaries of this
anomaly appear sharp enough to produce multipathing in SKS. Recently released
SKS data from the South African Array reveals jumps in SKS travel time of up to
8 secs, which can be contoured, delimiting the sharpness of this huge structure
as it turns from a northwest direction to an east west direction beneath the
Indian Ocean. To make accelerated progress in developing 3D images of this
structure and a possible sister structure beneath the Pacific, the investigators
plan a concentrated effort to construct whole mantle 2D cross sections by
modeling waveform data along selected corridors. Using their new waveform
modeling tools in combination with the ever-expanding IRIS networks of PASSCAL
arrays and fixed stations will allow them to address the following questions:
How sharp are the sides of these huge structures and what is their 3D geometry;
how uniform is the roof structure and does the Rayleigh number decrease
drastically to form fast moving smaller plumes interacting with the 660
transition zone and can this be seen in distortions of the 670 km triplications;
what is the fine-scale structure beneath the Pacific (SV and SH) and how is it
related to the mid-mantle structure? The investigators purpose to address these
issues with a broadband data gathering exercise followed by detailed modeling,
including all body wave phases sampling selected
corridors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;