* 0229876
* Variations and Controls on the Up- and Down-Dip Limits of the Central America Seismogenic Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 67,730.00

EAR-0229876&lt;br/&gt;Susan Y. Schwartz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first-order
characterization of the seismogenic zone, including its geometry &lt;br/&gt;and
up and down-dip limits is nearly established in northern and central Costa
&lt;br/&gt;Rica. This was accomplished through the deployment of two
onshore/offshore &lt;br/&gt;seismic networks directly above the seismogenic zone
that were part of a &lt;br/&gt;MARGIN's funded multidisciplinary seismogenic
zone experiment (CRSEIZE). This &lt;br/&gt;proposal seeks to: 1) use data
collected during this experiment in conjunction &lt;br/&gt;with local network
data to establish a similar first-order characterization of &lt;br/&gt;the
seismogenic zone in Nicaragua; 2) perform a detailed investigation of the
&lt;br/&gt;variations in the transition from inter to intra plate seismicity in
northern &lt;br/&gt;Costa Rica and Nicaragua; and 3) evaluate thermal and
mechanical models that &lt;br/&gt;have been proposed to control this transition.
These golas will be accomplished &lt;br/&gt;by simultaneously inverting local
travel time data in northern Costa Rica and &lt;br/&gt;Nicaragua to obtain an
high resolution, three-dimensional, P and S wave velocity &lt;br/&gt;structure
and accurate hypocentral locations. Earthquake locations coupled with
&lt;br/&gt;focal mechanism determinations will allow the active seimogenic zone
to be &lt;br/&gt;identified in southern Nicaragua, where the addition of
stations from the &lt;br/&gt;northern Costa Rica (Nicoya) network greatly
improves station coverage and &lt;br/&gt;hypocentral accuracy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;