* 0229705
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Detection and attribution of changes in the hydrologic regimes of the Mackenzie, the Kuparuk and the Lena River Basins
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Douglas Kane, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 2,134,062.00

The objectives of this research are to detect and document changes in the
storage of freshwater in the Arctic regions of the Western Canadian, Alaskan,
and Eastern Siberian Arctic, to ascribe those changes to their land cover or
climate source, and assess the impacts of past and future variations in storage
components (e.g., active layer depth, lake volume) on freshwater inputs into the
Arctic Ocean. The aim is to characterize the changing hydrologic regime
spatially to facilitate accurate projections of future hydrologic conditions and
to develop a numerical modeling capability that 1) accurately captures
contemporary climatic and hydrologic dynamics, 2) projects reasonably accurate
responses to future scenarios and 3) incorporates well documented algorithms
that will be distributed to other modeling groups wishing to include dynamic
land surface processes in arctic regions (e.g., for studies of vegetation
dynamics or gas flux). The investigators will also provide a pan-Arctic
perspective by using spatially-based model results to develop a statistically-
based model. &lt;br/&gt;The research is divided broadly into two main
components: process-level hydrologic studies and large-scale atmospheric
studies, with a well-defined approach to bridge the scale differences. Process-
level studies include field observations and analyses of the storage components
in the hydrological cycle as well as modeling of their role in the hydrological
cycle. Field studies include surveys of the main storage components, with
literature searches and remote sensing filling in many of the gaps. Field
studies on the watershed scale will also be conducted at several small
watersheds along North/South transects covering the Middle Yukon, Kuparuk, Upper
Yukon, Mackenzie and Lena watersheds where long-term records and on-going
measurement programs exist. The WaterWERCs model will be applied to these small
sub-watersheds for calibration and validation using contemporary records, and to
the entire watersheds for both climate scenarios of the past, present and future
driven from our atmospheric modeling. The atmospheric model, PAM, is a state-of-
the-art regional climate model that will be tailored for use in a pan-Arctic
setting and will be driven by gridded atmospheric re-analyses. The atmospheric
model results will be validated with available observational data and the
gridded model output will be used to force a hydrologic model. &lt;br/&gt;