* 0229526
* Collaborative Research: Toward an Erosion Rule for Glacial Quarrying: Modeling and Measurements
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Thomas Hooyer, University of Wisconsin-Extension
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2006
* USD 26,432.00

Collaborative research toward an erosion rule for glacial quarrying: Modeling
and measurements

Denis Cohen and Neal Iverson EAR-0229692 Iowa State University Thomas Hooyer
EAR-0229526 Wisconsin Geological Survey

Abstract

Erosion of rock by glaciers results in spectacular landforms, such as horn peaks
and U-shaped valleys, and can also have a dramatic effect on rates of rock
uplift in mountain belts and associated changes in weathering rates, CO2
production, and climate. Quarrying, the process in which glaciers crack
underlying rock and remove resultant rock fragments is thought to be the most
important process of glacial erosion. There is at present, however, no
comprehensive quantitative model of quarrying that fully links glaciological
variables, such as sliding speed and basal water pressure, to quarrying rate.
Thus, results of models of glacial erosion applied over broad areas (e.g.,
mountain belts) and long periods (10^5-10^6 years) are uncertain, both
quantitatively and conceptually.

With this research, a versatile theoretical model of quarrying will be
constructed and then tested, both with real-time measurements of crack growth in
bedrock beneath a glacier and with mapping of crack patterns in bedrock recently
exposed by glacier retreat. Ice flow will be modeled over bedrock consisting of
inclined steps by fully coupling water pressure in cavities in the lee of these
steps with sliding speed and cavity size for both steady and transient cases.
Results will be used to calculate the stress distribution in the rock bed and
the consequent speeds and paths of cracks, as they slowly extend and isolate
rock blocks that can be extracted easily by the glacier. The model will be
tested by installing inclined rock steps beneath 210 m of sliding ice at
Engabreen, a temperate glacier in northern Norway, where the Svartisen
Glaciological Observatory provides human access to the glacier-rock interface.
Sound waves generated by growth of cracks in the steps will be used to determine
the relation between glaciological variables and crack-growth speeds and paths
in the steps. To further test aspects of the quarrying model, sizes of former
subglacial cavities and distributions and orientations of associated glacially-
induced cracks will be mapped on stepped bedrock in front of Castelguard
Glacier, Alberta, and compared with model predictions. The overall result of
this work will be a quarrying rule that can serve as the basis for large-scale
models of glacial erosion.