* 0229805
* Improving Preservice Mathematics Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental Concepts in the Secondary Mathematics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* John Lorch, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 12/31/2006
* USD 74,388.00

Recent reports indicate that secondary mathematics teachers are most effective
when they have a deep understanding of the mathematics they teach, and that
teachers trained in the United States generally do not possess this depth of
knowledge. In this proof of concept, the grantees address this problem by
writing an innovative college-level mathematics textbook focusing on the
secondary mathematics curriculum, and show that the use of this book by pre-
service secondary mathematics teachers in a newly designed undergraduate course
improves their knowledge of the mathematics they are teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of "Improving Pre-service
Mathematics Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental Concepts in the Secondary
Mathematics Curriculum" is that it aims to improve the knowledge base of pre-
service teachers allowing for an increase in the depth of their mathematics
knowledge. The intent is to produce a book ready for national dissemination that
could be used in a wide variety of situations on both the undergraduate and
graduate level, either as a main textbook or as a resource. Roughly speaking,
the book exhibits three main features: First, coverage of carefully selected
basic secondary mathematics topics (many of which are not explored sufficiently
in high school due to the rush to calculus); second, an emphasis on connections
between these topics; and finally extensions of these topics to challenging
college-level problems and projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of
"Improving Pre-service Mathematics Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental
Concepts in the Secondary Mathematics Curriculum" is realized through the
development, testing, and revision of innovative materials through a
collaboration of mathematics faculty, mathematics education faculty, and current
high school teachers. These materials serve as the basis for a textbook, a draft
of which is completed and field tested by the end of the grant period. At the
same time, student knowledge is assessed via a variety of evaluation
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;