* 0229654
* A Microstructural Study of Simulated and Natural Fault Gouge Using Digital Image Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Jafar Hadizadeh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2006
* USD 182,700.00

Recent large-displacement experiments with simulated gouge indicate that
velocity-dependence of gouge friction evolves to, and out of velocity weakening
behavior, dependent upon cumulative slip history. Such rate-dependence
transitions appear to coincide with certain shear localization and
delocalization microstructures. Do the microstructures appear and disappear in a
systematic way with cumulative displacement? The PI's propose to investigate the
question through specific models with built-in tendency for shear localization
and recurrent delocalization. In one model the state of gouge is determined by
interaction of shear bands and surfaces at the scale of gouge thickness, in
another the observed rate-dependence transitions result directly from grain-
scale processes. They will investigate the validity of the models in both
simulated and natural fault gouge. Simulated gouge samples will be produced by a
series of rotary shear experiments; natural gouges will be collected from
previously studied San Gabriel and Punchbowl fault outcrops in southern
California. The rate-and state-dependent friction laws are to a large extent
empirical expressions of the processes of cataclasis, healing, and development
of internal structures in gouge. Microstructural parameters known to control
these processes include particle size, particle size distribution, gouge layer
thickness, porosity, and gouge fabrics. The coupling between microstructural and
mechanical analysis is weak due to difficulties in working with randomness,
variability, and discontinuity that is inherent in brittle deformation
microstructures. Do cataclastic microstructures offer significantly more
information than have been acquired so far by traditional methods? The PI's
propose to use digital image techniques, which allow matrix-type manipulations
of image data and application of statistical, massive and sequential data
analyses. They believe that the project has clear implications for the physical
definition of the evolution laws in friction constitutive equations, laboratory-
to-field scaling relations, and computer simulation of gouge evolution.
Furthermore, large-scale fault mechanics investigations (e.g. SAFOD) are
expected to benefit from the portability and efficiency of digital image
techniques that will be developed by this project.