* 0229034
* Collaborative Research:    Late Quaternary History of Reedy Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Brenda Hall, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2007
* USD 140,817.00

The stability of the marine West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) remains an
important, unresolved problem for predicting future sea level change. Recent
studies indicate that the mass balance of the ice sheet today may be negative or
positive. The apparent differences may stem in part from short-term fluctuations
in flow. By comparison, geologic observations provide evidence of behavior over
much longer time scales. Recent work involving glacial-geologic mapping, dating
and ice-penetrating radar surveys suggests that deglaciation of both the Ross
Sea Embayment and coastal Marie Byrd Land continued into the late Holocene, and
leaves open the possibility of ongoing deglaciation and grounding-line retreat.
However, previous work in the Ross Sea Embayment was based on data from just
three locations that are all far to the north of the present grounding line.
Additional data from farther south in the Ross Sea Embayment are needed to
investigate whether recession has ended, or if the rate and pattern of
deglaciation inferred from our previous study still apply to the present
grounding line. This award provides support to reconstruct the evolution of
Reedy Glacier, in the southern Transantarctic Mountains, since the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM). Because Reedy Glacier emerges from the mountains above the
grounding line, its surface slope and elevation should record changes in
thickness of grounded ice in the Ross Sea up to the present day. The
deglaciation chronology of Reedy Glacier therefore can indicate whether Holocene
retreat of the WAIS ended thousands of years ago, or is still continuing at
present. This integrated glaciologic, glacial-geologic, and cosmogenic-isotope
exposure- dating project will reconstruct past levels of Reedy Glacier. Over two
field seasons, moraines will be mapped, dated and correlated at sites along the
length of the glacier. Radar and GPS measurements will be made to supplement
existing ice thickness and velocity data, which are needed as input for a model
of glacier dynamics. The model will be used to relate geologic measurements to
the grounding-line position downstream. Ultimately, the mapping, dating and ice-
modeling components of the study will be integrated into a reconstruction that
defines changes in ice thickness in the southern Ross Sea since the LGM, and
relates these changes to the history of grounding-line retreat. This work
directly addresses key goals of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative, which
are to understand the dynamics, recent history and possible future behavior of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;