* 0229204
* SGER:  Room-Temperature Reactive Ion Plasmas for the Generation of Low-Friction Carbon Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Michael McNallan, Aerospace Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 08/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

ROOM-TEMPERATURE REACTIVE-ION-PLASMAS &lt;br/&gt;FOR GENERATION OF LOW-FRICTION
CARBON FILMS&lt;br/&gt;Small Grant for Exploratory Research &lt;br/&gt;G.
Radhakrishnan (The Aerospace Corporation) and Michael McNallan (University of
Illinois at Chicago)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this exploratory research program,
a novel room-temperature process for the generation of low-friction carbon films
from hard carbides is proposed. This offers an alternative to high-temperature
chlorination (on the order of 1000oC), typically used to generate such films
from carbides. There are practical limitations when applying the high-
temperature process to fabrication of microscale devices. Such devices are
typically produced by photolithography on a silicon substrate. The Si substrates
are highly susceptible to attack by Cl. or F. radicals and must be protected
from the halogenation process. However, neither organic photoresist, nor
phospho-silicate glass, commonly used as mask materials in device fabrication,
are capable of withstanding the high temperatures employed in the chlorination
process. For these reasons, an alternative low-temperature is highly desirable.
&lt;br/&gt;We will investigate the use of reactive halogen-ion plasmas,
generated from low-pressure halogen gases using a radio-frequency source, as an
alternate method of producing low-friction carbon coatings at or near room-
temperature on bulk TiC and SiC as well as thin films of these carbides. Such
coatings will simultaneously reduce friction and wear on sliding interfaces in
micro and macro-scale devices and surmount key and complex problems that result
from high-temperature processing during fabrication of devices with new
materials. Specifically, room temperature processing will allow such a technique
to be applied to the fabrication of devices using standard photoresist as a
masking layer for lithographic patterning. This approach to depositing low-
friction and hard coatings at room temperature is new and exploratory. It has
the potential of significantly impoacting the MEMS industry by becoming a
processing step in the manufacture of many types of complex MEMS
devices.&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will provide insight into the fundamental
mechanisms responsible for the generation of low-friction carbon from carbides
by comparing carbon films generated by room-temperature reactive halogen plasmas
to those produced by high-temperature chlorination of carbides. In parallel,
this investigation could provide a technological breakthrough for fabricating
hybrid, multi-functional low-friction coatings for MEMS or other devices
impacting micro and nanotechnologies. Novel coatings and hybrid deposition and
surface engineering schemes will emerge from this research. This program will
also provide an excellent opportunity for students to participate in new
developments and applications in materials processing and surface
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative program between the Aerospace
Corporation and UIC makes use of complementary experimental capabilities at the
two institutions to achieve its research and educational goals. UIC has
pioneered the development of high temperature chlorination processes for
formation of carbon structures on ceramic carbides, and is well equipped with
characterization equipment. The Aerospace Corporation has particular expertise
in room-temperature coating technologies, fabrication of MEMS devices, and can
offer additional equipment, which can supplement that available at UIC. The
technologies used at the two institutions are sufficiently different that a
student with experience in both laboratories will be uniquely prepared to
contribute to the development of new nanoscale technologies. The collaboration
between the two institutions will enable a graduate student from UIC to
participate in investigations at The Aerospace Corporation as part of his/her
thesis research and gain valuable experience and exposure to the advanced
laboratory facilities at The Aerospace Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;