* 0229324
* Collaborative Research (USC/UCLA/UCR/SDSU): Continuing Study of Internal Structure, Dynamic Rupture, and Post-Earthquake Healing of the Hector Mine Rupture Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Yong-Gang Li, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,344.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research (USC/UCLA/UCR): Continuing Study of
Internal Structure, Rupture, and Post-Earthquake Healing of the Hector Mine
Rupture Zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal Number: EAR-0229324, 0229452,
0229678&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Yong-Gang Li, John E.
Vidale, and David D.
Oglesby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We
propose to continue our study of post-earthquake healing, fault zone process,
and dynamic rupture of the 1999 M7.1 Hector Mine, California, earthquake using
fault-zone trapped waves. Observations and FD simulations of fault-zone trapped
waves generated by aftershocks and explosions, and recorded at linear seismic
arrays deployed across the Hector Mine surface rupture, have revealed a ~100 m
wide low-velocity waveguide along the rupture zone, and the bifurcation of
northern rupture at the seismogenic depth. Our previous work has also shown that
this low-velocity waveguide has healed since the mainshock, with P and S wave
velocities increasing by ~1% between 2000 and 2001. Continued monitoring of
healing in the Hector Mine rupture zone will help us to see if its healing rate
slows with time, as did the healing rate at Landers. In the present proposal, we
shall 1) repeat the experiment in 2003 to find further evidence of the time- and
spatial-dependence of fault healing; 2) develop a mechanical model based on
crack dilatancy theory combined with chemical sealing for interpretation of
fault healing; 3) simulate dynamic rupture on multiple fault segments and relate
these models to the extent of damage to the rock mass in fault zone; 4) analyze
shear-wave splitting for study of the near-fault stress state and its temporal
variation; 5) compare the fault healing at Hector Mine with that at Landers for
understanding the fault interaction in a parallel-fault system. Through this
project, we will obtain a better understanding for the relationships between the
fault zone internal structure, rupture process, and earthquake cycle. Knowledge
of spatial and temporal variations in the fault structure will help resolve more
realistic macroscopic representations of fault-strength variations and the
dynamic response of fault segments and fault networks as well as predict
behavior of future earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;