* 0229755
* Collaborative Research: Geochemistry and Whole Mantle Convection
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2008
* USD 70,000.00

Van Keken, Hauri&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229962, 0229755&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators are interested in the role that the generation and
recycling&lt;br/&gt;of oceanic crust plays in the formation of geochemical
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;The formation of oceanic crust is a fundamental
differentiation process that&lt;br/&gt;causes distinct variations in trace
element and bulk composition. The related&lt;br/&gt;variations in density and
rheology have important consequences for mantle&lt;br/&gt;dynamics and mantle
mixing. Our main hypothesis is that the formation and&lt;br/&gt;recycling of
oceanic crust can explain a vast proportion of the
geochemical&lt;br/&gt;observations. The central goal of this project is to study
the role that&lt;br/&gt;compositional density plays in preserving geochemical
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;As part of the investigators' hypothesis testing
approach they will &lt;br/&gt;address following questions:&lt;br/&gt; 1) How
does the recycling of oceanic crust affect mantle chemistry?&lt;br/&gt; 2) What
are the relationships between noble gas and lithophile &lt;br/&gt;isotope
ratios?&lt;br/&gt; 3) Is it possible that the large-scale differentiation during
Earth's&lt;br/&gt;formation accounts for the presently observed
heterogeneity?&lt;br/&gt; The team will use a combination of geodynamical and
geochemical modeling to&lt;br/&gt;answer these questions. This provides an
excellent tool to test conceptual&lt;br/&gt;ideas by quantifying the effects of
mantle mixing, fractionation,&lt;br/&gt;differentiation, and degassing. The
approach is based on previously established&lt;br/&gt;collaboration between Van
Keken, Ballentine and Hauri. Previous models will be&lt;br/&gt;improved by the
modeling of oceanic crust formation, incorporation of&lt;br/&gt;lithophile
isotopes, and significantly higher spatial and temporal
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;Van Keken and a graduate student will be responsible for
the model improvements&lt;br/&gt;and dynamical computations, while Hauri and
Ballentine will guide the &lt;br/&gt;hypothesis testing approach and aid the
geochemical modeling. The collaborative &lt;br/&gt;aspects are an essential
component of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt; This project will lead to a better
understanding of the processes that are&lt;br/&gt;responsible for the thermal
and chemical evolution of our planet. It will aid&lt;br/&gt;in the development
of essential dynamical modeling tools and provide&lt;br/&gt;cross-disciplinary
integration, international collaboration, and education&lt;br/&gt;of students in
quantitative geophysics and geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;