* 0229196
* Regional Paleosol Variability on a Dissected Alluvial/Coastal Plain:  A Proposal to Develop an Empirical Paleosol-Landscape Model for Nonmarine Sequence Stratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Paul McCarthy, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2005
* USD 115,792.00

Regional Paleosol Variability on a Dissected Alluvial/Coastal Plain:&lt;br/&gt;A
Proposal to Develop an Empirical Paleosol-Landscape Model&lt;br/&gt;For
Nonmarine Sequence Stratigraphy and Terrestrial Basin
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paul
McCarthy&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229196&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The use of paleosols
(fossil soils) for partitioning continental rocks and understanding changing
sedimentation rates in terrestrial sedimentary basins is now firmly established.
Early successes in applying paleopedological techniques to the recognition and
correlation of terrestrial unconformities (sequence boundaries) have built
largely upon paleosol-landscape models that were developed primarily from
aggradational basin settings. In contrast, relatively little attention has been
paid to paleosol variability in an alluvial/coastal plain undergoing dissection
during the falling stage on the relative sea level curve. This research will
document the spatial variability of paleosols across a single interfluve surface
in the Cretaceous (Cenomanian) Dunvegan Fm. with respect to distance from
associated valley margins and the coeval paleo-shoreline. The Dunvegan Fm. is
ideally suited for this study because it is both spatially extensive and
stratigraphically well understood; because coeval shallow marine and shoreline
environments can be confidently correlated with nonmarine deposits updip; and
because paleo-valley deposits have been mapped in detail and the distance from
any interfluve paleosol to the valley margin can be fairly accurately
determined. Ten paleosols will be sampled from a single interfluve at distances
from less than 1 km to more than 20 km from adjacent valley margins along a
transect extending more than 250 km updip from the coeval shoreline. Paleosols
will be described in the field and analyzed for micromorphological features,
geochemistry and mineralogy. Micromorphological features will be quantified and
paleosols will be objectively compared using a soil micromorphology index. These
paleopedological data will be used to reconstruct the pedosedimentary histories
of these paleosols, to develop a paleosol-landscape model for dissected
alluvial/coastal plain settings, and to assess the value of the soil
micromorphology index for objective description and comparison of paleosols both
within and between basins.&lt;br/&gt;