* 0229631
* A Novel Building Material for Panelized Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Fouad Fouad, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2005
* USD 168,000.00

FRP/AC sandwich panel with a core of lightweight high performance Aerated
Concrete (AC) (e.g., Autoclave Aerated Concrete, Cellular Concrete etc.) and
face sheets of Fiber Reinforced Plastics (FRP) composites has the potential to
be an excellent energy absorbing construction material plus it is relatively
inexpensive and available over much of the globe. Consistent with the recent
interests in high performance, zero maintenance civil infrastructures, the
proposed project will investigate the potential of FRP/AC sandwich panels (that
are cost effective, long lived, and lightweight), and concepts will be developed
and feasibility demonstrated for construction of low cost building structures
using the panel. FRP/AAC sandwich components will also be durable in severe
environments including corrosion and against ballistic impact. The results of
the program has the potential to provide commercial and residential building
that is more energy efficient and cheaper than traditional construction. It also
has some properties, in addition to those mentioned above, that may be of
interest to the military and others responsible for protecting lives. The unique
contribution of the effort will be the application of cost-effective VARTM
(Vacuum Assisted Resin Infusion Molding process) processing using innovative FRP
hardening schemes with recently developed glass-and carbon fiber architectures
and vinyl ester as well as epoxy resin types. The proposed effort will also
eliminate traditional hand lay-up processing techniques which prove to be
expensive and time-wise inefficient, and simultaneously advanced the state of
the art of usage of advanced composites in civil
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, a first step towards the
long-term goal, will address five fundamental queries: 1) Investigate cost-
effective manufacturing of FRP/AC sandwich panels with damage tolerant
architectures and new resin systems. 2) Perform material characterization and
structural testing of FRP/AC sandwich panels through a comprehensive
experimental program. The experimental studies are expected to provide an
understanding of the (a) failure mechanisms of the proposed sandwich panels, (b)
the strength, energy absorption, strain and modulus characteristics, (c) the
role of the fiber-to-AC concrete interface, and (d) failure of the composite
layers in the sandwich structure. 3) Develop concept and demonstrate the
ballistic response of affordably produced sandwich panels that have promise to
harden/strengthen without adding weigh penalty, and are cost-effective. 4)
Understand the structural response of such structures through analytical
simulations. 5) Develop modular systems to show how the FRP/AC panels can be
used for a variety of types of building construction. Erection, assembly, and
connections will be provided to clearly show how the construction can handle the
material in the field. The proposed effort will explore the tangible benefits
for wider application in structural engineering application areas. Finally, it
was demonstrated in our previous study that the impact response of two proven
materials- i.e., carbon fiber reinforced composite (CFRC) and glass fiber
reinforced composite (GFRC), in conjunction with engineered Polycarbonate (PC)
thermoplastic exhibits desirable failure mechanisms through indention of the
Polycarbonate accompanied by delaminating at Polycarbonate-laminate interface
rendering minimal damage to the laminate. The dynamic tests included ballistic
impact loading conditions using a 30-cal sabot assisted projectile and high
strain rate loading using compression Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB). The
rationale was that by providing a PC facing, the damage resistance of the
composite structure could be enhanced, as the PC can absorb energy, with minimal
weight penalty, and can serve the purpose of a sacrificial layer, that is easily
repairable or replaceable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate students and three
undergraduate students will be involved in the project. They will be exposed to
a wide range of technological issues crossing the boundaries of different
engineering disciplines such as materials science, structural design, computer
simulations, infrastructure analysis, hazard mitigation, and a variety of
fabrication techniques at the University of Alabama (Birmingham) campus. The
REUs will also organize demonstration for the high school students at the
university high school on the UAB campus. The PI has had prior rewarding
experiences working with REUs from diverse groups. &lt;br/&gt;