* 0229982
* Collaborative Research:   An Integrated Interior Infill System for Mass Customized Housing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Michael Mullens, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 12/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Collaborative Research: An Integrated Interior Infill System for Mass Customized
Housing&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In the future, homes will contain the most
complex activities of any building type. With the aging of the&lt;br/&gt;baby
boomers, homes must become centers for proactive healthcare, distributed energy
production, work,&lt;br/&gt;commerce, learning, etc. Homes must become agile
environments that accommodate rapidly changing&lt;br/&gt;needs, activities, and
technologies. They must respond to demands of sophisticated, affluent
baby&lt;br/&gt;boomer generation who want choice and tailored solutions that
closely reflect their values and needs. But&lt;br/&gt;places of living are
poorly prepared for this future. Most new apartments are generic, low-grade,
low-tech,&lt;br/&gt;inflexible, disruptive to upgrade, high maintenance, and
ill-designed. Architects and engineers play no&lt;br/&gt;significant role in the
creation of places of living, except at the very high end of the market. Most
housing&lt;br/&gt;research is focused on cost reduction - not on preparing
places of living to meet new requirements in the&lt;br/&gt;future.&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research project is to conceptualize and assess the viability
of a new approach that that may result in high-value, customized,
reconfigurable, adaptable, multifamily housing. The three coordinated thrusts
are as follows.&lt;br/&gt;1) The development of design concepts for the use of
prefabricated, volumetric module ioshellslc of a&lt;br/&gt;dimension that can be
efficiently and affordable shipped to the jobsite, combined with the
application&lt;br/&gt;of a mass customized cabinetry-like integrated interior
infill (I 3 ) system for apartment fit-out. Modular&lt;br/&gt;construction is
the fastest growing segment of the housing market, but its potential is limited
by a&lt;br/&gt;narrow range of design possibilities, its failure to take
advantage of modern manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;technologies, and the labor
intensive operations required to connect modules at the site.
This&lt;br/&gt;research will employ modular construction for what it is most
suited for - structural shells with building&lt;br/&gt;services that can be
rapidly assembled. &lt;br/&gt;2) The development of concepts for automated, web-
based, consumer design tools based on&lt;br/&gt;parametrically defined I 3
components. This effort will take advantage of prior work developed at
MIT&lt;br/&gt;and in industry for user customization of apartment design and
cabinetry.&lt;br/&gt;3) The development and testing of an I 3 production
methodology. The following issues will be&lt;br/&gt;investigated: Can an I 3
system allow mass-customized components to be manufactured efficiently
and&lt;br/&gt;with the same quality as identical mass-produced units? Can the
controlled and precise fabrication of&lt;br/&gt;integrated components allow new
materials such as advanced polymers, composites, and special-&lt;br/&gt;purpose
metals to find their way into the home? Can delicate electronics and devices be
more easily&lt;br/&gt;integrated into I 3 components than with conventional
construction? Can parallel manufacturing of the&lt;br/&gt;modular shell and
interior components reduce production cycle time?&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this
research will give the homebuilding supply chain, suppliers, factory producers,
and&lt;br/&gt;builders a vision of the future - and an approach to the design
tools and lean production systems that can&lt;br/&gt;make that vision a reality.
The research will attempt to leap beyond incremental improvements in
the&lt;br/&gt;conventional process, to an agile and adaptable system of mass-
customization using technologies&lt;br/&gt;processes that could be put into
effect in the near term. The research will also have important
academic&lt;br/&gt;impacts. It will provide two Masters thesis topics and multi-
disciplinary research experiences for two&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research
assistants. The class project in EIN 3314 Work Measurement and
Design,&lt;br/&gt;involving lean manufacturing in local industry, will provide
valuable, team-based, real world learning&lt;br/&gt;experiences for about 30
undergraduate engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;