* 0229306
* Magmartic Workshop in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Bruce Marsh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 388,249.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a field seminar or workshop to examine
fundamental aspects of magmatic processes using the Ferrar Supergroup sills in
the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The most challenging aspect of understanding planetary
magmatism is that so little of the integrated nature of the full magmatic life
cycle can be directly examined in any realistic context. Planetary magmatism
itself is an integrated, multifaceted process involving a spectrum of
interleaved chemical and physical processes. These physical processes are
responsible for the chemical transformation of the initial primitive magma into
the final evolved erupted product. Each essential physical component can be
found well exposed somewhere on Earth, and these components have been studied
piece by piece for nearly a century. But is has proven singularly elusive to
find and study any reasonable example of the entire process itself in a fully
integrated true spatial context. The Ferrar dolerites of the McMurdo Dry Valleys
(McM-DV) exhibit in exquisite exposures the detailed three-dimensional structure
and evolutionary development of an extensive magmatic system, which formed
within Earth?s upper crust some 180 m.y. ago. The McM-DV magmatic system
contains, on a manageable scale, all the essential features of major magmatic
systems, which elsewhere in the world are commonly seen only in a piecemeal
fashion. This system is a unique and an invaluable laboratory in which to study
first hand the dynamics of planetary magmatism. Because this unusual area is so
inaccessible to most researchers, it is proposed to hold a field workshop here
to introduce other researchers to the wonders of the McM-DV field relations, to
stimulate cutting edge research, and also to delineate the many fundamental and
unsolved problems posed by this magmatic system.

A two-week field and laboratory event involving 20-25 researchers will be
conducted to study the magmatic processes of the McM-DV magmatic system as a
centerpiece to understanding the fundamental mechanics and development of
magmatic systems in the most general sense. A working conference is envisioned
with sessions split between discussions and laboratory work at McMurdo in the
Crary Laboratory and fieldwork in the Dry Valleys. Four magmatic processes will
be considered by four research modules: 1. Magma Transport and Differentiation
in a Mush Column (East Bull Pass) 2. Crystal Transport and Sorting in Ponded
Magma (East Dais) 3. Solidification Front Instability (SFI) in Sills (Pandora's
Spire/Solitary Rocks) 4. Mechanics of Sill Emplacement (Victoria Valley and East
Wright Valley) To provide the widest possible impact on research, both in real
time and the long term, participants will be spread among five groups: 1)
Researchers working on other parts of the Ferrar system; 2) Senior researchers
of layered intrusions and basaltic sills worldwide; 3) Young researchers
studying magmatic processes; 4) Researchers of ocean ridge magma chambers and
melt sheets; 5) Graduate students in igneous petrology. The involvement of
undergraduates is also a real possibility.

The bringing together of these workers is intended as a catalyst to enunciating
a specific fundamental theme common to all magmatic processes, to understanding
the regional dynamics of the Ferrar-Transantarctic magmatic province, and to
stimulating strong scientists to new horizons of creativity through exposure to
a singular, world class field area.