* 0229661
* MOSI Natural Hazards Exhibition
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Dave Conley, Museum of Science and Industry
* Continuing grant
* Alphonse T. DeSena
* 04/30/2007
* USD 1,583,409.00

The Museum of Science and Industry in Tampa, Florida, will develop a permanent
exhibition and associated educational programs on natural hazards, phenomena
that become "natural disasters" when they interact with the human community and
its built environment. The exhibition, 9000 square feet in size, will address
the science of these phenomena, the science and technology of forecasting and
mitigation strategies and techniques. The exhibition features floods,
hurricanes, wildfires, lightning, hail, tornadoes, earthquakes and volcanoes.
The exhibition begins with an overview and a focus on the dynamic earth. It then
presents a streetscape of buildings devastated by the phenomena and eight
interactive areas dealing with each of the hazards. The concluding sections
include a demonstration stage and a series of elements that focus on
communications, community preparedness and response and forecasting. Ancillary
materials include: a family exhibition guide, teacher preparation materials,
classroom materials on forecasting, a distance learning program and a brochure
for the public (to be developed by IBHS). Central to the project is MOSI's
partnership and campus neighbor, Institute for Business and Home Safety, a
nonprofit arm of the insurance industry with a mandate to educating Americans
about natural disasters and ways to mitigate loss and suffering. Other partners
include FEMA, USGS, Red Cross, NFPA, local schools and community based
organizations. The Institute for Learning Innovation will conduct the
evaluation, supplemented by action research investigations by the University of
South Florida. A local high school emphasizing design and art will participate
in the exhibition development process.