* 0229297
* NOVA:  Leading Edge
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Paula Apsell, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 02/29/2008
* USD 5,098,289.00

WGBH is producing twelve quarterly television magazine-format programs devoted
to the public understanding of current scientific research. The programs will
consider the significant areas of on-going research, present the scientists who
are conducting the research, portray research as an on-going endeavor and
discuss the social impact and ethical implications of major areas of research.
Each program will include segments such as the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research news update - (5 to 7
mins.)&lt;br/&gt;Feature stories about on-going research - 3 (8 to 12 min.
each)&lt;br/&gt;In-studio discussions following many of the feature stories -
ethical, policy and social implications&lt;br/&gt;Point/Counterpoint - 2
commentators presenting social, ethical, political and economic aspects of
research&lt;br/&gt;"Then and Now" segments showing changing nature of scientific
research&lt;br/&gt;In-studio demonstrations&lt;br/&gt;Interstitial moments --
Showcases of interesting and surprising aspects of research&lt;br/&gt;Close --
update stories from previous programs, read viewers' input or answer viewers'
questions, preview upcoming story.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, WGBH will
produce three one-hour "Year in Review" programs that report what major research
has occurred over the past year and puts it in a context that will help viewers
understand the role of current research in all aspects of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other major components of the project include on-
going collaborations with other Public Understanding of Research Projects, an
interactive web site, communication training for scientists to help them explain
their work to the public, "Science Cafes" with on-going public programs about
cutting-edge research in informal settings, a resource guide for teachers,
"Leading Edge" articles in magazines targeted to teens, a "Leading Edge" science
contest for students conducted through PBS stations and a station resource kit
with information about how to establish local collaborations with researchers,
science museums, schools and others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;