* 0229757
* Paleobiology and Taphonomy of Exceptional Preserved Fossils from Jurassic Lacustrine Deposits, Beardmore Glacier Area and Southern Victoria Land, Antarctica
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Loren Babcock, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 204,890.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a study of the paleobiology and taphonomy
(postmortem history) of biotas from lacustrine interbeds within the Kirkpatrick
Basalt of the Ferrar Group (Jurassic), Beardmore Glacier area and southern
Victoria Land, Transantarctic Mountains, Antarctica. Sedimentary interbeds of
the Kirkpatrick Basalt represent unusual deposits of exceptional preservation
(or Konservat-Lagerstatten), characterized by the presence of a variety of non-
biomineralizing (or so-called soft-bodied) organisms. Fieldwork in previous
decades resulted in discovery of abundant remains of conchostracans (bivalved
arthropods having non-mineralized exoskeletons) and fishes, less common remains
of various arthropods such as insects, syncarids, and isopods, as well as plant
fragments. The arthropod and fish fossils range in preservational quality from
disarticulated pieces to articulated remains comparable to the finest known from
the fossil record. Renewed collecting of the lacustrine deposits should yield
additional exceptionally preserved fossils, possibly including additional taxa,
and other data important for paleoecologic, taphonomic, and paleoenvironmental
interpretation.

Present indications are that the Kirkpatrick lake deposits offer important
"windows" into the evolutionary history of high-latitude, freshwater ecosystems
of the middle Mesozoic. Paleoecologic and taphonomic study of the Kirkpatrick
lake deposits can be expected to provide additional clues to the general
conditions under which exceptional preservation of non-mineralized skeletal
parts, and perhaps soft parts, occurred in the geologic past. This is
significant because nearly all of our current understanding of conditions
surrounding exceptional preservation has been derived from studies of marine
deposits, marginal-marine deposits, or freshwater deposits from low- to middle-
paleolatitudes. Principal objectives of the research are: 1) to collect and
systematically document the biota of the sedimentary interbeds of the
Kirkpatrick Basalt sites in the Beardmore Glacier area and southern Victoria
Land, Antarctica; 2) to document and interpret taphonomic information on the
Kirkpatrick sites, including diagenetic alteration of fossils; 3) to describe
and interpret trace fossils that are associated with the body fossils; and 4) to
document and interpret the stratigraphic and sedimentologic context of
exceptional preservation in the Kirkpatrick sites.

Considerable importance attaches to the Jurassic sites in the Transantarctic
Mountains area because few sites from aqueous ecosystems of high paleolatitude
areas are known to contain non-biomineralized fossils. Completion of this study
will result in a more complete understanding of the biota and paleoecology of
high latitude lacustrine ecosystems of the middle Mesozoic. The Kirkpatrick
sites will provide information useful for interpreting Jurassic biotas in a
global context, as it will provide an improved basis for comparison with better-
known, low- to middle-latitude deposits of exceptional preservation. Data from
study of the Kirkpatrick deposits are expected to provide information concerning
the fundamental question of why exceptional preservation of organisms has
occurred in freshwater, high latitude settings.