* 0229300
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Study Linking Paleosol Biotic Communities and Ancient  Alluvial Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Stephen Hasiotis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 186,955.00

Collaborative Research: Integrated Study Linking Paleosol Biotic Communities and
Ancient Alluvial Landscapes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mary Kraus-EAR-0228858
University of Colorado&lt;br/&gt;Stephen T. Hasiotis-EAR-0229300 University of
Kansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is a
collaborative study of the different kinds of trace fossils (ancient burrows,
tracks, and trails) found in fossil soils or paleosols that developed on river
floodplains. The paleosols are of early Eocene age (~55 million years old) and
are located in northern Wyoming. The principal investigators, together with
graduate and undergraduate students, will use detailed fieldwork and laboratory
analyses to describe the different kinds of trace fossils and to determine how
the various trace fossils are distributed within different kinds of paleosols.
Because different paleosols represent different ancient environmental
conditions, the project will determine which trace fossils are environmentally
sensitive and can be used in other rocks to interpret ancient environmental
conditions. The paleosol and trace fossil data will also be combined with
available climatic data to determine if changes in the trace fossils coincided
with documented climatic fluctuations during the early Eocene in northern
Wyoming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining the study of trace fossils with the
study of paleosols offers a valuable new tool for interpreting ancient
floodplain environments. Results from this project will provide new insights
into the relationships among soil organisms (represented by trace fossils), the
soil environment in a particular area of the ancient floodplain, and climate.
Results from this study can be used to determine which trace fossils can be used
in other ancient floodplain deposits to identify ancient ecologic and climatic
settings. This study provides a unique opportunity to develop an
interpretational tool that can delineate among environmental, hydrologic, and
climatic factors that control the distribution of trace fossils in the ancient
floodplain record and clarify their distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;