* 0229836
* Soil Biodiversity and Response to Climate Change: A Regional Comparison of Cape Hallett and Taylor Valley, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Diana Wall, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2007
* USD 508,480.00

Soil ecosystems along the Antarctic Victoria Land coast from the McMurdo (MCM)
Dry Valleys in the south (78-76 S) to Cape Hallett (72S) in the north occur
across broad scale gradients of biodiversity, climate, and soil resource
legacies (e.g. organic matter, nutrients, salts) from previous climates. The
range of conditions encountered across this region can be used to test specific
hypotheses derived from a soil biodiversity and habitat model developed from the
findings of the MCM Dry Valleys Long-term Ecological Research Program (LTER).
This "habitat suitability" model describes the distribution, abundance and
diversity of soil biota based upon a combination of legacy and contemporary soil
and climate properties. This current project will extend the habitat suitability
model developed in the McMurdo Dry Valleys to the greater Victoria Land region
at Cape Hallett. Insights into the relationship between biodiversity (microbes,
invertebrates) and ecosystem functioning (soil respiration and nutrient cycling)
may be especially important in the Victoria Land region since it encompasses a
range of ecosystems, including those with organic matter near minimum detection
limits and no invertebrates, to those with very high organic matter deposits and
complex food webs (2-3 trophic groups comprised of &gt;4 invertebrate taxa). A
two-year study of field and laboratory research will address how soil food webs
and ecosystem processes are affected by changes in climate, legacy and
contemporary soil processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will begin the
regionalization of results and insights from the McMurdo LTER study and
determine whether the changes in biodiversity along the range of soil habitats
and landscape gradients in Taylor Valley, occur similarly across gradients in a
richer, more complex habitats (e.g. Cape Hallett). This study involves
international collaborations and will further multi-national research in the
Antarctic. There is a clear and immediate need to understand how soil
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning are related in all ecosystems and to
determine the factors influencing the distribution of soil biodiversity across
the Antarctic landscape. The motivation for the research proposed here
underscores the value of soils and their biota in providing ecosystem services
important to society (e.g., soil fertility). This is a difficult challenge as
the taxonomic complexity of soil food webs elsewhere limits our ability to draw
inferences about the functional significance of biodiversity and the responses
of soil communities to varying soil conditions and climate. This research will
make a significant contribution to testing biodiversity theory in all soils,
because extension of and testing this conceptual model of soil biodiversity
based on the simplest soil communities on earth will contribute to knowledge of
complex temperate ecosystems. These linked studies of microbial and invertebrate
diversity in relation to soil organic matter, moisture, and temperature change
at Taylor Valley and Cape Hallett will provide one of the most complete
quantitative assessments of soil diversity to date.