* 0229195
* Infrastructure for Biology at Regional to Continental Scales
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Goldman, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,687,733.00

The AIBS project on "Infrastructure for Biology at Regional to Continental
Scales" (IBRCS) has the following goals: (1) educate the scientific community
about the need to increase physical infrastructure capacity for data collection,
analysis, and database networking within and among field biology, other areas of
biology, and other areas of science; (2) provide for communications within the
scientific community and with the National Science Foundation regarding the
future development and focus of relevant infrastructure and data-networking
projects, and (3) serve as a public information source on these projects. The
scientific community will thereby become better able to determine the benefits
and utility of particular existing or proposed infrastructure and data-
networking projects to their areas of research. The AIBS IBRCS project will be
led by a Working Group consisting of biologists from the AIBS membership of
scientific societies and organizations, plus technical advisors from other areas
of science.

AIBS and the Working Group will:

- Summarize and evaluate past workshops on relevant infrastructure and data-
networking projects, and maintain a rolling summary of future workshops and
related activities.

- Conduct collaborative and consensus-generating activities, including Working
Group meetings, joint-sessions at the annual AIBS Council meeting, workshops,
presentation and discussion sessions at scientific conferences, and coalition
meetings with other scientific organizations. The goal is to involve many kinds
of biologists and other scientists in thinking about and working together on
scientific activities, questions, and applications that can be better addressed
with enhanced infrastructure and data-networking capacities. - Make the
biological community aware of relevant infrastructure and data-networking
activities in other scientific/technical communities such as geology, chemistry,
toxicology, hydrology, remote sensing/GIS, engineering, nanotechnology, bio-
sensors, mathematics, computer science, and data management/IT.

- Serve as a key source of information about relevant infrastructure and data-
networking projects for the scientific community, the public policy community,
the media, and the general public. Included will be printed materials (brochures
and reports), articles in the AIBS publication, BioScience, and a new website
covering past activities (e.g., past workshop summaries and evaluations, etc.),
present activities (e.g., current workshops and other meetings, reports, program
announcements, lists of existing networks, a matching service for scientists
seeking to partner with other PIs to develop funding proposals), and future
activities (e.g., upcoming workshops and other meetings, etc.).

