* 0229577
* The Science Behind Our Food
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* David Knauft, University of Georgia
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,699,357.00

The Science Behind Our Food Program is improving achievement, comprehension and
mastery of scientific concepts by middle and high school students. The program
provides inquiry-based education in biology and chemistry by focusing on the
application of these disciplines to solve real-world problems centered on the
theme of science behind our food. The program creates a science community that
includes graduate teaching fellows, science teachers, and University of Georgia
(UGA) faculty. Research and teaching expertise is shared among the members of
the group in a collaborative style. Teachers and fellows identify science
concepts that students find difficult to grasp and/or that are inaccessible
given the current resources. Through the use of a resource called Lessons In A
Trunk, lesson plans and materials needed to conduct demonstrations and/or
student-centered experiments are being created and used in classrooms. Weekend
Discovery Kits contain resources for students to conduct experiments at home
with family members. Thematic focus of lessons and kits are tied to food-related
research being conducted by faculty on the UGA campuses. Through press releases,
newsletters, and monthly videoconferencing, this community of scientists is
introduced to the individual students. Videographic examples provide virtual
field trips allowing students to visit these scientists' facilities. In all
activities, fellows provide on-site support and expertise in collaboration with
teachers' needs, including alignment to the State of Georgia's Quality Core
Curriculum (QCC). All components of the grant-supported activities are created
as resources for the broadest possible dissemination during and after the
project, and are being designed for maximum sustainability. The specific lesson
plans and newsletter content are being added to materials already available at
www.uga.edu/discover/educators. Participating teachers are conducting in-service
training for fellow teachers and are conducting workshops at state and national
science teacher association meetings. Lessons In A Trunk and Weekend Discovery
Kits are being maintained and expanded by science-based student clubs at the
University of Georgia that charge a minimal fee for their services. Coordination
of the "replenishment" program, continued newsletters, and web site maintenance,
are the responsibility of a permanent graduate assistant who is currently a part
of our program. The broader impacts of these activities accrue to a variety of
beneficiaries. Science teachers are obtaining further expertise in the
disciplines they teach and obtaining additional materials and lesson plans for
inquiry-based instruction. Science faculty are obtaining enhanced teaching
skills for classroom use, as well as enhanced communication skills to provide
the general public with information about science. Teaching fellows are leaving
the university with a set of science, teaching, and communication skills
generally not found in graduates of a science program in a research
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Science Behind our
Food&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Georgia&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: David
knauft, Joseph Oliver, Wayne parrott, Andrew Paterson&lt;br/&gt;Partner School
Districts: Ogelthorpe County, Tift County Public, Walton County, Turner
County&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,449,117 &lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows/year: 10
graduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban, Suburban, Rural&lt;br/&gt;Target audience:
middle-high school&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved: Biology
&lt;br/&gt;