* 0229915
* Long-term History of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* John Stone, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2004
* USD 50,279.00

Stone/0229915&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several recent studies have shown indications
of continued ice-sheet thinning in West Antarctica. Geological evidence of much
larger-scale deglaciation in the past is therefore a cause for concern over the
future of the ice sheet. This award supports an exposure-dating study that will
help to determine the frequency, extent and duration of previous deglaciations,
and show whether the present state of West Antarctic ice cover is typical, or
highly unusual. The project is based on measurements of cosmic-ray-produced
nuclides, which accumulate only when rock surfaces are exposed above the ice
sheet. Provided these surfaces are protected during glaciation by non-erosive,
cold-based ice, nuclide concentrations build up to record the cumulative history
of exposure and ice cover. Although this method cannot be used to date specific
prior glaciations, it can be used to obtain minimum limits on the total duration
of past exposure and glaciation, and maximum limits on exposure within the late
Quaternary (approximately the past million years). As an example of this, trial
Al-26/Be-10 measurements on a sample of bedrock from Marie Byrd Land reveal a
history extending back to the Pliocene, in which the sampled surface has
experienced very limited exposure. The results indicate a cumulative exposure
time of ~130,000 years, in 3.5 million years of (non-erosive) ice cover, and
limit the total exposure time in the past million years to less than ~10,000
years. Evidently this particular surface seldom outcrops, suggesting that the
current state of deglaciation in Marie Byrd Land is unusual compared to most
interglacial periods in the late Quaternary. This project will explore this
possibility with further, coupled Be-10/Al-26 analyses of bedrock samples
collected during the 2000-01 field season. If consistent results emerge, like
those described above, scientists will be able to constrain: (i) the long-term
average configuration of the ice sheet in this region, (ii) how much of the
current terrain is typically exposed during interglacial periods, (iii) the
comparative frequency and duration of deglaciation in the early Quaternary vs
the late Quaternary, and (iv) the duration of late-Quaternary deglaciation
events, which may be linked to previous episodes of extensive deglaciation
reported in the literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;