* 0229403
* Collaborative Research: Geomagnetic Field as Recorded in the Mt Erebus Volcanic Province: Key to Field Structure at High Southern Latitudes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/29/2008
* USD 305,111.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate Earth's magnetic
field over the past 5 million years in order to test models of Earth's
geomagnetic dynamo. Paleomagnetic data (directions of ancient geomagnetic fields
obtained from rocks) play an important role in a variety of geophysical studies
of the Earth, including plate tectonic reconstructions, magnetostratigraphy, and
studies of the behavior of the ancient geomagnetic field (which is called paleo-
geomagnetism). Over the past four decades the key assumption in many
paleomagnetic studies has been that the average direction of the paleomagnetic
field corresponds to one that would have been produced by a geocentric axial
dipole (GAD) (analogous to a bar magnet at the center of the Earth), and that
paleoinclinations (the dip of magnetic directions from rocks) provide data of
sufficient accuracy to enable their use in plate reconstructions. A recent re-
examination of the fundamental data underlying models of the time averaged field
has shown that the most glaring deficiency in the existing data base is a dearth
of high quality data, including paleointensity information, from high latitudes.
This project will undertake a sampling and laboratory program on suitable sites
from the Mt. Erebus Volcanic Province (Antarctica) that will produce the quality
data from high southern latitudes that are essential to an enhanced
understanding of the time averaged field and its long term variations.