* 0229724
* Using Viscoelastic Material to Reduce the Dynamic Response of Woodframe Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Harry Shenton, III, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 05/31/2007
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract

The objective of the proposed research is to develop an advanced panel system
for improving the seismic performance of wood frame structures using thin
laminates of viscoelastic (VE) damping materials. The VE will be integrated into
the lateral load resisting system of the structure material between the wall
frame and the sheathing and/or finishing material. It is anticipated that the
final panel system will utilize little to no fasteners to connect the sheathing
and drywall to the stud frame and provide increased durability at significant
cost savings. VE material is self-adhesive and comes in rolls (similar to tape).
The material is readily available, very flexible, easy to apply, and can be
layered. The results of one preliminary full-scale test of one thin layer
(0.005") of the material applied to a wall show that significant improvements
can be realized without affecting the overall wall dimensions. Innovative
applications of viscoelastic sheet material may potentially have a profound
impact on the design, construction and rehabilitation of wood frame structures.
The proposed research program will test and evaluate the application of
viscoelastic material in wood frame structures, typical of residential housing,
for improving the seismic performance and durability of the structure. An
experimental program has been proposed to evaluate the application of VE
material to wood frame construction at the connection/component level. A non-
linear finite element model will be used to conduct parametric studies to
optimize the placement of the VE material within the wall. The model can account
for the supplemental damping and stiffness of the VE material and will be used
to predict the full-scale wall behavior. Baseline full-scale tests (static and
cyclic) will be conducted on conventional walls with and without drywall. Based
on the connection and analytical work, an optimal design will be determined and
full-scale wall tests will be conducted on walls with and without drywall and
compared to the analytical results. The research proposed reduces the risk of
life, injury, and property destruction and improves durability by developing a
state-of-the-art shearwall panel system. Wood frame structures continue to
experience significant structural and non-structural damage during moderate to
large earthquakes. In many cases the structure may remain standing after the
disaster, only for there to be serious non-structural damage that renders the
residence uninhabitable. Having just high ductility is no longer satisfactory;
today's structures must be engineered and designed to perform better and to
insure more than just life safety. Increasing the energy dissipation capacity of
the primary lateral load resisting system of the structure would significantly
reduce the risk to loss of life, injury and non-structural damage during seismic
events. The concept proposed makes use of existing materials and incorporates
them into the structure in such as way as to not disrupt the design of the wood
frame shear wall and simplifies the construction process.