* 0229546
* Collaborative Research of Earth's Largest Icebergs
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Douglas MacAyeal, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2008
* USD 483,865.00

This award supports the study of the drift and break-up of Earth's largest
icebergs, which were recently released into the Ross Sea of Antarctica as a
result of calving from the Ross Ice Shelf. The scientific goals of the study are
to determine the physics of iceberg motion within the dynamic context of ocean
currents, winds, and sea ice, which determine the forces that drive iceberg
motion, and the relationship between the iceberg and geographically and
topographically determined pinning points on which the iceberg can ground. In
addition, the processes by which icebergs influence the local environments
(e.g., sea ice conditions near Antarctica, access to penguin rookeries, air-sea
heat exchange and upwelling at iceberg margins, nutrient fluxes) will be
studied. The processes by which icebergs generate globally far-reaching ocean
acoustic signals that are detected within the global seismic (earthquake)
sensing networks will also be studied. A featured element of the scientific
research activity will be a field effort to deploy automatic weather stations,
seismometer arrays and GPS-tracking stations on several of the largest icebergs
presently adrift, or about to be adrift, in the Ross Sea. Data generated and
relayed via satellite to home institutions in the Midwest will motivate
theoretical analysis and computer simulation; and will be archived on an
"iceberg" website (http://amrc.ssec.wisc.edu/amrc/iceberg.html) for access by
scientists and the general public. At the most broad level, the study is
justified by the fact that icebergs released by the Antarctic ice sheet
represent the largest movements of fresh water within the natural environment
(e.g., several of the icebergs to be studied, B15, C19 and others calved since
2000 CE, represent over 6000 cubic kilometers of fresh water-an amount roughly
equivalent to 100 years of the flow of the Nile River). A better understanding
of the impact of iceberg drift through the environment, and particularly the
impact on ocean stratification and mixing, is essential to the understanding of
the abrupt global climate changes witnessed by proxy during the ice age and of
concern under conditions of future greenhouse warming. On a more specific level,
the study will generate a knowledge base useful for the better management of
Antarctic logistical resources (e.g., the shipping lanes to McMurdo Station)
that can occasionally be influenced by adverse effects icebergs have on sea ice
conditions.