* 0229387
* Geochemistry of Metal and Metalloid Thioanions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2008
* George Helz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 370,476.00

Helz&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229387&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
geochemistry of selected aqueous thioanions. Thioanions consist of a metal or
metalloid cation coordinated at least partially by sulfide ions. The chemical
behavior of these anions in nature has received little study. The information
obtained could have applications in such diverse areas as managing solid
(including nuclear) wastes, improving our understanding of ore formation,
reconstructing the past redox status of the ocean and healing coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using previous studies of Mo behavior in
sulfidic waters as a prototype, we will explore mechanisms that trigger
particle-association of Re. This element is of interest in paleoenvironmental
studies, in geochronology and as a laboratory model of the nuclear waste
component, Tc. In oxic environments, the stable form is strongly hydrophilic
ReO4-. In suboxic to anoxic environments, Re becomes particle-associated.
Mechanisms that could trigger this change in behavior include transformation to
thioperrhenates or reduction to ReIV complexes. The nature of the products
formed and equilibrium constants characterizing such changes are the objective
of this portion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thiomolybdate ions have
been observed to dissolve very insoluble Fe minerals, like pyrite. Formation of
strong Fe-Mo-S complexes is implied. We will study this phenomenon
systematically in order to characterize the dissolved complexes. If such
complexes are capable of reversible equilibrium with pyrite, then they may
catalyze formation of this mineral from Fe monosulfide. Mechanisms of pyrite
formation remain an area of active interest (and some dispute) among
geochemists, despite considerable previous work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
discovery of very strong complexing between CuI and the oxythioarsenite ion,
AsS(OH)(SH)-, has sparked interest from theorists and led to predictions of
similarly strong thioarsenite complexes involving other potentially hazardous
metals (e.g. Pb2+, Hg2+). We will test these predictions. Complexes of this kind
result in synergistic co-transport of hazardous metals and metalloids. They
should be accounted for in computational models used for designing hazardous
waste sites and making decisions about disposal options for dredge spoil, mine
tailings, etc.&lt;br/&gt;