* 0229638
* Diving Physiology and Behavior of Emperor Penguins
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Paul Ponganis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 01/31/2008
* USD 650,960.00

The emperor penguin, Aptenodytes forsteri, is the premier avian diver and a top
predator in the Antarctic ecosystem. The routine occurrence of 500-m diver
during foraging trips to sea is both a physiological and behavior enigma. The
objectives of this project address how and why emperors dive as deep and long as
they do. The project examines four major topics in the diving biology of emperor
penguins: pressure tolerance, oxygen store management, end-organ tolerance of
diving hypoxemia/ischemia, and deep-dive foraging behavior. These subjects are
relevant to the role of the emperor as a top predator in the Antarctic
ecosystem, and to critical concepts in diving physiology, including
decompression sickness, nitrogen narcosis, shallow water blackout, hypoxemic
tolerance, and extension of aerobic dive time. The following hypotheses will be
tested: 1) Prevention of nitrogen narcosis and decompression sickness in emperor
penguins is achieved by inhibition of pulmonary gas exchange at depth. 2)
Shallow water black out does not occur because of greater cerebral hypoxemic
tolerance, and, in deep dives, because of resumption of pulmonary gas exchange
during final ascent. 3) The rate of depletion of the blood oxygen store is a
function of depth of dive and heart rate. 4) The aerobic dive limit (ADL)
reflects the onset of lactate accumulation in locomotory muscle, not total
depletion of all oxygen stores. 5) Elevation of tissue antioxidant capacity and
free-radical scavenging enzyme activities protect against the routine
ischemia/reperfusion which occur during diving. 6) During deep dives, the
Antarctic silverfish, Pleuorogramma antarcticum, is the primary prey item for
emperors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to evaluation of the hypotheses
below, the project has broader impacts in several areas such as partnership with
foreign and national institutes and organizations (e.g., the National Institute
of Polar Research of Japan, Centro de Investigacioines del Noroeste of Mexico,
National Geographic, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, and
Sea World). Participation in National Geographic television documentaries will
provide unique educational opportunities for the general public; development of
state-of-the-art technology (e.g., blood oxygen electrode recorders, blood
samplers, and miniaturized digital cameras) will lay the groundwork for future
research by this group and others; and the effects of the B15 iceberg on
breeding success of emperor penguins will continue to be evaluated with
population censuses during planned fieldwork at several Ross Sea emperor penguin
colonies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;