* 0229854
* Space-Time Progression of Faulting in the Northernmost Basin and Range:  Implications for Crustal-Scale Processes During Extension
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Elizabeth Miller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2005
* USD 162,763.00

The Basin and Range extensional province is the world's premier region for the
study of continental stretching as faults are moving and volcanic activity is
ongoing today. The northwestern part of the Basin and Range Province, in
northern Nevada, has fault-bounded mountains and valleys like elsewhere in the
Basin and Range, but, based on geologic studies, the upper part of the
continental crust has undergone much less extension by faulting than elsewhere.
Paradoxically, the crust as a whole is thin (only 28 km) and appears to be just
as stretched or thinned, or more stretched than the rest of the Basin and Range,
which is on average 30-35 km thick). In addition, the age span of extension, its
relationship to volcanic activity, and the nature of the transition from this
region of apparent low upper crustal extension to the more highly extended areas
to the south and east in the Basin and Range are not clearly known.
Magmatic/volcanic activity is thought to heat and weaken the crust, leading to
thinning and rifting. However, most magmatism and volcanic activity in northern
Nevada occurred at about 16 million years ago (associated with the Snake River-
Yellowstone volcanic trend), but ongoing studies show that extensional faulting
happened almost 10 million years later.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation
of northern Nevada extensional faulting relies on existing and ongoing geologic
field studies and their compilation into a digital data base to better document
the distribution, geometry and the age of faulting in the region. Combined with
state-of-the-art geochronologic and thermochronologic dating of rocks and
minerals, the age or time and the amount of extension that took place in this
part of the Basin and Range will be determined accurately. This new data base
will help answer several important questions: What conditions lead to the
thinning of continents and their rupture and rifting apart? What role does
magmatism play in crustal extension? How does stretching and thinning happen on
the scale of the entire crust, and can the lower crust thin or stretching
independently of the upper crust? Answers to these questions are applicable to a
variety of regions beyond northern Nevada, and in particular, will help address
fundamental questions about the origin and evolution of sedimentary basins
developed on thinned continental crust of the world's vast offshore continental
shelves.