* 0229472
* A Study of the Incorporation of Water in Earth Materials Based on Electron Density Distributions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Nancy Ross, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 208,995.00

Ross&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229472&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be undertaken to
advance the geochemist's - mineralogist's understanding of the mechanisms
controlling the incorporation of water in earth materials and properties of the
bonded interactions, both in minerals and representative molecules. Sites that
are susceptible to electrophilic attack will be located, at the atomic level,
within the crystal structures and on the surfaces of minerals. These
calculations will identify potential sites for incorporation of hydrogen in
nominally anhydrous minerals, both as hydroxyl groups and as water molecules. In
addition, the adsorption and alignment of molecules like water, the hydronium
and hydroxyl ions within the structures will be determined. These goals will be
accomplished by evaluating the bond critical point properties of the calculated
electron density distributions for a wide variety of minerals. The properties of
the electron density will be determined and the local maxima in the Laplacian
distributions for the valence shell electrons of the bonded atoms will be
located. Electron density distributions will also be studied at pressure to
monitor how these sites behave when compressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A knowledge
of the location and structure of the internal and surface sites that are
susceptible to electrophilic attack will advance our understanding, at the
atomic level, of the incorporation of hydrogen in minerals as well as the
chemical reactivities of silicates and oxides. It is further anticipated that
this work will not only provide a theoretical basis for the modeling of internal
and surface reactions of earth materials, but that it will lead, in future
studies, to a better understanding of the atomistic properties and pathways
involved in weathering, bacterial attack, chemisorption and other important
geochemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;