* 0229335
* A Prototype Computer Aided Laboratory System for STEM Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Donald Smith, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 74,770.00

This project combines hands-on experiential discovery laboratory exercises with
computer-aided instruction into computer aided laboratory instruction (CALI).
The goal of the project is to enhance laboratory learning and understanding
while significantly reducing the time, equipment, staffing and space
requirements. A generalized, interactive software application is being developed
which presents the laboratory problem, guides students through setup of the
experiment and physical apparatus, monitors the experimental effort, provides
feedback during the laboratory exercise, and evaluates student performance. An
existing prototype CALI experiment is being modified, based on experience to
date, and two new experiments are being developed. The efficacy of the CALI
system is being evaluated by having randomly selected experimental groups
perform the CALI experiments and comparing their short and long term learning
with control groups performing conventional laboratory experiments with similar
apparatus without the CALI interface. This evaluation procedure is being
replicated at another institution for one of the experiments. Resources are
being tracked to estimate potential savings. CALI details and the evaluation
results will be disseminated by conference presentations and through testing of
the system at the second institution.

