* 0229508
* Helium and Carbon Isotope Studies of Geothermal Fluids Along the North Anatolian Fault and Relationships to Seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* David Hilton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 113,200.00

Hilton&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229508&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal is aimed
at understanding relationships between geochemical tracers such as helium and
carbon dioxide and the occurrence of seismicity along the North Anatolian Fault
Zone (NAFZ) in Turkey. In collaboration with Turkish colleagues, who are
monitoring major and minor element geochemistry and other isotope systems (18O,
D/H and tritium), we plan to sample fluids for helium and carbon (from
production wells and surface springs) from nine previously-monitored geothermal
localities sited along an 800-km active segment of the NAFZ. These two
geothermal tracers have great utility in their ability to distinguish crustal
and mantle inputs to the volatile inventory. We want to test the hypothesis -
seen in other studies of earthquake-prone regions - that changes in the balance
between mantle- and crustal-derived volatiles have potential as a precursor of
impeding seismic activity. The western segment of the NAFZ region experienced
two catastrophic earthquakes in 1999 entailing more than 25,000 fatalities: it
continues to be seismically active. This work, aimed at understanding how
crustal fluids respond to seismic events, has clear societal relevance. In
addition, prior work carried out through collaborative efforts with our Turkish
colleagues has discovered that mantle-derived 3He occurs in fluids along the
entire strike (~800 km) of the active western segment of the NAFZ. The presence
of a mantle-derived fluid component indicates leakage across the ductile-brittle
transition region of the seismogenic zone. The same observation has been made
for the San Andreas Fault System (SAFS) in California. Indeed there are many
other parallels between the NAFZ and the SAFS. Information gained in the present
study, particularly on the distribution of seismicity along the NAFZ and the
westward progression of epicenters (towards the metropolis of Istanbul), may be
applicable to the SAFZ. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;