* 0229343
* Development and Application of In-Situ Measurement of Water Vapor Isotopes For Hydrological And Ecological Research
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Ronald Smith, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/29/2008
* USD 500,000.00

0229343&lt;br/&gt;Xuhui Lee&lt;br/&gt;The proposal includes three tasks. In Task
I, we will work with Campbell Scientific Inc. to design and build a TDL system
for continuous and in-situ measurement of HDO and H218O isotope ratios in
atmospheric water vapor. The instrument will be tested against a cold-trap
method, used at Yale and elsewhere. In Task II, we will use the new TDL system
to determine the isotopic ratio in water vapor evaporating from the earth's
surface and exchanging with the lower atmosphere. The isotope flux ratio will be
determined with the micrometeorological gradient-diffusion and eddy accumulation
methods. The ability to determine the flux ratio accurately is essential in two
fields of science: plant-water relationships and paleo-climate. In Task III, we
will obtain and interpret continuous time series of stable water isotope ratio
in surface air on time scales including boundary layer gusts, rain showers, the
diurnal cycle, frontal cyclones and seasons. The advantage of our continuous
time series is that we will be able to observe a variety of atmospheric
processes operating on different time scales. We expect that the isotopic method
will be extraordinarily sensitive to subtle changes in water vapor condensation
and evaporation history of an airmass&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion
of these tasks will open a new "window" on the hydrologic cycle, especially to
processes involving phase changes of water. The project will also generate
broader impact on the society by promoting partnership between the academia and
a private industry and by contributing new instrumentation to the infrastructure
for research in hydrology, ecology, meteorology and global change. &lt;br/&gt;