* 0229907
* Collaborative Research:  Testing and Constitutive Modeling of Fine-Grained Tills Deposited by the Laurentide Ice Sheet
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2006
* USD 130,266.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: TESTING &amp; CONSTITUTIVE MODELING&lt;br/&gt;OF FINE-
GRAINED TILLS DEPOSITED BY THE LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET&lt;br/&gt;J.W. Jenson, P.U.
Clark, C.S. Desai &amp; D.N. Contractor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229907,
-0229513, -0229889&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
more complete empirical basis for constraining and testing hypotheses regarding
the role of sediment deformation, sliding, and ploughing in influencing ice-
sheet behavior over soft sediment beds. An accurate and complete description of
the deformational behavior of subglacial tills is required for understanding ice
sheet dynamics and their linkages to the Earth's climate system. In conjunction
with climate models, such ice sheet models may be used to investigate the
stability of ice sheets-both Pleistocene and modern-and their interaction with
global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project by specialists
in glacial geology, soil mechanics and materials engineering, and geophysical
modeling will address this important issue by obtaining a comprehensive
evaluation of the mechanical properties of two representative fine-grained tills
deposited by the Laurentide Ice Sheet. Specifically, the PIs proposed laboratory
program will apply an inclusive general model that will enable us to
comprehensively evaluate behavior through the entire deformation history of
these sediments, from the onset of strain to late-stage behavior. For each till,
fifteen mechanical parameters will be quantified in terms of the highly general
constitutive model that has been successfully applied elsewhere in a variety of
geotechnical and other materials engineering applications. The experiments will
encompass 80 or more tests over about 30 months utilizing proven equipment and
methodologies, as well as some innovative techniques recently developed by one
of the members of the research team. To help validate the experimentally
determined parameters, the project includes development of a non-linear back-
prediction model, which will be used to verify the consistency of the
experimentally determined values with predicted values, given the physical
conditions and responses observed during the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;