* 0229233
* GOALI: Gas Transport and Barrier Properties  Aromatic Polyamides
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Benny Freeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2005
* USD 39,598.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9803225 Benny Freeman/N.C. State U. Proprietary amorphous
polyamides used commercially in gas separation applications; liquid crystalline
(LC) aromatic polyamides area among the most impermeable barrier polymers
available. However, wholly aromatic polyamides in general and LC ones in
particular are typically difficult to dissolve and have melting points near or
above their decomposition temperatures; melt and solution processing of these
materials can be, therefore, quite difficult. Moreover, the synthesis of new
higher performance aromatic polyamides can be impeded by their lack of
solubility. The proposed experimental research program is a continuation of an
earlier two year program to explore the synthesis and gas sorption, transport,
and permeation properties of a new class of highly soluble wholly aromatic
polyamides, having either rigid rod, possibly mesogenic, backbones or semi-
rodlike backbones and structural elements which could be precursors for further
reactions such as crosslinking or the attachment of pendent rigid or flexible
groups. These fundamental studies are directed toward developing an expanded and
more subtle repertoire of structural modification useful for the rational
tailoring of super-membranes and super-barriers. Central to the thesis under
consideration is the notion that the proposed primary chemical structure
variations could markedly influence polymer suprastructure (i.e. polymer chain
packing), polymer-pentrant interactions, and, in turn, strongly effect gas
sorption, transport, and permeation properties. An Experimental program is
proposed involving controlled synthesis of highly soluble wholly aromatic
polyamides having substituents which could be used to crosslink the polymers or
attach rigid or flexible side chains. The chemical structure, physical
properties, and gas transport properties of these polymers would be
characterized to determine explicitly the influence of side and main chain
molecular architecture and side chain stiffne ss, plus the potential for
crosslinking, on the overall sorption, transport, and permeation behavior. ***