* 0229065
* SYMPOSIUM: "Physiology Underlying Phenotypic Plasticity and Polyphenisms," Toronto, Canada, January 4-8, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* John Hatle, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2003
* USD 4,715.00

The final form of many animals (perhaps most animals) depends on the environment
in which they develop. This symposium will be a series of talks by both faculty
and graduate students on how animals regulate modifications in their development
in response to environmental changes. Hence, it explores internal controls of
the "nurture" end of the nature-vs.-nurture dichotomy. For example, the eggs of
some turtles develop into males if incubated at cool temperatures but develop
into females if incubated at warm temperatures. Many such environmental effects
on animal development are known, but the hormonal processes involved in
regulating these developmental switches are less well known. For example, in
turtle eggs, what are the cellular processes underlying the temperature effect
on sex hormones and sex determination? The talks in this symposium will present
results on environmentally affected developmental processes in animals. Included
will be lectures on how toads either undergo metamorphosis to a small adult or
grow to a larger larvae, how beetles grow either large or small horns, and how
butterflies develop wings with either large or small eyespots. Perhaps most
important, there has never been a conference on environmental effects on
development that brings together biologists who study a wide range of animals.
This cross-disciplinary discussion could lead to new advances in understanding
how animals control developmental responses to the environment.