* 0229650
* Metal Binding Ligands: Evolution, Transport, and Transformations Along Hydrologic Flowpaths
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* David Armstrong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2007
* USD 336,248.00

0229650 Shafer Trace metals in natural waters exist in a myriad of chemical and
physical forms that influence their transport, bioavailability, and toxicity.
The speciation of these metals is regulated by their interactions with metal-
binding ligands comprised of natural organic and inorganic solutes, colloids,
and particles. Despite their importance, information on the sources, nature, and
stability of these ligands is lacking. In particular, the roles of the diverse
biogeochemical and hydrologic processes that regulate the production and
transport of strong-binding ligands along a hydrologic flow path are poorly
understood.

Our goal is to provide information on changes in the nature and abundance of
strong metal-binding ligands along representative hydrologic flow paths, and the
fluxes of strong ligands into streams from both groundwater and hyporheic
sources and processes. Specifically, we intend to determine: (1) the abundance
and strength-spectrum of metal-binding ligands along key segments of hydrologic
flow paths and associate ligand properties with hydrologic and geochemical
conditions and biogeochemical processes; (2) the influences of hydrologic events
(recharge, discharge) and biogeochemical processes (iron redox reactions,
sulfate redox reactions, primary production) on temporal variability in ligand
characteristics and abundance; and (3) the stability of strong ligands to
chemical and biochemical transformations. We expect interface margins such as
the hyporheic zone to be important sites of ligand production.

Our research is centered at Alequash Creek, within the site of the co-located
NSF North Temperate Lake LTER and the USGS Trout Lake WEBB projects where the
hydrologic system is especially well characterized and instrumented. Our
approach is based on sampling and characterizing strong metal-binding ligands at
key segments along the flow path while also quantifying transport. Ligands will
be isolated on-site using filtration and ultrafiltration and characterized using
detailed chemical analysis, spectroscopy, and related techniques. We expect
strong ligands to be associated with organic carbon, iron oxide, and/or reduced
sulfur-containing phases. We will emphasize the metals Cu, Pb, and Zn as both
environmental contaminants and probes of ligand character. Assessment of binding
strength using voltammetry is a key component of our approach, supported by
biochemical response measurements. Using our study site as a model, our research
will be structured to address two key areas: the importance of groundwater as a
source of strong ligands to the riparian and hyporheic zones and the production
of strong ligands within the hyporheic zone and transport into streams and
lakes. These questions are central to understanding watershed linkages to
streams and lakes and their influences on the abundance and bioavailability of
metals in surface waters