* 0229504
* Heat Transport Scaling in Earth's Mantle-Plate System: Understanding Core Heat Flow and the Effect of Continents
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Paul Tackley, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2006
* USD 189,538.00

Tackley EAR-0229504

Understanding how the heat fluxes at Earth's surface and core-mantle-boundary
(CMB) scale with the relevant parameters is essential to understanding the
thermal evolution of the mantle and core. This two-year project involves focused
studies of two important but presently ill-determined aspects of heat transport,
using the tool of numerical modeling. The first aspect is how CMB heat flux
scales in the presence of plate tectonics. This is important because constraints
from geodynamo energetics on the heat flow through the CMB indicate that the
likely heat flow is much higher than that measured by buoyancy fluxes of
observed hotspots, suggesting that other modes of core heat removal are
important. It is thought that these other modes are most likely 'slab warming'
(warming of cold subducted slabs resting above the CMB), and 'stealth plumes'
(plumes that do not generate an observable signature at the surface). The
relevant scalings in the presence of plate tectonics and strongly variable
interior viscosity are not known, and will be the first focus of this
investigation. The second aspect is the effect of continents on surface heat
flow. Continents have a "thermal blanketing" effect which affects the scaling of
heat flux (Nu) with Rayleigh number (Ra). However, the effect of continents on
this scaling has not been quantified, with previous parameterized thermal
evolution models simply reducing the standard Nu-Ra scaling in proportion to the
fractional surface area covered by continents. Establishing the scaling of
surface heat flow, internal temperature and velocities with continental (width,
Biot number) and standard convective parameters will be the second focus of this
project.