* 0229578
* Multivariate Geospatial Analysis of Engineering and Flood Response, Mississippi River System, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Nicholas Pinter, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2007
* USD 299,953.00

Pinter&lt;br/&gt;0229578&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the Red River in 1997 and
2001, to North Carolina's Tar River in 1999, to the Mississippi River in 1993,
1995, 2001, and again in 2002, recurrent flooding has led to assertions that
human activities have increased the magnitude and frequency of large river
flooding. The hypothesis of human flood forcing, however, remains unverified and
politically controversial, and a recent National Research Council panel
concluded that "there are ... few cases where human impacts on flood magnitude
and frequency have been carefully documented".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of the research proposed here is to provide an empirical, system-wide tool for
quantifying human forcing of flood stages on the Mississippi River system. We
propose to document and quantify these connections using a pooled time-series
analysis, a multivariate technique for testing the correlation between one or
more dependent variables (here, stage magnification) and independent variables
that have both cross-sectional and temporal variability. Magnification of flood
hazard will be measured using specific-gage analysis of long-duration gaging
stations on the study rivers. The specific-gage technique quantifies changes in
the stage response to fixed discharge conditions relative to baseline historical
conditions, thereby isolating the local effects of river engineering and channel
modification. In order to quantify the potential independent variables, we will
construct a GIS database of engineering structures and their history of
emplacement and modification over the past 70-100 years on the study rivers. A
database of this kind was a major recommendation of the Interagency Floodplain
Management review following the 1993 flood. This database will be constructed
for the analyses proposed here and then will be disseminated for widespread
access and use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local and regional engineering activities
on U.S. rivers currently are being reviewed, authorized, and their relative
costs and benefits assessed with little or no recognition that these activities
may raise flood levels, lower recurrence times, or cause increased economic
losses in future floods. The research proposed here would provide a tool for
empirical assessment of the impact on flood levels of any incremental
engineering addition to the Mississippi or other similar rivers. Engineers,
planners, and politicians should seek to reach an equitable balance between 1)
the local benefits of flood control and navigation improvements and 2) the
elevated flood risk that these structures may cause.&lt;br/&gt;