* 0229969
* STI:  Collaborative Research: NetReact Services: Middleware Technologies to Enable Real-time Collaboration Across the Internet
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Nageswara Rao, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 170,001.00

Modern science is a distributed wide-area enterprise, requiring real-time
coordination of scientific instruments and remote sensors, computational
resources, large data repositories and teams of researchers in different
locations, even on different continents. The high-bandwidth networking demands
of any such real-time and data-intensive collaborations tax the largest network
pipes, and when conducted across the Internet, their Gigabit/sec data streams
must utilize heterogeneous platforms with network link speeds that vary from
10Gbps to 10Mbps and with end user machines that range from desktop PCs to large
supercomputers. However, effective scientific collaboration demands that team
members be able to interact with each other and with critical remote resources
in real-time, despite platform heterogeneity and despite dynamic variations in
the availability of platform resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key idea of the
NetReact middleware services is to utilize the substantial server and processing
resources associated with distributed collaborations to improve end user
performance and compensate for potential deficiencies in network capabilities.
NetReact provides rich functionality for dynamically reconfiguring both
middleware and applications in response to network and platform monitoring, and
to coordinate (1) middleware and application-level reactions to changes in
network state with (2) the possibly simultaneous actions taken at the transport
level. NetReact's monitoring (NRM) services dynamically determine available
network bandwidth and communication latencies. NetReact uses such information to
adjust middleware and application actions, to tune the underlying network
transport, and even to dynamically select suitable network paths for ongoing
middleware-enabled scientific collaborations. By embedding NetReact services
into the grid computing middleware commonly used for scientific collaboration,
the functionality of such NetReact-enriched middleware is improved
substantially, enabling end users to collaborate in real-time even when they do
not have access to high end machines or high capacity network links, thereby
supporting scientific applications that currently remain out of reach for
existing networking and grid computing technologies.