* 0229302
* Biogeochemical Tracers in Arctic Rivers:  Linking the Pan-Arctic Watershed to the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Robert Holmes, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,657,491.00

The overall objective of this proposal is to use river water chemistry as a
means to study the origins and fates of continental runoff. Tracers in addition
to temperature and salinity are needed to identify river contributions to
surface waters of the Arctic Ocean because melting of sea ice confounds
interpretation of temperature-salinity mixing models. Furthermore, tracers
provide a means to distinguish contributions from different rivers regionally. A
5-year project is proposed in which selected parameters focusing on tracers of
river water will be measured in the largest 6 rivers that drain the watershed of
the Arctic Ocean: the Yenisey, Lena, Ob', Mackenzie, Yukon, and Kolyma. Tracers
to be measured include H218O, barium, organic matter, alkalinity, and nutrients.
Sampling will be conducted during the high flow season in Years 1 and 4 and
during all seasons in Years 2 and 3. Synthesis and modeling will occur
throughout the 5-year project. Samples will be collected near the mouths of the
rivers (but above tidal influence) in order to get fully integrated watershed
signals and the most relevant freshwater end member values for oceanographic
tracking. To investigate transport pathways of river waters through the Arctic
Ocean, newly defined end member values will be examined in the context of
existing and growing oceanographic tracer databases. To study watershed sources,
tracers will be examined in the context of geomorphology, land cover, and
hydrology models. The proposed work will also generate a synoptic pan-arctic
database on river biogeochemistry for comparison with past and future data in
trend analyses. A collaborative network of expertise to successfully sample the
6 largest arctic rivers was assembled. Scientists from 4 nations are involved,
including representatives of agencies responsible for water quality monitoring
in the Russian, Canadian, and US Arctic. The research group is also in a strong
position to analyze and synthesize information on river tracer fluxes into and
through the Arctic Ocean at the pan-Arctic scale because of the diverse
expertise brought to the project by hydrologists, biogeochemists, and
oceanographers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach will involve participation of
high school students living in villages near the study sites. Under the
supervision of local teachers or researchers, these students will collect water
samples from their rivers. They will perform basic analyses such as temperature,
pH, and conductivity. Participating students will also be active in exchange of
data via the web where available. Scientists from the research group will visit
the students and discuss the project, present lectures to their classes, and
involve the students in as many aspects of the project as possible.&lt;br/&gt;