* 0229634
* Collaborative Research:  A Multi-Disciplinary Study of Selective Adsorption of Chiral Molecules on Mineral Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Robert Hazen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2004
* USD 95,714.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Selective adsorption of aqueous solutes onto mineral surfaces
represents an important mechanism for the concentration, sequestration and
organization of organic molecules. Such mineral-organic interactions play key
roles in processes as diverse as aquifer purification, biofilm formation and the
origin of life.&lt;br/&gt;In this regard, the selective adsorption of chiral
(left-handed versus right-handed) molecules is of special interest. Strong
chiral preference for amino acids, sugars and other essential biomolecules is a
defining characteristic of biological systems. Abiotic processes that select
left-handed versus right-handed molecules are thus central to geochemical models
of life's origin. Chiral recognition and separation of molecules, furthermore,
is vital to pharmacological activity of many drugs, biodegradation of packaging
materials, development of improved polymers, and many other applications in
science and industry.&lt;br/&gt;Previous work described selective adsorption of
D- and L-aspartic acid, a biological amino acid, on chiral crystal growth faces
of calcite. Such chiral selectivity on surfaces of a centric mineral had been
predicted by theory, but had not been demonstrated experimentally. This proposal
seeks to document further this behavior and to investigate structural mechanisms
by which chiral organic molecules adsorb selectively on mineral surfaces. A
multi-disciplinary, collaborative, two-part research program
includes:&lt;br/&gt;I. Phenomenology of Chiral Adsorption on Minerals: Research
will expand on previous studies, which demonstrated chiral selectivity on
mineral surfaces, by establishing the range and extent of chiral adsorption on
mineral surfaces. Proposed experiments include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigation of
the adsorption of other chiral amino acids, both biological and non-biological,
onto calcite crystal growth surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigation of the
adsorption of chiral amino acid derivatives, sugars, nucleotides and other
chiral species onto calcite crystal growth surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigation
of chiral adsorption onto crystal growth surfaces of gypsum and quartz, both of
which are geochemically important minerals that display chiral crystal growth
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;II. Adsorption Mechanisms - Experimental Approaches:
Structural mechanisms that underlie chiral adsorption of organic molecules on
these mineral surfaces will be investigated. Proposed experiments
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Liquid-immersion atomic force microscopy imaging of
calcite crystal growth surfaces: Observations will be made of both surface
growth and dissolution in the presence and absence of chiral
adsorbates.&lt;br/&gt;2. Use of site-specific fluorescent tags: Calcite surfaces
with an adsorbed layer of amino acids will be exposed to a variety of
fluorescent tags to determine the orientation and distribution of adsorbed
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;These proposed studies, in concert with ongoing theoretical
models of the adsorption process, will lead to an understanding of structural
mechanisms of chiral selection. This work, furthermore, will lay the groundwork
for future investigations that adapt&lt;br/&gt;microarray technology to the
combinatorial study numerous of mineral surfaces and adsorbed organic species in
a single experiment.&lt;br/&gt;