* 0229208
* Collaborative Research (USC and UT):  A Study of Naturally Occurring Decay-Series Isotopes as Quantitative Hydro-Geochemical Tracers
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Teh-Lung Ku, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

0229208&lt;br/&gt;Ku&lt;br/&gt;Chemical transport in groundwater is often
studied in the laboratory setting which may differ considerably from the natural
settings in terms of heterogeneity of the sediment and the scales involved, both
temporal and spatial. To assess the in-situ transport rates, this project makes
use of the distributions of naturally occurring uranium- and thorium-series
isotopes in an aquifer system. 238U and 232Th in rocks decay to stable isotopes
of Pb through a series of intermediate daughters consisting of elements with
diverse chemical properties and a wide range of decay mean lives. These decay-
series isotopes enter groundwater as a result of water-rock interaction. Their
abundance and ratios in groundwater evolve as the water passes through rock
media, with resultant parent-daughter disequilibrium relationships providing
quantitative constraints on subsurface geochemical reactions and transport
processes on various time scales. We will conduct this multi-tracer research in
a regional aquifer system known as the Memphis aquifer at the Shelby County area
in western Tennessee. In connection with the determination of groundwater
recharge, it has been a research study site for interdisciplinary studies
involving geochemistry, environmental tracers, numerical modeling and sediment
analysis. We will collect groundwater from various locations and aquifer depths
for isotopic measurements of 238U and 234U), thorium (234Th, 230Th, 228Th, and
232Th), radium (226Ra, 228Ra, and 224Ra),, lead (210Pb), polonium (210Po) and
radon (222Rn). Measurements will also be made on aquifer solids and colloidal
particles. Modeling the observed radioactive disequilibria in fluids and
colloids will be attempted to quantify the kinetics of water-rock interactions
(e.g., rates of adsorption/desorption and precipitation/dissolution) and their
effects on chemical transport and subsurface flows. The model results, to be
tested by the measured disequilibria in the sorbed phases of rocks, allow
calibration of transport models developed from small-scale, natural, undisturbed
flow system, and may reveal new processes that are not apparent in laboratory
studies or field manipulation experiments. It is anticipated that the research
will provide new insights into the colloidal associations of radioisotopes in
groundwater. Through an enhanced understanding of long-term subsurface
contaminant transport, the research has the practical benefit of strengthening
the scientific basis for risk assessment and management of nuclear wastes stored
in geologic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;