* 0229176
* Improving Calibration, Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analysis of Data Based Models of the Environment
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Christine Shoemaker, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 03/31/2007
* USD 349,991.00

0229176 Shoemaker Site-specific pollution transport models are based on field
data and the calibration of the parameter values that cannot be directly
measured. This combination of field data and calibrated model is a powerful tool
in environmental analysis. However, one of the difficulties in using such models
is that the calibration process can be computationally very demanding if it is
done thoroughly. An even more serious computational obstacle is the
quantification of the uncertainty associated with model forecasts of pollution
transport. This proposal develops a new computational procedure (acronym ROCUS)
that can be applied to a range of pollution transport problems. In the proposed
research, ROCUS will be applied to a large watershed in New York, for which the
PI's research model results are currently being used in formulating regulatory
policy. ROCUS will also be used for anaerobic bioremediation of chlorinated
ethenes using field data collected by DOD and an 18 species reactive transport
model developed by the PI and her students. The ROCUS procedure involves a group
of computationally efficient algorithms for calibration, combined sensitivity
and uncertainty analysis that is integrated through the use of response surface
methods. One of the hypothesis of the study is that computation time to find
good values for model calibration can be significantly reduced by replacing
methods currently in use with one or both of the two new optimization algorithms
to be investigated. These two methods both involve the use of a Radial Basis
Function response surface coupled with a new optimization algorithm. Previously
published papers and the PI's computational experiments support this hypothesis.
The extent to which this hypothesis is valid will be assessed in the proposed
research by a systematic comparison of accuracy and computational speed of the
two response surface optimization algorithms with two existing heuristic
methods. These tests will be performed on the two environmental applications and
on standard global optimization test problems. The applications represented are
very serious pollution problems, and the results will add to scientific
understanding and to methods for environmental protection. The teaching and
research objectives will be obtained by incorporation of research results into
two courses the PI teaches. Research infrastructure contributions will follow
from the interdisciplinary nature of the research. In addition, the PI has a
long history of working to promote underrepresented groups, especially women
engineers, and this research project will continue that effort.