* 0229495
* Experimental Determination of the Solubility of PGE in Hydrothermal Chloride Solutions
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Scott Wood, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2006
* USD 299,923.00

Wood&lt;br/&gt;0229495&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is debate in the scientific
literature as to the extent to which the platinum-group elements (PGE, e.g.,
platinum, palladium, iridium) can be transported and concentrated by
hydrothermal fluids to form ore deposits. The debate is hampered by a lack of
experimental data with which to test the hypothesis that hydrothermal processes
play a role in the concentration of the PGE to economic levels. To redress this
lack of data, a series of experiments will be conducted. Some of these
experiments will attempt to determine the relative solubilities of palladium,
platinum, and iridium in hydrothermal solutions of geological relevance. Other
experiments will be conducted to simulate the effect of hydrothermal fluids on
magnesium-rich; PGE-bearing rocks similar to those in many PGE occurrences. The
latter experiments will attempt to directly model hydrothermal processes that
have occurred in the Marathon copper-palladium deposit in the Coldwell Complex,
Ontario. The mineral assemblages and conditions employed in the latter
experiments will be based on concurrent field-based research on the deposit
being conducted by colleagues at the University of Windsor (I.M. Samson, B.J.
Fryer) and the University of Waterloo (R. Linnen). A postdoctoral fellow, an
undergraduate student, and a graduate student will participate in the project
and will be trained in aqueous geochemistry. Both will be encouraged to present
their work at national scientific meetings, and the postdoctoral fellow will
participate in teaching of undergraduate geochemistry. The project will
strengthen and expand existing collaboration between the PI and Canadian
colleagues. The results of this research will be of direct socioeconomic benefit
via the development of improved exploration models for PGE deposits. They may
also lead to improved methods of hydrometallurgical treatment of PGE ores and to
a better understanding of the corrosion of PGE and PGE-alloys in hydrothermal
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;