* 0229503
* Molecular Studies on Antigen Receptor Gene Recombination
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Renato Aguilera, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 01/31/2003
* USD 31,720.00

The major goal of this research is to determine the role of Endo-SR
(Endonuclease implicated in Switch/Somatic Recombination) in B-cell specific
gene recombination or other DNA processing events. Endo-SR was initially
discovered through its ability to preferentially cleave immunoglobulin (lg)
switch repeat sequences commonly found at lg isotype-switch recombination
breakpoints. This enzyme has been purified to homogeneity from bovine spleen
nuclear extracts and partial peptide sequence information from the purified
protein has been obtained. Sequence homology searches performed with these
peptides revealed significant similarities to the predicted amino acid sequences
of hypothetical human and C. elegans proteins identified by the Human and C.
elegans Genome Projects. The identified human protein has recently been reported
to encode an endonuclease implicated in nuclear DNA degradation induced during
programmed cell death. Preliminary evidence indicates that the C. elegans
protein also encodes an endonuclease implicated in apoptotic nuclear DNA
degradation. The recent isolation of the Endo-SR gene should greatly facilitate
a rigorous analysis of the in vivo regulation and function of this enzyme. As
part of this analysis, Endo-SR mutant cell lines will be generated by targeted
gene disruption. Assays conducted with these Endo-SR deficient cells should
allow definitively conclusions as to whether or not this nuclease activity is
required for switch recombination and/or apoptosis. This research should greatly
enhance current understanding of the molecular and biochemical roles of an
enzyme that has been implicated in both a lymphocyte-specific DNA recombination
process and a general DNA degradation process induced by apoptosis.