* 0229739
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Hydrogen and Ferric Iron in Felsic Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Melinda Dyar, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 86,000.00

Dyar&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229739&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fugacities of hydrogen and
oxygen in silicate melts limit the water concentration of melts, and hence are a
major control of viscosity, explosivity, crystallization temperature, and order
of crystallization of minerals. Both H and O are key to the crystallization of
hydrous minerals, and their abundance may drive magmas along calc-alkaline or
tholeiitic differentiation paths. The goal of this project is to assess the
Fe3+/Fe2+ and H contents of felsic melts and their crystallization products, and
to relate those contents to the fo2 and fH2O of the starting melt. We plan to 1)
measure the H concentrations in minerals and glasses from magmatic systems for
which independent constraints on fH2O are available, using both synchrotron and
conventional (globar) FTIR spectroscopy; and 2) measure the Fe3+ contents of
naturally-produced melts, feldspars, and coexisting oxide and ferromagnesian
phases (such as amphibole) for which independent constraints on fO2 are
available, using micro-XANES spectroscopy. From these data, we can independently
derive oxygen and hydrogen fugacity values from the measured Fe3+/SFe and
compare these results to previously determined values. Samples from the Bishop
Tuff (California), the Timber Mountain Tuff (Nevada), Mt. Erebus (Antarctica),
the Purico complex (Chile), and the Katmai complex (Alaska) will be used in this
study. &lt;br/&gt;To associate oxygen and hydrogen fugacity values with measured
Fe3+/SFe, we will use coexisting hydrous phases, either hornblende or biotite,
for which experimental data are available that provide a calibration between
Fe3+/SFe and H2O deficiency as a function of fH2, T, and P. Because we will know
H2O concentration from independent work on melt inclusions, and we will measure
Fe3+/SFe, we will be able to calculate fH2. From the calculated fH2 and fH2O
derived from water concentrations in melt inclusions, we will be able to
calculate fO2. We also plan to compare our results to results with the oxygen
barometers developed by Sugawara (2001) based on thermodynamic models to
calculate oxygen fugacity in the crystallizing system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;