* 0229898
* The Middle Miocene Antarctic Climate Transition: Investigating Magnitude, Phasing, and Processes Involving Cryosphere Expansion and Global Cooling
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 111,093.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the Miocene climate
transition as recorded in Ocean Drilling Program cores from the South Tasman
Rise. Understanding mechanisms that force climate change is a major challenge in
Earth Sciences. Middle Miocene (~13-15 Ma (million years ago)) geologic records
describe significant global ocean/atmosphere cooling coincident with Antarctic
cryosphere expansion and a lack of appreciable Northern Hemisphere ice sheets.
This suggests that Antarctic climate and cryosphere evolution played a central
role in late Cenozoic climate development. Given the complexity of traditional
proxies (e.g. d18O), fundamental questions exist concerning the magnitude,
phasing, and processes driving mid-Miocene ice volume and temperature change.
The primary objectives of this project are to better understand: 1) magnitude
and phasing of global cooling and Antarctic cryosphere expansion across this
interval; 2) processes that forced Antarctic climate/cryosphere evolution at
this time; and 3) effects of an expanding and increasingly stable Antarctic
cryosphere on climate feedbacks at orbital periods (about 40, 100, and 400
thousand years). Recently developed geochemical paleotemperature proxies (Mg/Ca)
should deconvolve mid-Miocene d18O temperature and ice volume signals. New data
from ODP Site 1171 Miocene foraminifers suggest that Mg/Ca will yield
paleotemperatures necessary to evaluate ice volume and temperature changes. This
project will integrate high-resolution (2-6 kyr (thousand year)) planktonic and
benthic foraminifer Mg/Ca, d18O, d13C, and faunal records to address these
objectives. This novel multi-proxy approach will test hypotheses regarding mid-
Miocene Antarctic cryosphere evolution and global cooling. Further inquiry will
address: 1) processes forcing the mid-Miocene climate shift, and 2) dynamic
influences of climate feedbacks across this shift. The research will: i) assess
the southwest Pacific/Southern Ocean hydrographic response to this climate
shift, ii) evaluate possible processes/feedbacks involved in cryospheric
expansion using records with age resolution of ~2-6 kyr to distinguish 40 and
100 kyr orbital periodicity, and iii) characterize the evolution of the climate
spectrum at orbital time-scales through the mid-Miocene climate transition. To
achieve the proposed objectives, high-resolution (~2-6 kyr) multi-proxy
geochemical and faunal investigations will be conducted on a pair (ODP Sites
1170 and 1171) of unusually high quality marine CaCO3 sequences of mid-Miocene
age (~16.8 to 12 Ma) drilled on the South Tasman Rise (STR) during ODP Leg 189.
STR sequences provide a rare opportunity to study the mid-Miocene global climate
shift at a sensitive oceanographic interface in the high southern latitudes. In
the mid Miocene, the STR was situated proximal to the confluence of subtropical
Pacific circulation and the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. The STR marks the
southern extent of the East Australian Current, a sensitive western boundary
current supplying heat and moisture to high southern latitudes. Sites 1170 and
1171 are marked by superb-quality CaCO3 preservation, relatively high deep-sea
sedimentation rates (~6 cm/kyr), and >80% recovery. The primary intellectual
merit of this research is that it will provide an unprecedented opportunity to
examine the magnitude, phasing, and processes influencing middle Miocene
Antarctic cryosphere expansion and global cooling at orbital timescales. This
research will focus the view of Cenozoic climate evolution, including processes
and feedbacks influencing Earth's systems across a major climate transition.
Dramatic changes occurring in Antarctica, which may be linked to observed
tropical Pacific variability (ENSO), underscore the need to improve
understanding of feedbacks influencing the development, extent, and stability of
the Antarctic cryosphere on both long (tens of thousands to millions of years)
and short (decadal to millennial) timescales. The impact of this research is
broad, as it addresses major issues related to the evolution of the Antarctic
cryosphere and its response to climate reorganizations that is of vital interest
to society. Further broader impacts are the student training that will be
accomplished during the course of the research.