* 0230271
* Geodetic Constraints on Arc Dynamics and Coupling on the Plate Interface in the Lesser Antilles
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,10/31/2010
* Glen Mattioli, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 10/31/2010
* USD 282,041.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Along obliquely convergent plate boundaries, the
relative plate motion vector frequently is partitioned into arc-normal and arc-
parallel components. Complete separation of the normal and parallel components
leads to arc-parallel thrusts and folds in the forearc and arc-parallel strike-
slip faults in the volcanic arc. The forearc thus translates relative to the
interior of the overriding plate. Partial separation of the two components,
however, is more common, particularly when coupling occurs across the plate
interface. In addition, changes in obliquity of convergence along the plate
boundary can create arc- parallel gradients in shear stress to produce internal
deformation of the forearc. Either arc-parallel extension or compression may
occur. The northeastern Caribbean corner affords an excellent opportunity to use
Global Positioning System (GPS) geodesy to examine strain partitioning, coupling
along the plate interface, and arc-parallel extension in a slow subduction zone.
Caribbean-North American relative plate motion is ~20 mm/yr. The&lt;br/&gt;trend
of the plate boundary changes from NNW in the Lesser Antilles to EW along the
eastern Greater Antilles. The ENE azimuth of the convergence vector predicts
near normal subduction at Martinique and near strike-slip motion at Puerto Rico.
Horizontal slip directions derived from shallow-thrust earthquakes east of the
Lesser Antilles lie between the predicted convergence direction and the normal
to the subduction trace, suggesting that some partitioning occurs. The focus is
on the northern Lesser Antilles for four reasons. First, The PI's have collected
GPS data in the region since 1994 and have developed a Caribbean reference
frame. Second, GPS-derived velocities for the southern Lesser Antilles agree
within error with those predicted for Caribbean motion relative to North America
at those locations, implying little or no deformation of the overriding plate.
In contrast, a simple elastic half-space model shows that preliminary GPS
geodetic results from the northern Lesser Antilles are consistent with coupling
along the plate interface. Third, the northern Lesser Antilles arc consists of
two concentric island chains that provide subaerial exposure closer to the
trench and over a greater arc transverse distance than do the islands in the
south. Fourth, NE-trending structures transverse to the arc in the northern
Lesser Antilles accommodate a component of arc-parallel extension. In addition,
volcanic centers on individual islands have migrated parallel to the arc at
rates equivalent to those of the arc-parallel component of convergence. Finally,
EW-oriented extension along NS-trending structures has been measured by GPS
geodesy for the EW-trending eastern Greater Antilles. The slow relative plate
motion in the northeastern Caribbean requires long GPS time-series to yield
robust velocities to assess potential arc-parallel strain gradients. This five-
year proposal, therefore, builds on data collected in the northeastern Caribbean
since 1994.If no motion of the islands of the northern Lesser Antilles relative
to the Caribbean plate can be detected over temporal scales of a decade or
longer a scenario that is unlikely given our preliminary dataset these sites
will be used to provide additional constraints for the Caribbean reference frame
formulation. The proposed work includes: collection and processing of GPS data;
noise analysis, which is particularly important where motion is slow such as the
Caribbean; and modeling of results. The questions to be addressed are: Is
oblique slip partitioned into trench parallel and normal components in slow
subduction zones, i.e. the northern Lesser Antilles? If partitioning occurs,
does it depend upon obliquity of convergence? What is the degree of coupling
along the plate interface in the northern Lesser Antilles? Is arc-parallel
extension of sufficient magnitude for detection by GPS geodesy? If so, does it
increase in magnitude as obliquity of subduction increases? Are the rates of
arc-parallel slip and/or arc-parallel extension consistent with rates of
migration of volcanic centers within the northern Lesser Antilles? What are the
implications of this for the dynamics of deep magmatic processes? Determining
whether the leading edge of the Caribbean plate corner in the eastern Greater
Antilles and the Lesser Antilles is composed of distinct block(s)that move
relative to the Caribbean interior also will constrain seismic hazard in the
northeastern Caribbean, an area that is little studied and particularly at risk
for seismogenic tsunamis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;