* 0230595
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Prehistoric Urbanism and Lithic Technological Organization During the Middle Horizon: A Case Study from Conchopata, Ayacucho, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2002,06/30/2004
* William Isbell, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,178.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Isbell, Ms. Catherine Bencic will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct an intensive archaeological
analysis of approximately 10,000 stone artifacts excavated from the
archaeological site of Conchopata in the Ayacucho Valley of central Peru. This
research will demonstrate how the production and use of stone tools was
integrated into the daily lives of Conchopata residents, and will provide new
information on the rise of urbanism from a domestic perspective in the Ayacucho
region. The prehistoric urban settlement of Conchopata is located approximately
10 kilometers from the Huari capital, one of South America's first great cities.
The Huari culture dates to the Middle Horizon (A.D. 550-1000) and Conchopata is
believed to be a center of large-scale, specialized production of ceremonial
pottery, perhaps beginning before Huari came to power. Recent excavations have
revealed new information about royal elites, craft production and complex ritual
activity. New areas suggesting extensive domestic activity were revealed as
well, a previously unexplored aspect of life at Conchopata. Andean prehistoric
urbanism has typically been investigated through studies of regional settlement
patterns and elite material culture, such as ceremonial pottery and monumental
architecture. Few have studied everyday domestic artifacts, yet mundane
artifacts such as stone tools reveal a great deal about essential domestic and
ritual activities and the degree to which all classes of people were socially
and economically differentiated. This research will represent one of the first
complete analyses of stone artifacts conducted at Middle Horizon sites in the
Andes. Studies of stone artifacts in the Andes still mainly focus only on
formal, highly modified tools, emphasizing their typological classification. The
majority of stone artifact assemblages, however, are composed of casually
produced unmodified or slightly modified flakes that were used for most domestic
activities. As a result of the typological emphasis on formal tools, many
studies have ignored the vast majority of stone artifacts and the information
they can provide. This research is important for providing new information on
how stone tools were used and produced as well as a new perspective on the daily
lives of prehistoric Andean peoples in Peru's early cities. It will help develop
a baseline for the analysis and interpretation of other stone artifact
collections not only for Huari sites, but also for other archaeological cultures
and centers throughout Andean South America. This research will also contribute
to the growing interest in domestic contexts in Andean archaeology, and will
assist in training a promising young scientist.