* 0230114
* Longwave Radiation Processes over the Antarctic Plateau
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Von Walden, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly Falkner
* 12/31/2006
* USD 97,657.00

The atmosphere over the Antarctic Plateau plays a unique role in the global
climate system. It is the coldest and driest atmosphere on earth, and radiation
processes dominate both the surface and the top-of-atmosphere energy budgets. In
summer, the four radiation components (downward and upward, shortwave and
longwave) are each in the range of 100 to 400 watts per square meter, generally
exceeding the sensible and latent heat fluxes by at least an order of magnitude.
In winter, there is no shortwave radiation, so the downward and upward longwave
fluxes are the dominant contributors to the surface energy budget. When
spectrally resolved, longwave radiation is also useful for remote sensing of
atmospheric and surface properties. Thus it is desirable to develop methods for
remote sensing by polar-orbiting satellites so that the entire continent can be
characterized. Surface-based observations are invaluable for validating
satellite observations, as well as for obtaining information about climatic
processes that are best studied in situ. &lt;br/&gt;Five separate projects will
be based upon analysis of data from South Pole Atmospheric Radiation and Cloud
Lidar Experiment (SPARCLE), a full-year experiment of the effects of clouds,
water vapor, atmospheric ice crystals, and surface snow, on the longwave
radiation spectrum measured at the surface. Project 1 will use the
climatological database of longwave spectra to determine the contributions of
different gases to the downward longwave flux at the surface and the surface
cloud radiative forcing. Project 2 involves longwave radiative properties of
Antarctic clouds and their effects on the surface and atmospheric energy
budgets. Project 3 involves the measurement of humidity profiles and development
of retrieval algorithms of boundary-layer temperature and humidity profiles for
Antarctica. Project 4 involves the simultaneous retrieval of the surface
temperature and the spectral emissivity of snow. Project 5 is a study of near-
surface atmospheric temperature profiles. &lt;br/&gt;The experimental data and
the subsequent analysis products are expected to generate research in other
areas, including remote sensing, climate modeling, and weather forecasting in
Antarctica for potential year-round logistical operations. The data analysis
projects proposed here will also provide data from the Antarctic Plateau useful
in constraining and testing general circulation models.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;