* 0230285
* Collaborative Research - Transantarctic Mountains Deformation Network: GPS Measurements of Neotectonic Motion in the Antarctic Interior
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2009
* USD 547,949.00

OPP-0230285/OPP-0230356&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Wilson, Terry J./Hothem, Larry
D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to
conduct GPS measurements of bedrock crustal motions in an extended
Transantarctic Mountains Deformation network (TAMDEF) to document neotectonic
displacements due to tectonic deformation within the West Antarctic rift and/or
to mass change of the Antarctic ice sheets. Horizontal displacements related to
active neotectonic rifting, strike-slip translations, and volcanism will be
tightly constrained by monitoring the combined TAMDEF and Italian VLNDEF
networks of bedrock GPS stations along the Transantarctic Mountains and on
offshore islands in the Ross Sea. Glacio-isostatic adjustments due to
deglaciation since the Last Glacial Maximum and to modern mass change of the ice
sheets will be modeled from GPS-derived crustal motions together with new
information from other programs on the configurations, thicknesses, deglaciation
history and modern mass balance of the ice sheets. Tectonic and rheological
information from ongoing structural and seismic investigations in the Victoria
Land region will also be integrated in the modeling. The integrative and
iterative modeling will yield a holistic interpretation of neotectonics and ice
sheet history that will help us to discriminate tectonic crustal displacements
from viscoelastic/elastic glacio-isostatic motions. These results will provide
key information to interpret broad, continental-scale crustal motion patterns
detected by sparse, regionally distributed GPS continuous trackers and by
spaceborne instruments. This study will contribute to international programs
focused on Antarctic neotectonic and global change
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategies to meet these science objectives include
repeat surveys of key sites in the existing TAMDEF network, extension of the
array of TAMDEF sites southward about 250 km along the Transantarctic Mountains,
linked measurements with the VLNDEF network, and integration of quasi-continuous
trackers within the campaign network. By extending the array of bedrock sites
southward, these measurements will cross gradients in predicted vertical motion
due to viscoelastic rebound. The southward extension will also allow
determination of the southern limit of the active Terror Rift and will provide a
better baseline for constraints on any ongoing tectonic displacements across the
West Antarctic rift system as a whole that might be possible using GPS data
collected by the West Antarctic GPS Network. This project will also investigate
unique aspects of GPS geodesy in Antarctica to determine how the error spectrum
compares to mid-latitude regions and to identify the optimum measurement and
data processing schemes for Antarctic conditions. The geodetic research will
improve position accuracies within our network and will also yield general
recommendations for deformation monitoring networks in polar
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An education and outreach program is planned and
will be targeted at non-science-major undergraduate students taking Earth System
Science at Ohio State University. The objective will be to illuminate the
research process for nonscientists. This effort will educate students on the
process of science and inform them about Antarctica and how it relates to global
science issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;