* 0230556
* Hands-on MEMS
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Vijay Modi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 01/31/2007
* USD 302,317.00

Educational institutions, particularly those without access to clean room
facilities, find it difficult to offer a course that exposes students to the
concepts of MEMS micro fabrication and MEMS-based devices. This project is
developing educational materials that provide students with MEMS devices for
characterization and study, and instructors with easy-to-use course and training
materials. This full-scale development is based on a prototype course offered
during Spring 2001 and 2002 at NJIT and Columbia University. Specifically, the
product is a laboratory kit for hands-on MEMS exploration that includes 1) a
polished set of experiments built upon the existing prototype activities, 2) a
set of MEMS devices for testing, and wafers to illustrate key process steps, 3)
easy- to-use device packaging or mounting hardware, 4) a supplemental process
and device illustration/simulation software tool to further illustrate design
and processing, 5) teacher training and lecture materials and exemplary reports,
and 6) recommended equipment and software platforms for each device type.
Including actual MEMS devices in the kit is perhaps the most novel aspect of the
proposed program, but necessary if hands-on MEMS is to be accessible to a wide
audience. The product is being beta tested at six partner universities,
including small schools with small programs, to help insure appropriateness for
national dissemination. Furthermore, a commercialization partner has been
identified and has agreed to help develop a product that can be distributed
nationally through their network of major dealers.

