* 0230091
* 3-D Evolution of Arc Magmatism and Associated Hydrothermal Activity in Central Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Mark Barton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 206,996.00

Barton&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0230091&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will study arc
magmatism and hydrothermal activity in a 75x30x10 km block of the upper crust in
central Arizona. The area has exceptional 3-D exposure due to the topographic
relief, arid climate, and extensional fault rotation. This area presents an
exceptional opportunity to study shallow (&lt;10 km) magmatic systems, and
address near versus far-field controls on mineralization, hydrothermal systems,
and styles of magmatic evolution. We hope to develop a picture of the evolution
of large magmatic centers in arc settings. The work will focus on geologic
mapping, structural reconstruction, geochronology, and petrology of contrasting
Laramide centers in the Tortilla and Dripping Spring Mountains. This area
encompasses the Ray, Globe-Miami, and Superior mining districts. Mapping will
resolve the distribution, timing, and character of igneous, metamorphic, and
hydrothermal features. Using these results, pre-extension geometries will be
reconstructed and linked to industry and USGS studies. Magmatic and hydrothermal
events will be constrained with U-Pb, Ar-Ar, and Re-Os dating and whole rock,
mineral, isotope and fluid inclusion studies. Broader impacts include education
of post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students, collaborations with the
USGS and the mining industry, and improved exploration models for porphyry
copper and related ore deposits.&lt;br/&gt;