* 0230624
* Partnerships to Enhance Engineering Education in K-16
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Christine Ebert, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230624&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ebert,
Christine&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University South Carolina Research
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Partnerships to Enhance Engineering Education in
K-16&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Bridges
for Engineering Education planning grant will develop a comprehensive program
to: improve the pedagogical skills of engineering faculty, including their
ability to assess student achievement of learning objectives; increase the
engineering content in K-12 education; and increase the engineering content in
pre-service teacher education. The activities proposed during the planning
process are built upon a foundation that increases the number of mutually
beneficial partnerships between faculty members in the College of Education and
the College of Engineering and Information Technology. The PIs will also
personally demonstrate and document the effectiveness of pedagogy-development
strategies that are known to education faculty but not to engineering faculty.
As a vehicle for developing a comprehensive and integrated program to enhance
engineering education in grades K-16, the state-approved Center &lt;br/&gt;for
Engineering Education Excellence will be activated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
core strategy is to identify and support partnerships between faculty in the
College of Engineering and Information Technology and the College of Education
at the University of South Carolina. By partnering together to apply their
unique expertise to address the common interest of K-12 education improvement,
they have learned from each other and are able to directly apply their new
knowledge in their separate disciplines. This program is based on cooperative
learning techniques. By supporting good people to work together on good
projects, each member of the &lt;br/&gt;partnership will have a greater
awareness of what the other has to offer. This is the cornerstone of a mutually
beneficial and long-lasting relationship. &lt;br/&gt;