* 0230705
* "How Things Work" - A Model for Introducing Engineering Concepts to Primary Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Owen Robert Mitchell, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,995.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230705 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Watkins, Steve INSTITUTION NAME:
University of Missouri-Rolla TITLE: "How Things Work" - A Model for Introducing
Engineering Concepts to Primary Students

ABSTRACT

This project will create educational resources for primary school teachers
dealing with technical literacy and to develop significant interactions between
engineering programs and K-12 schools. Unfortunately, many K-12 students lose
interest and motivation for science, mathematics, and technology early in their
school years. Consequently, technical programs and resources dealing with high
school students and, to some extent, middle school students are too late in the
educational process. Primary school instruction needs a strong technical
component that captures the imagination and stimulates interest of students. Too
little work is currently being done to develop the technical abilities of
primary teachers and to provide level-appropriate resources for our youngest
scholars.

The project will build a foundation that connects engineering faculty, programs,
and resources to elementary teachers, schools, and students. In particular, a
comprehensive, multi-course program in science, mathematics, and engineering for
primary teachers is a long-term aim. The specific goals for this planning
proposal are to facilitate the collaboration among university faculty in
education, engineering, and arts and sciences; to increase pre-college student
interest and motivation in engineering concepts by developing an innovative
prototype course; and to enhance the synergy among university programs, K-12
curriculum, and Missouri teachers. A fundamental aspect of the plan is to
involve university faculty, university students, in-service teachers, and
parents as partners in the developments.