* 0230441
* Balloon Observations of MeV Electron Precipitation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,03/31/2007
* George Parks, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 03/31/2007
* USD 682,321.00

The proposed project is the preparation and flight of a series of balloon
payloads to study energetic electrons precipitated from the outer zone of the
Earth's radiation belts into the atmosphere, and the subsequent data analysis.
The electrons under consideration are relativistic (kinetic energy greater than
the electron rest mass of 511 keV). These electrons can be responsible for
damage to satellites in geosynchronous orbit. They are trapped in the Earth's
magnetosphere between roughly 4 and 6 Earth radii at the equator, which means
they hit the Earth near the Arctic and Antarctic circles when they come down.
The precipitation can be triggered by a number of causes, some associ-ated with
magnetic storms and some which can occur under all conditions. The balloons
study not the electrons themselves, but rather x-rays emitted by the
bremsstrahlung process when they hit the atmosphere. A balloon can therefore
watch all the precipitation, taking place within a hundred kilometers of its
location or more, and can track the variability of the emission with time. Most
satellites only observe electrons at their own position, and move too quickly
through the precipitation zone to observe the evolution of the precipitation
events. Balloons were used ex-tensively until the 1970s to study precipitation
of non-relativistic electrons (roughly 20-200 keV). When relativistic electrons
hit the atmosphere, they can produce enough ionization to create chemically
important amounts of "odd nitrogen" (e.g. NO2 and other compounds). Depending on
the circumstances, these compounds can either destroy stratospheric ozone or
else bind up and deactivate chlorine atoms which destroy ozone even more
efficiently, and thus perhaps partially protect the ozone layer. Although their
role in either case is widely understood to be small compared to that of
increases and decreases in chlorine introduced by human activity, that role is
not well studied and may represent an important perturbation on the main
chemistry. The campaign proposed for December 2004/January 2005will address the
physics of the various relativistic electron precipitation processes, their
patterns of occurrence in space and time, and the energy and number of electrons
precipitated. The last point is relevant to the overall balance of relativistic
electrons in the radiation belts and also to their impact on atmospheric
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;