* 0230027
* Modes of Lithospheric Extensional Consumption and Magmatism: Testing for End-member Cases at the Great Basin-Colorado Plateau Transition with a Magnetotelluric Resistivity Transect
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2007
* USD 160,833.00

EAR-0230027&lt;br/&gt;Wannamaker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR02-30027: Modes of
lithospheric extensional consumption and magmatism: testing&lt;br/&gt;for end-
member cases at the Great Basin-Colorado Plateau transition, Utah, with
a&lt;br/&gt;magnetotelluric resistivity transect&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Philip E.
Wannamaker (University of Utah, Energy &amp; Geoscience Institute,
423&lt;br/&gt;Wakara Way, Suite 300, Salt Lake City, UT 84108,
pewanna@egi.utah.edu)&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;End-member possibilities for
stable lithospheric extension will be tested according to&lt;br/&gt;their
influence on physical properties of the deep crust and upper mantle across the
Great&lt;br/&gt;Basin-Colorado Plateau transition zone, south-central Utah. The
main geophysical&lt;br/&gt;property to be investigated is electrical
conductivity, together with its implications for&lt;br/&gt;thermal and
rheological state, which will be imaged using the magnetotelluric
(MT)&lt;br/&gt;technique. New MT surveying primarily across the transition zone
(TZ) per se will join&lt;br/&gt;existing data into an E-W transect nearly 400 km
in length, with a depth range of&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity from 100's of m to
250-400 km approximately. Data will be acquired using&lt;br/&gt;wideband and
long-period recorders of the University of Utah and University
of&lt;br/&gt;Washington, which reside in the NSF-supported EMSOC instrument
facility. Existing&lt;br/&gt;geophysical indicators show a strong N-S strike
orientation at upper crustal to&lt;br/&gt;lithospheric scales and should allow
accurate cross sections of model conductivity using&lt;br/&gt;mainly current 2-D
regularized inversion platforms. Substantially reduced
electrical&lt;br/&gt;resistivity values at lower crustal and upper mantle depths
inferred from MT field&lt;br/&gt;data most likely reflect melts and exsolved
ionic fluids. Previous surveying indicates&lt;br/&gt;that the onset of low
resistivity in the deep crust occurs for T &gt; ~500-550 o C in high-
grade&lt;br/&gt;metaigneous host rocks. Depth variation in low resistivity thus
will approximate&lt;br/&gt;an isotherm which should evolve gradually from the GB
to the CP in the case of&lt;br/&gt;uniform TZ warming, or show an upwelling
under the little-extended TZ in the case&lt;br/&gt;of non-uniform, enhanced
extension at depth. Exsolved fluids weaken the lithosphere&lt;br/&gt;greatly
through diffusion creep, so resistivity will provide a clear view of at
least&lt;br/&gt;relative rheological contrasts. Conductivity, heat flow and
constraints on composition&lt;br/&gt;and timing of extension, will be used in
time-dependent, 2-D thermal modeling for an&lt;br/&gt;improved projection of the
thermal field into the upper mantle.