* 0230535
* Science and Mathematics Authentic Inquiry-Based Teaching:   Project SMART for K-12
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Daniel Oerther, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230535 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kukreti, Anant INSTITUTION NAME:
University of Cincinnati Main Campus TITLE: Science and Mathematics Authentic
inquiRy-based Teaching: Project SMART for K-12

ABSTRACT

Project SMART partners engineering and education faculty members with K-12
educators to empower high school students to successfully complete college..
Project SMART recognizes that effective student education requires authentic,
inquiry-based learning. By solving open-ended problems based upon real world
examples, students will link the relevance of their education with their daily
lives and appreciate the intrinsic and tangible values of science and
mathematics in modern society. The five goals of Project SMART include:

Improving science and mathematics achievement of ALL students, consistent with
our overarching goal ioTo Leave No Child Behind.l_ Training secondary science
and mathematics educators to incorporate authentic, inquiry-based education into
current secondary science and mathematics curricula. Attracting secondary school
students to engineering; enhancing the perception of career opportunities in
engineering; and improving students SMET related skills to become successful
engineers. Instilling an awareness of the importance of learning science and
mathematics skills in K-6 administrators, teachers, parents, and students.
Increasing the quantity and quality of gender and ethnic student diversity in
SMET related courses.

The partners form a unique alliance among engineering and education faculty of
the University of Cincinnati (UC), the Southwest Ohio section of High Schools
That Work (HSTW), and the Greater Cincinnati Tech. Prep.

For this planning proposal, we have presented our preliminary thoughts on the
main elements envisioned for Project SMART, including: 1) teacher professional
development; 2) educational resources for teachers; 3) student programs: out of
the classroom and into the world of science and mathematics; 4) pre- engineering
program for high school students; and 5) evaluation, assessment and improvement.
In particular, we have proposed special programs specifically targeting
traditionally underrepresented groups in SMET related fields including ethnic
minorities and girls. In addition, we have presented our views on
ininstructional theorylu which will form the context for the planning and
development of these elements. The Project Committee believes that the
implementation of Project SMART in the microcosm of Cincinnati is transferable
to other school districts struggling with similar education problems. During the
last century, Ohio lead the nation as a strong manufacturing state. Now, we must
change our educational style to keep up with society's technological demands.
Project SMART is envisioned to transform the lives of students it touches by
tearing down barriers to high paying jobs and creating informed citizens.