* 0230514
* Testing Southern Ocean Control of Atmospheric CO2 using Diatom-based Paleo-proxies
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Mark Altabet, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/28/2007
* USD 298,000.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the role of the
Southern Ocean in regulating atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) during glacial-
interglacial cycles. The polar Southern Ocean is the primary region where the
deep-sea exchanges carbon dioxide (CO2) with the atmosphere due to shoaling of
very-cold seawater to the near-surface layer. Consequently, of the numerous
theories that have been advanced to explain oceanic control of atmospheric CO2,
most of those that remain viable point to a dominant role for this region.
Increasing consumption of upwelled CO2 and nutrients (e.g. increasing export
production) or decreasing rates of supply to the surface (e.g. increasing
stratification or sea-ice cover) may thus be responsible for reduced atmospheric
CO2 during glacial maxima. Since at present only a small fraction of available
macronutrients (nitrates and phosphates) are consumed in Southern Ocean surface
waters, either scenario would produce a substantial increase in relative
nutrient utilization, thus making it a master variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
history of Southern Ocean surface nutrient utilization will be reconstructed for
the last 60,000 years at three Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) sites that span the
polar front. These remarkable Atlantic sector sites have continuous, high
sediment accumulation rates (&gt;15 centimeters per thousand years (cm/kyr)) for
the entire period to be studied. They are also unique for the Southern Ocean in
being within the modern zone of high biogenic opal content as well as having
sufficient foraminiferal abundance for oxygen isotope chronostratigraphy.
Centennial resolution will be achieved over the past 60,000 years to determine
phasing with changes in climate and atmospheric CO2 to within 500 years with
emphasis on millennial-scale events between 20,000 and 60,000 years ago as well
as the last glacial termination. Since sea-ice has been implicated as a driving
mechanism, detailed comparisons will also be made for existing sea-ice proxy
data from the ODP sites as well as the Vostok ice core climate and CO2 record.
Nitrogen isotopic ratio will be the primary proxy for nutrient utilization,
which has been verified in detail through studies of the modern Southern Ocean.
To avoid artifacts associated with organic matter diagenesis, we will conduct
analyses primarily on diatom-frustule bound organic matter. The three ODP sites
have relatively high biogenic opal content over the time period of interest.
Though not completely unambiguous, diatom carbon isotopic data obtained at no
extra cost will be useful for constraining possible scenarios particularly since
it will be obtained synoptically with the other tracer data. It will reflect
primarily changes in surface CO2 and/or diatom growth rate. In collaboration
with Dr. Christina De La Rocha (Cambridge U.), silicon isotopes will be measured
on a subset of the samples analyzed for nitrogen and carbon isotopic ratio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the best possible chronology for nutrient
utilization for the last 40,000 years, we will explore radiocarbon dating of
diatom frustule-bound organic matter using preparation methodology recently
developed by John Hayes' group at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
(WHOI) Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) facility. Subsets of samples analyzed
for nitrogen, carbon, and silicon isotopic ratio will be sent to WHOI for sample
preparation and AMS radiocarbon analysis. This approach not only permits dating
of critical intervals where there is insufficient foram material for radiocarbon
dating but also ensures that the dates obtained pertain directly to our nutrient
utilization record. Verification of this new method will be made at each site by
dating diatom frustules and forams from the same sediment depths where the
latter are sufficiently abundant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following major
hypotheses will be tested:&lt;br/&gt;#1 Southern Ocean surface relative nutrient
utilization is the primary driver of past changes in atmospheric CO2 and hence
global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;#2 Seasonal sea ice cover is an important
regulator of Southern Ocean relative nutrient utilization and CO2 providing a
positive feedback between Antarctic and global climate.&lt;br/&gt;#3 Glacial
reduction of the silicate to nitrate utilization ratio resulted in elevated
silicate in Subantarctic surface waters, northward movement of opal-rich
sediments, and changes in the nutrient composition of intermediate waters formed
in polar frontal region.&lt;br/&gt;