* 0230613
* An Integrated, Modular Chemical Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Mohammad Ataai, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230613&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McCarthy,
Joseph&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: An
Integrated, Modular Chemical Engineering
Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the scientific
needs of tomorrow's industries are not well defined, the goal of an engineering
educator should not be to train specialized experts in the perceived areas of
future import, but instead to give students a broad spectrum of knowledge and to
cultivate their ability to think analytically and critically while encouraging
them to pursue learning throughout their careers. The challenge before us then
is to develop a curriculum that prepares students for the engineering economy of
today, while enabling them - through a strong and well integrated core of
engineering knowledge -- to maintain versatility through life-long learning and
continuing education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we will formulate a
plan to (a) Give the students a strong fundamental foundation by concentrating
on the essential core of scientific and engineering basics in a given
discipline.(b) Enhance systems thinking by helping students to integrate their
knowledge across courses and disciplines so that they are better prepared to
address open-ended problems; and (c) Prepare and provide for continuing
education and life-long learning. We hypothesize that an effective method of
accomplishing these three tasks is to combine ideas from the NSF Coalitions with
the well-established K-12 practice of Block Scheduling. Specifically, we propose
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Modularize and integrate the critical "core" of
Chemical Engineering (including mass balances, thermodynamics, kinetics,
separations, transport phenomena, process systems, control, laboratory, and
design) into six Pillar courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Re-evaluate and re-
align supporting courses (mathematics, chemistry, physics, and biology) and
elective courses into application-focused tracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Re-
align each individual course so that, in addition to the traditional macroscopic
and continuum-level descriptions, we also include "sub-continuum" or
"fundamental unit" analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;