* 0230427
* Collaborative Research:    Circulation in the Freshwater Switchyard of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Michael Steele, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2007
* USD 825,028.00

The proposed research will document the circulation, variability, and driving
mechanisms of the upper ocean in the freshwater switchyard of the Arctic Ocean.
This unexplored region lies to the north of the eastern Canadian Archipelago and
Greenland, extending about 500-800 km into the central Arctic Ocean. It lies
just upstream of the freshwater exit points in Fram and Nares Straits, i.e.,
where freshwater from various sources is finally delivered to some of the main
channels that lead to the North Atlantic Ocean. The main hypothesis is that this
area is a bifurcation point for freshwater transfer between the Arctic and North
Atlantic Oceans, and that small changes in the overall circulation of this
region may have large downstream effects. This study will measure ocean
temperature, salinity, currents, and geochemical freshwater tracers such as
oxygen, oxygen isotopes, tritium/3He, CFC.s, barium, and nutrients. The focus
will be on the upper ocean (0-300 m) where freshwater resides. This will be an
aircraft-based operation, because thick sea ice prevents access by most surface
ships and political realities prevent access by submarine. There will also be a
satellite-based study of sea ice motion and thickness in the switchyard region
which will determine how much ice recirculates westward within the Beaufort
Gyre, how much exits through Fram Strait, and how much exits within the various
passages of the Canadian Archipelago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
study will be made available via an internet web site that will be linked to
other similar ongoing projects, as well as through presentations and articles in
both scientific and popular formats. Additionally, they will be used for
educational purposes through involvement of both graduate and undergraduate
students, and in course material. A special link to numerical modeling studies
is planned via incorporation of our data into a gridded ocean database as well
as raw validation data. The appropriate logistics infrastructure at NSF has been
developed over the past several years as part of various projects, in particular
the North Pole Environmental Observatory, an aircraft-based project staged out
of Alert/Eureka.&lt;br/&gt;