* 0230094
* High-Resolution Seismic Tomography and Earthquake Monitoring at Deception Island Volcano, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2010
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 01/31/2010
* USD 316,845.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a seismic tomography experiment and earth
quake monitoring of Deception Island Volcano as a collaborative venture with
investigators supported by the Spanish Antarctic Program. Deception Island
volcano is an active, back arc stratovolcano with a flooded caldera that is
located in Bransfield Strait. The historical eruptions at Deception have all
occurred near the ring fracture and extend around the caldera. The three most
recent, in 1967-1970, are unusual in that each eruptive event involved
simultaneous eruptions from multiple vents. Chemical differences between the
lavas are best explained if the eruptions were fed by isolated shallow intrusive
pods but their synchronicity and distribution suggests that they may have been
driven by an extensive magma body underlying the whole caldera. However, a
recent model for the caldera suggests that it formed by progressive passive
extension rather than catastrophic collapse and this model implies that magma
may be less widely distributed beneath the volcano. Although the volcano has not
erupted for 30 years, it is still very active. There is extensive fumarole
activity, earthquake swarms in 1992 and 1999 were attributed to magma injection
events, and bathymetric data suggests that the northeastern portion of the
caldera is resurging at rates of up to 0.5 m/yr. However, the size, distribution
and interconnectivity of subsurface magma bodies and their relationship to
resurgence, the recent eruptions, and the distribution and style of faulting is
poorly constrained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been many seasonal
experiments to monitor seismicity at Deception Island but they have all been
small scale and lacked seafloor stations. While they demonstrate that the
volcano is seismically active the hypocentral locations have large uncertainties
and there are no focal mechanisms. No seismic tomography experiment has been
attempted at Deception Island, which is perhaps rather surprising because its
geometry that makes it ideal for a combined land and marine high-resolution
active source experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a US
component of an international project organized by Jesus Ibanez at the
University of Granada, Spain. The combined objective is to deploy a joint
marine-land seismic network around Deception Island for an Antarctic summer to
monitor seismicity and to conduct a high-resolution active-source tomography
experiment. The scientific goals of the experiment are to:&lt;br/&gt;o
Understand the distribution of magma and its relationship to recent volcanic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;o Understand the details of resurgence in northeastern
portion of the caldera.&lt;br/&gt;o Understanding the distribution of faulting
and the state of stress and its relationship to volcanic and tectonic
processes.&lt;br/&gt;The Spanish group is supported by the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Technology to deploy a substantial land based seismic network in the
2004-2005 field season and they have also secured 21 days of on-site ship time
on the large Spanish R/V Hesperides. This award supports participation by US
investigators in the conduct and analysis of the experiment and supports the
contribution of 14 short-period three-component ocean bottom seismometers
(OBS's). The experiment plan calls for a ten-week deployment of an earthquake
network comprising 14 OBS's and about 10 land stations, some of which will
include both short period and broadband seismometers. This will be followed by
the active source experiment using the airgun array on the Hesperides to shoot
to a very dense land network and to 38 OBS sites (the 14 US OBS's and 5 short
deployment OBS's provided by the Spanish will be redeployed
once).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to contribute significantly
to knowledge about the structure and eruptive potential of Deception Island and
will also contribute to the growing knowledge about volcanology in general and
eruptive processes in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;