* 0230578
* Digital Tutorial for Sandstone Petrography
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Earle McBride, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 01/31/2008
* USD 302,629.00

&lt;br/&gt;A demonstration version of an interactive digital tutorial in
sandstone petrology was developed&lt;br/&gt;and tested during a one-year proof-
of-concept project. The current tutorial is a collection of over
&lt;br/&gt;petrographic images of sandstone components in which mapped regions
respond to active inquiry (by mouse clicks) to reveal identification and
conceptual information. Organized around the Folk sandstone classification, the
image collection addresses both provenance and diagenesis and serves to
supplement, and even partially replace, traditional laboratory exercises. Formal
educational assessment of the tutorial was undertaken at the University of Texas
at Austin during two semesters of GEO 416M, Sedimentary Rocks. The attitudes and
attainments of undergraduate sedimentary petrology students who did and did not
utilize the demonstration version as a required resource in their laboratory
exercises show that students respond extremely well to this style of learning.
Assessment results support the soundness of the educational&lt;br/&gt;approach
and also indicate some clear directions for future development. This full
development project is doubling the size of the image collection to greater than
600 images and associated text as well as adding substantial new elements in
response to student experiences with the demonstration version. Assessment
activities are continuing at the University of Texas and at four other
universities. The digital sandstone tutorial is providing a well-balanced
treatment of the principal petrographic characteristics of major sandstone
components and the major sandstone types (and also examples of shales). The
tutorial also includes self-assessment and skill modules that help students
learn how to identify minerals, estimate the percentage of components, and
texture. Publication through a non-profit organization makes this large
collection of well-organized and intensely annotated sandstone images readily
available to universities and individual students, including those that do not
currently have access to petrographic thin section collections and petrographic
expertise. The educational approach developed and demonstrated in this project
can be applied to any natural science discipline that utilizes visual
data.&lt;br/&gt;