* 0230717
* A Plan for Competency-Based Individualized Curriculum for Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Dan Shunk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,992.00

The objective of this project is to plan different strategies that enable
a&lt;br/&gt;competency-based individualized education in such a diverse
engineering school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While education is significantly
different than industrial production of goods and services, we&lt;br/&gt;believe
that there exist several concepts one can borrow, modify and implement to
education&lt;br/&gt;systems to answer today's increasing demands. At the very
least, one such concept is mass&lt;br/&gt;customization of goods and services,
which translates into a competency-based&lt;br/&gt;individualized education
system. This concept aims to provide a set of measurable&lt;br/&gt;outcomes
(namely, skills, knowledge base and competency of graduates) by characterizing
and&lt;br/&gt;Individualizing each student's learning process and
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, we envision the development of a
competency-based learning system that would&lt;br/&gt;reflect a unified
academia-industry perspective, provide for the immediate needs of the
industry&lt;br/&gt;and facilitate scholarly development of future engineers and
researchers. In this project, we&lt;br/&gt;propose to develop a plan to
implement a systems approach and the manufacturing strategy of&lt;br/&gt;mass
customization to the education process. More specifically, we propose to develop
a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental framework for curriculum design, which allows for
individualized education while&lt;br/&gt;still optimizing the capacity of the
teaching assets we have for each academic year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
findings from the project will be published in various journals on
education&lt;br/&gt;research. We also intend to work with local industry to
extend our findings and insights to the&lt;br/&gt;mass customization of their
education and training systems. &lt;br/&gt;