* 0230176
* Workshop on Plastic Deformation of Minerals and Rocks; December 4 - 5, 2002, Berkeley, California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

EAR-0230176&lt;br/&gt;Karato and Wenk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
partially support a workshop entitled "Plastic deformation of minerals and
rocks", which is to be held in December 4th and 5th of 2002, in Berkeley,
California. The two-day workshop is one of the series organized by Mineralogical
Society of America. A total of 13 invited presentations (16 invited speakers)
are currently on the agenda. Reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of this
area of science, among these 16 invited speakers, three are from materials
science community and two are from geodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
purpose of this workshop is to provide students and scientists alike an
opportunity to learn the current status of plastic deformation of minerals and
rocks. There have been major progresses in the study of plastic deformation in
minerals and rocks during the last 20 years or so. They include the extension of
experimental studies to a wider range of conditions and the development of
theoretical models of deformation including the modeling of deformation
microstructures. But there has been little opportunity to bring these
developments together to allow students and scientists in Earth sciences to
learn the current progresses to make significant advances in Earth sciences.
This workshop will provide such an opportunity that is needed for the healthy
development of solid Earth sciences particularly solid Earth
geodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;