* 0230544
* Converging Technologies:  The New Frontier in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Robert Balmer, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230544 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Balmer, Robert INSTITUTION NAME:
Union College TITLE: Converging Technologies: The New Frontier in Engineering
Education NSF RECEIVED DATE: 06/04/2002

Abstract In recent years the intersection of a wide variety of industries and
technologies have been used to create new products and solve new problems. Since
these new technologies typically occur at the interfaces of science and
engineering, we refer to this intersection as .Converging Technologies.. Union
College has made a commitment to bring converging technologies into the
engineering classrooms, integrating nanotechnology, mechatronics, bioengineering
and pervasive computing into our undergraduate engineering program.

To achieve our goals, we have undertaken the initial phase of planning - a full
year of interdisciplinary discussions to identify our focus technologies,
establish working groups, and outline preliminary goals. Our strategy does not
include developing entirely new engineering or science programs; rather we want
to build on our strengths as an engineering and liberal arts college to enhance
and expand our curricula in an interdisciplinary way, eliminating the .silos. of
traditional liberal arts and engineering programs.

In the second phase of planning we will determine the impact of the Converging
Technology program on college resources, and develop plans to allow integration
of Converging Technology components into existing programs as well as the
possibility of developing new programs within Converging Technology. Based on
our initial discussions, we anticipate various engineering and science courses
from the freshman through the senior years will touch on elements of these new
emerging technologies, as well as provide enhanced exposure to the latest
software tools. The program will also feature increased opportunities for
industrial internship programs and further weave internationalism throughout the
curricula.

