* 0230325
* Tidal Effects on the Lead Fraction and the associated Ocean-Atmosphere Heat Flux in the Weddell and Ross Seas
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Robin Robertson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Falkner
* 05/31/2007
* USD 309,553.00

This project will examine the characteristics and effects of tides in the
Weddell and Ross Seas, using a three-dimensional free surface coupled sea
ice/ocean model to study the barotropic and baroclinic components of the tide
and their effects on the structure of sea ice. &lt;br/&gt;Antarctic sea ice and
tides are important factors affecting the air-sea heat flux, deep water
formation, dynamics, and mixing in high southern latitudes. At the present time,
tidal processes and their effects have generally not been included in wind-
driven coupled ice-ocean models and sea ice has been ignored in the tidal models
of the Antarctic Seas. In this study a terrain-following coordinate model,
modified to include the ice shelves, is combined with a granular rheology sea
ice model and will be used to generate 45-day scenarios, one for each season,
based on climatological forcing. Simulations will be made both without and with
tidal forcing in order to quantify the tidal effects during the different sea
ice, mixed layer, and wind conditions associated with each season.
Climatological seasonal atmospheric conditions with realistic daily variability
for the forcing will be provided by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts. The investigation will include tidal effects on 1) formation of open
water, 2) the ocean-atmosphere heat flux, 3) the mean ocean circulation, 4)
shelf water formation due to brine rejection, 5) mid-water column mixing due to
shear instabilities, and 6) benthic mixing. Both Antarctic Bottom Water and Ice
Shelf Water production will be determined from the model results.&lt;br/&gt;