* 0230925
* Data Intensive GRID Benchmarks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Chaitanya Baru, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 779,049.00

Efficient development and deployment of Grids will be advanced by defining a
suite of benchmark to measure expected quality-of-service for Grid architectures
and anticipated time-to-solution of Grid applications. In particular, the
benchmarks to focus on the impact of alternative middleware implementations on
application performance are needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the
project will be:&lt;br/&gt;(1) A set of low-level benchmark probes for measuring
the performance of Grid infrastructure and the overheads of Grid
middleware.&lt;br/&gt;(2) A synthetic applications benchmark suite embodying
anticipated Grid usage scenarios of several emerging data intensive Grid
applications.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Applications profiling tools that can summarize the
resource usage patterns of Grid applications, and thus inform the refinement of
an evolving synthetic benchmark as production applications mature.&lt;br/&gt;(4)
A maintained website of performance data where Grid users can obtain benchmarks,
view results reported by this group and others, and submit their own new
results.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Enabled research (some as part of this proposal, but also
by the wider community) into factor affecting Grid
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Grids emerge, it is important to deploy
measurement methods along with them so that applications and architectures can
evolve guided by scientific principles. All sciences need agreed upon metrics-a
common language for communicating results. And a system, to be well engineered,
must be measured so that alternative implementations can be compared
quantitatively. Also, users of systems need performance objectives that describe
system capabilities so that they can develop and tune their applications towards
informed objectives. And system architects need examples of how the users will
exercise the system to inform the design process. Benchmarks are thus an
important part of the middleware for Grids, enabling communication about
technological advances and design tradeoffs. The proposed work will develop a
suite of data intensive Grid benchmarks to convey information back and forth
between people building Grids and people planning to use them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data-intensive applications form a class of problems
requires access to multiple data archives remote from their computational
resources. They belong on the Grid because they are already distributed (as
opposed to traditional HPC applications that may or may not scale well to
Grids). A benchmark suite to embody the resource requirements of these emerging
applications is needed to help Grid architects understand how applications will
stress infrastructure and middleware, and give users an early look at the
quality-of-service they can expect for their applications.&lt;br/&gt;