* 0230590
* Software Engineering Technology Program Development
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Michael Brzoska, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2003
* USD 99,999.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230590&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Brzoska,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Eastern Washington
University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Software Engineering Technology Program
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Engineering Technology and Multimedia Design within the School of Computing and
Engineering Sciences at Eastern Washington University plans to develop a new
program in the emerging discipline of Software Engineering Technology ( SET).
The SET program was conceived largely on the basis of three major factors:
industrial demand within the region and state, the small number of
qualified&lt;br/&gt;graduates available to enter the workforce, and the
increasing pool of potential students. It is Eastern Washington University's
goal to develop and offer a timely and high-quality SET program that provides a
thorough understanding of theory and design combined with the
variety&lt;br/&gt;of practical skills needed today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal components of the curriculum design to be developed under this grant
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. A synthesis of research derived from surveys and site
visits to industry and other undergraduate SET programs,&lt;br/&gt;2. Program
objectives and outcomes based on the research and internal discussions within
the department, school and college,&lt;br/&gt;3. A final list of proposed SET
courses including course descriptions based on the research&lt;br/&gt;4.
Recommendations for integrating new learning strategies and problem-solving
techniques in the curriculum,&lt;br/&gt;5. An identification of potential
industry mentors, internships, and industry-originated classroom
projects,&lt;br/&gt;6. A final list of laboratory needs including identification
of equipment, configurations, and numbers of workstations,&lt;br/&gt;7. A
student recruitment and retention plan that focuses on nontraditional
students,&lt;br/&gt;8. Increased advisory board membership to include persons
with a background in SET and non-technical members who can assist with both
curriculum development and student recruitment and retention,&lt;br/&gt;9. A
timeline for obtaining final program approval, and&lt;br/&gt;10. A checklist of
TAC of ABET requirements.&lt;br/&gt;