* 0230343
* STEP: A Multidisciplinary Bridge Program in a Liberal Arts Setting
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* George Shields, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 99,909.00

The program focuses on both recruitment and retention initiatives as ways to
increase the number of SMET graduates. Participation in an on-campus research
bridge program in the summer leading into the freshman year is the enticement
presented to high school students as part of recruitment efforts. The program is
being advertised by the Admissions Office and through visits by science faculty
and student researchers to math and science "magnet" schools. Women in
particular are targeted. Participant selection is based on expressed interest in
science and academic profile, with inclusion not only of students who have
demonstrated academic excellence but also of those in the middle range of the
applicant pool on a variety of measures.

The pre-matriculation summer research experience is six weeks long. Participants
work with individual faculty on the latter's research, spending a minimum of
seven hours daily in the laboratory. As a major part of developing a sense of
community, they live in a "summer science" dorm. Weekly luncheons with faculty,
followed by discussions on topics ranging from adjustment to college life to
women in science, and special trips out of town to athletic and cultural events
are also part of the effort to integrate them into a network of peers and
faculty. Reinforcement of this feeling of community continues into the academic
year with a poster-session in October, at which students present reports of
their summer research activities and findings, and with biweekly luncheons and
seminars. An important part of the project, made possible with matching funds
from Hamilton College, is a second, 10 week-long, summer research experience for
each participant with the same or different professor, as they choose. Students
are encouraged to internalize research into their personal academic vision
through an apprenticeship relationship with their supervising professor and
through opportunities to publish and to present their work at conferences. They
also serve as peer-mentors to a new group of incoming students, thereby ensuring
continuity of the community.

Currently 10 faculty in biochemistry, chemistry, computer science, neuroscience,
and physics have opened their laboratories to participants.

