* 0230921
* ANI/STI: Measurements, Models, and Simulation Scenarios for Internet Research
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2007
* Edward Kohler, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2007
* USD 599,491.00

Networking researchers work from mental models of the Internet's important
properties. The scenarios used in simulations and experiments reveal aspects of
these mental models, often including one or more of the following:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) Flows live for a long time and transfer a lot of data. Simple
topologies, like the "dumbbell" topology, with one congested link, are
sufficient to study many traffic properties&lt;br/&gt;(2) Flows on the congested
link share a small range of round-trip times&lt;br/&gt;(3) Most traffic across
the link is one-way &lt;br/&gt;(4) Reverse-path traffic is rarely
congested&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of these models can deeply affect simulation
and experimental results, and therefore evaluations of research, but none of
them are confirmed by measurement studies, and some are actively wrong. Some
divergences from reality are unimportant, in that they don't affect the validity
of simulation results, and simple models help people understand the underlying
dynamics of systems. However, as a community we do not yet understand which
aspects of models affect fundamental system behavior, and which aspects can
safely be ignored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to build a much
richer understanding of the range of realistic network models, and of the likely
relevance of different model parameters to network performance. The lack of good
measurements, lack of tools for evaluating measurement results and applying
their results to models, and lack of diverse and well-understood simulation
scenarios based on these models, are holding back the field. This program will
directly address the models used by network researchers in simulations and
experiments. Building on the wealth of existing measurement results and
generating new empirical results where needed, this will create high-quality
tools to facilitate ongoing measurement by this group and the wider network
research community, so that the results keep up with the Internet's high rate of
change. Synthesizing the relevant body of measurement results will provide
concise intuitions, and a range of simulation-ready models, for use by
researchers. An illustration of how each aspect of the models can influence
simulations and experiments will be given.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
not create a universal model of the global Internet (an immense and unnecessary
undertaking). Instead, it will focus on models used by researchers in specific
research areas, motivated by addressing their pressing modeling concerns.
Focusing at first on the group's own areas of expertise, particularly modeling
congestion-related mechanisms at a queue in a router, and later address other
research areas, help others improve their measurements and measurement tools,
along with the resulting models and simulation scenarios, and improve the
relationships between experiments, models, and our shared understanding of
simulation results.