* 0230129
* Recruitment and Retention of STEM Majors in the First Year: A Pilot Project
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Marco Fatuzzo, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,970.00

This project seeks to increase the number of students receiving baccalaureate
degrees in STEM fields at Xavier University. The pilot program focuses
particularly on first-year students in computer science, mathematics, and
physics. The objectives for the project are: to increase the numbers of
undeclared majors who become majors in computer science, mathematics, or physics
by the end of their first year; to increase the retention rate from first to
second year of students who enter Xavier with a declared major in computer
science, mathematics, or physics; to increase the number of underrepresented
minorities majoring in computer science, mathematics, and physics, and the
number of women in computer science and physics; and to assess the impact of
these efforts so that the successful parts can be expanded to all mathematics
and science departments at Xavier after the end of the grant period. The pilot
effort includes components that support both the recruitment of STEM majors from
the undecided majors and the retention of incoming STEM majors: a first-year
STEM exposure program for prospective majors; an undergraduate teaching
assistant program that assigns current majors to be tutors/mentors in the first-
year, major-level courses; a grants program providing funds for computer
science, mathematics, and physics students to do student-planned activities
aimed at outreach both on- and off-campus; a summer bridge program to help at-
risk students between the first and second years to acquire the mathematical and
scientific skills necessary to continue in the major; and a workshop series for
STEM faculty to raise awareness of STEM recruitment and retention issues,
particularly those of underrepresented groups. Current STEM majors are used
extensively in the project. This involvement strengthens the bonds of the
existing STEM community and provides essential role models for incoming
students. The project provides an opportunity to test several approaches towards
increasing STEM majors in a liberal arts environment, thus providing results
that can be used across the nation. It focuses particularly on approaches that
create a supportive learning environment for underrepresented groups in science
and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;