* 0230649
* Use of a Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as an Adjunct to and Change Instrument for the Chemical Engineering Curriculum at The University of Akron
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Harry Cheung, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 05/31/2005
* USD 99,948.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230649&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Cheung,
Harry&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Use of a
Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as an Adjunct to and Change Instrument
for the Chemical Engineering Curriculum at The University of
Akron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the use of the Vertically Integrated Team Design Project in an expanded
role as a component of the chemical engineering curriculum and as a change
instrument for the chemical engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing the Vertically Integrated Team Design
Project as a component of the ChE curriculum by:&lt;br/&gt;o Increasing and
improving the use of outside, industrial mentors&lt;br/&gt;o Establishing the
Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as an integral part of the core
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;o Increasing the assessment component of both the students
participating in the&lt;br/&gt;project and the project itself&lt;br/&gt;o
Developing additional project modules to incorporate emerging technologies
as&lt;br/&gt;the project themes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning for the use of the
Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as a change instrument for the ChE
curriculum by using it as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o an assessment tool for
specific affective and technical skills in our students&lt;br/&gt;o a
collaborative vehicle for involvement of industrial colleagues in shaping
the&lt;br/&gt;ChE curriculum&lt;br/&gt;o a test bed for incorporating
professional level computational tools into the core&lt;br/&gt;ChE
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;o a test bed for material and methods intended to displace
rote solution legacy&lt;br/&gt;materials and methods in the core ChE
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe that this use of a Vertically
Integrated Team Design Project will provide a tool for continuous improvement of
our department's chemical engineering curriculum, the model should be very
easily extensible to other chemical engineering departments and easily
extensible to other engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;