* 0230469
* DiatomWare:     An Interactive Digital Image Catalog for Antarctic Cenozoic Diatoms
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 04/30/2007
* USD 156,675.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports the development of a standardized diatom
image catalog or database. Diatoms are considered by many to be the most
important microfossil group used today in the study of Antarctic Cenozoic marine
deposits south of the Polar Front, from the near shore to deep sea. These
microfossils, with walls of silica called frustules, are produced by single-
celled plants (algae of the Class Bacillariophyceae) in a great variety of
forms. Consequently, they have great biostratigraphic importance in the Southern
Ocean and elsewhere for determining the age of marine sediments. Also,
paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic studies increasingly rely on fossil diatom
data. Changing biogeographic distributions of given taxa indicate shifting
paleoecological conditions and provide evidence of the surface productivity and
temperatures of ancient oceans. The generality of conclusions, though, is
limited by variation in species concepts among workers. The broad research
community relies, directly or indirectly, on the accurate identification of
diatom species. Current technology can be used to greatly improve upon the
standard references that have been used in making these
identifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an interactive
digital-image catalog of modern and Cenozoic fossil diatoms of the Southern
Ocean called "DiatomWare" for use by specialists and educators as an aid in
rapid, accurate, and consistent species identification. As such, this will be a
researcher's resource. It will be especially useful where it is not possible to
maintain standard library resources such as onboard research vessels or at
remote stations such as McMurdo Station. Major Antarctic geological drilling
initiatives such as the new SHALDRIL project and the pending ANDRILL project
will benefit from this product because they will rely heavily on diatom
biostratigraphy to achieve their research objectives. The DiatomWare image
database will be modeled on NannoWare, which was released in October 2002 on CD-
ROM as a publication of the International Nannoplankton Association. BugCam will
be adapted and modified as necessary to run the DiatomWare database, which can
then be run from desktop or laptop computers. Images and text for the database
will be scanned from the literature or captured in digital form from light or
scanning electron microscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software interface will
include a number of data fields that can be accessed by the click of a mouse
button. Primary information will be the images and descriptions of the
holotypes. In addition, representative images of paratypes or hypotypes will be
included whenever possible in plain transmitted, differential interference
contrast light and, when available, as drawings and SEM images. Also included
will be a 35-word or less English diagnosis ("mini-description"), the
biostratigraphic range in terms of zones and linear time, bibliographic
references, lists of species considered junior synonyms, and similar species.
The list of similar species will be cross-referenced with their respective image
files to enable quick access for direct visual comparison on the viewing screen.
Multiple images can be brought to the viewing screen simultaneously, and a zoom
feature will permit image examination at a wide range of magnifications. Buttons
will allow range charts, a bibliography, and key public-domain publications from
the literature to be called up from within the program. The DiatomWare/BugCam
package will be distributed at a nominal cost through a major nonprofit society
via CD-ROM and free to Internet users on the Worldwide Web. Quality control
measures will include critical review of the finalized database by a network of
qualified specialists. The completed database will include descriptions and
images of between 350 and 400 species, including fossil as well as modern forms
that have no fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the proposed
diatom image database will be important to all research fields that depend on
accurate biostratigraphic dating and paleoenvironmental interpretation of
Antarctic marine sediments and plankton. The database will also serve as a
valuable teaching tool for micropaleontology students and their professors, will
provide a rapid means of keying down species for micropaleontologists of varying
experience and background, and will promote a uniformity of taxonomic concepts
since it will be developed and continuously updated with the advice of a
community of nannofossil fossil experts. Broad use of the database is
anticipated since it will be widely available through the Internet and on CD-ROM
for use on personal computers that do not require large amounts of memory,
costly specialized programs, or additional hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;