* 0230008
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Distinguishing Regional Tectonic, Global Eustatic, and Isotopic Events in Chesterian Rocks of East-Central Idaho and Southwestern Montana
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Michael Pope, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2006
* USD 128,714.00

ABSTRACT

Recent stratigraphic and isotopic studies reveal a more complex nature to
Carboniferous glaciation than previously considered, and highlight a need for
further study of the timing and mode of initiation of Gondwanan glaciation, and
its mechanistic link to eustatic fluctuations, changes in continental weathering
rates, and paleoceanographic and climatic conditions. Furthermore, some isotopic
proxy data suggest that the mid-Carboniferous (Chesterian) may even have been a
time of global warming and deglaciation between glacial episodes. We hypothesize
that the changes in sea level, continental weathering patterns, and
oceanographic and paleoclimatic conditions that would have accompanied the
significant change in ice-sheet dynamics associated with either onset of main-
stage glaciation or potentially intermittent deglaciation during the Late
Mississippian should be recorded in the stratigraphy and isotopic compositions
of Chesterian strata. We further hypothesize that each of the two aforementioned
scenarios would have imparted, on Chesterian deposits, a unique set of
stratigraphic and geochemical signatures that can be used to place quantitative
constraints on the hypothesized evolutionary paths of Gondwanan glaciation. In
order to test these hypotheses, we propose to carry out an integrated, high-
resolution cycle- and sequence-stratigraphic, and isotopic study of Chesterian
carbonates and siliciclastics from east-central Idaho and southwestern Montana
focused on developing a record of environmental change during the Chesterian in
this portion of Panthalassa. A detailed regional reassessment of the Chesterian
macrofossil and microfossil biostratigraphy will be made from proximal and
distal settings of the study area in order to maximize the resolution of
chronostratigraphic correlation in the proposed sequence stratigraphic
framework. We will carry out a hierarchical sequence stratigraphic analysis of
the Chesterian rocks in order to decipher their depositional history, and to
determine the nature and distribution of peritidal and subtidal parasequences,
major sequence-bounding unconformities and parasequence boundaries at a local-
and regional-scale. This will allow for evaluation of how the parasequences and
surfaces relate to subtle tectonic movements or record eustatic fluctuations.
Paleontologic analysis will provide important qualitative and quantitative
constraints on the amount of relative sea level rise and/or fall recorded in
each parasequence or sequence. We propose to build on the recently derived set
of stable and radiogenic isotope curves for the Carboniferous by developing a
set of integrated stable (d13C, d18O, and d34S) and radiogenic (87Sr/86Sr)
isotope records for the Chesterian that should contribute uniquely by: (1)
refining a portion of the existing isotope curves, (2) defining a coupled
d13Ccarb and d13Corg record, and (2) testing the potential for reconstructing O
and C isotope vertical gradients for the Antler foreland basin. By developing a
series of high-resolution proxies from the same set of chronostratigraphically
well-constrained deposits, we will be able to evaluate the relative rates and
phase (i.e., lead-lag) relationships of the stratigraphic and isotopic proxy
records, an aspect that has been variably compromised in previous intrabasinal
studies. This approach should allow for differentiation of long-term tectonic
events from higher frequency eustatic events in this basin, and thus provide
considerable insight into the role of tectonic forcing on the stratigraphic and
isotopic character of the Chesterian strata. In turn this should provide insight
into the role of tectonic forcing in controlling basin accommodation, and
regional oceanographic conditions and circulation. Moreover, we anticipate that
this study should quantitatively constrain the spectrum of environmental changes
that occurred during the Chesterian in this portion of Panthalassa, including
global paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic perturbations. Lastly, the results of
this study should provide insight into the nature of any mechanistic links
between eustasy, physical and chemical oceanographic conditions and
paleoclimate, thus ultimately contributing towards constraining the timing and
mode of initiation of Gondwanan glaciation.