* 0230190
* A Laboratory Study of Texture Development During Grain Size Sensitive Creep of Ice, with Applications to the Flow of Glaciers and Ice Sheets
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* David Goldsby, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2005
* USD 137,422.00

This award supports a project to conduct laboratory experiments to investigate
textures formed in ice during superplastic flow. Superplastic flow has recently
been discovered in the laboratory and can be considered a new flow mechanism for
ice. A simple extrapolation of these new data for superplastic flow from
laboratory to natural conditions suggests that glaciers and ice sheets flow via
this mechanism. Furthermore, several grain-scale features in ice (e.g., crystal
shape) produced during superplastic flow in the laboratory are remarkably
similar to those observed in glaciers and ice sheets. Despite this exciting
discovery, however, important questions remain before we can apply with full
confidence these new flow data in mathematical models of glacier and ice sheet
flow. The textures seen in laboratory studies will be compared with those
observed in field studies of glaciers and ice sheets. These comparisons, coupled
with comparisons of the new superplastic flow data from the laboratory with flow
measurements from field studies, will provide a powerful method for further
assessing the importance of superplastic flow in nature and thereby improve our
understanding of glacier and ice sheet dynamics and global climate change.
Experiments will be conducted by the PI and an undergraduate research assistant.
Experimental results will be published in relevant refereed journals, presented
at glaciology meetings and incorporated into coursework.

