* 0230150
* Curriculum, Program, and Infrastructure Development for Bachelor of Science in Optical Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Anne Madsen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2005
* USD 119,979.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230150 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Osinski, Marek INSTITUTION NAME:
University of New Mexico TITLE: Curriculum, Program, and Infrastructure
Development for Bachelor of Science in Optical Science and Engineering NSF
RECEIVED DATE: 06/03/2002

ABSTRACT

The faculty of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering (EECE) in
the School of Engineering, the Department of Physics and Astronomy in the
College of Arts and Sciences, the Department of Educational Specialties in the
College of Arts and Science, and the Department of Individual, Family, and
Community Education in the College of Education at the University of New Mexico
(UNM) propose to jointly develop a comprehensive plan for a new B.S. degree in
Optical Science and Engineering, with emphasis on education in the field of
photonics, accompanied by teacher training and enhancement of K-12 optics
education initially at the high- and middle-school levels, and eventually
reaching down to the elementary school level in the implementation stage of this
program. The program will also have an important objective of supporting
optically enabled aspects of microsystems, nanoscience, and other emerging
fields. Specifically, the plan will incorporate development of a new college
degree curriculum, proposing creation of new laboratories, development of
courses training K-12 teachers in optical science and engineering, creation of
outreach programs, identification and activation of sources of support for
minority students, and involvement of local and national industry and government
laboratories.

Through the incorporation of current pedagogical learning theories concerning
instructional design and assessment, the proposed new degree curriculum will
support a new model that will be available for use by other engineering programs
at UNM's School of Engineering and nationwide. Most importantly, the proposed
degree will bridge the last remaining gap in the unique hierarchy of photonics
educational programs in New Mexico, starting with the Photonics Academy at West
Mesa High School supported by the Sandia National Laboratories that feeds into
the Photonics Technology Associate Degree program at the Albuquerque Technical
Vocational Institute, and ending with the M.S. and Ph.D. programs in Optical
Science and Engineering offered at UNM. The comprehensive line-up of educational
and career options in optics and photonics that would be enabled by the proposed
B.S. degree will permit New Mexico industry to fill its photonics-centered
positions at all levels, from the technician to the advanced researcher, from a
workforce trained locally. The proposed degree will, more generally, help meet
the emerging workforce and educational needs of the entire US industry.

The main goal of the proposed program is to create a unique and highly desired
cadre of optics personnel who, because of their broad, advanced,
interdisciplinary, and industrially relevant education and training, will be
able to lead the State of New Mexico and the Nation into the optics- and
photonics-engaged 21 st century.

