* 0230681
* Pilot Study for a "Course-Less" Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Teri Reed, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 105,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230681&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Knox,
Robert&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Oklahoma Norman
Campus&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Planning Grant: Pilot Study for a "Course-less"
Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work in this
planning grant would build upon the Sooner City project, which is a
comprehensive, integrated, infrastructure design project that is threaded
throughout the Oklahoma University civil engineering curriculum, beginning in
the freshman year. Freshmen are given a plat of undeveloped land that, by the
time they graduate, is turned into a blueprint for Sooner City's infrastructure.
Among other things, the project promotes five outcomes not always addressed by
traditional curricula, but which are emphasized by ABET 2000: team building,
communication, leadership, design, and higher level learning skills. For
practical purposes, the original Sooner City project was implemented in the
context of the traditional "course-dictated" curriculum. While this strategy
promotes faculty buy-in and minimizes institutional cost, the above outcomes may
be more fully realized if the curriculum were more flexible, viz, provide basic
engineering science skills and tools to the students on an as-needed basis to
complete the project. Thus, the objective of this planning grant is to pilot a
move toward a project-driven, "course-less" curriculum. In this setting,
"course-less" does not refer to "no courses." Rather, there would be "less" of
them because traditional courses that teach basic concepts would be replaced
with self-paced modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the Sooner City
project, through water supply and distribution design tasks, will provide
context for learning the principles of engineering fluid mechanics. When
students are faced with a new analysis or design task for which they do not have
the prerequisite fluids background, the tools will be provided to them on a
just-in-time basis via interactive modules. Within this framework, the proposed
pilot project can be broken down into three subtasks: development of self-paced
learning modules for core areas of fluid mechanics that take full advantage of
information technology; development of Sooner City design projects that
integrate these modules in a just-in-time fashion; assessment of the efficacy of
the methods. Outcomes from the project will provide the needed insight to direct
future steps toward a more robust "course-less" educational
experience.&lt;br/&gt;