* 0230323
* Collaborative Research: Thermodynamic Properties of Solutions Generated by Acid Rock Drainage: Fe2O3-SO3-H2O systems
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Richard Kettler, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2005
* USD 127,912.00

0230323&lt;br/&gt;Kettler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxidation of metal sulfide
minerals can generate solutions that have pH values as low as -3.6 and contain
less than 190 g H2O per liter of solution. Such acid rock drainage can be
generated in any locality where sulfides are exposed to the weathering process,
including mine workings and wastes, exposed coastal sediments, and exposures of
ancient marine sedimentary rocks. These solutions have a high environmental
impact that is estimated to be in the billions of dollars in North America
alone. Acid rock drainage has also generated large ore deposits, makes possible
the economic recovery of copper and other metals from disseminated
mineralization, and hosts some unusual microbial communities. The ability to
model the chemistry of these systems accurately would aid greatly in efforts to
remediate environmentally sensitive sites, improve the recovery of metals by
hydrometallurgic processes, and better understand the processes that control
diurnal and seasonal variations in the chemistry of acid rock drainage. Such
detailed modeling is currently impossible for many systems: activity
coefficients are lacking for strongly acidic ferric sulfate brines as are some
basic equilibrium constants needed to model the aqueous and mineral species
effectively. This project will take three steps to remove some of those
obstacles. 1)Osmotic coefficients of ferric sulfate and mixed ferric-ferrous
sulfate brines will be measured. The data will be modeled to retrieve
interaction parameters necessary to calculate activity coefficients using the
specific ion interaction model. 2)The association constants for ferric sulfate
complexes will be measured using a mercury/mercurous sulfate concentration cell.
These association constants will be necessary to complete the activity modeling.
3)The solubility of jarosite will be measured over a range of temperatures and
ionic strength and in different ionic media. This research will improve
significantly the ability to accurately model natural acid-sulfate waters.