* 0230199
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the Temporal Resolution and Geochronology of Holocene Sediment Records from the Antarctic Continental Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Peter Sedwick, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 12/31/2005
* USD 93,341.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate paleoenvironmental
proxy records in Antarctic sediments and improve approaches to determine the age
of the records. Marine sediment cores from perched basins on the Antarctic
continental margin have provided important proxy records of environmental
conditions in this region during the late Quaternary. Typically lacking in
carbonate microfossils, these sediment cores have primarily been dated by using
the carbon-14 (14C) content of bulk organic carbon, measured by accelerator mass
spectrometry. However, the non-zero radiocarbon age of organic matter at the
sediment-water interface (the so-called carbon reservoir problem) necessitates a
"correction" to down-core 14C ages, which may be as much as 1,000-3,000 years.
In addition, bioturbation of the upper sediment column by benthic organisms
serves to smear the proxy records preserved in sediment cores, thus limiting the
temporal resolution of such sediment records. For most of the Antarctic shelf,
the radiocarbon age of surface sediments and the depth of mixing by benthic
organisms are not known with any certainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will undertake high-resolution down-core analyses of the carbon isotopic
composition of bulk organic matter and the activity of unsupported lead-210 in
order to establish the radiocarbon age of surface sediments and the depth of the
sediment mixed-layer in several Antarctic shelf basins. The work will examine
Kasten cores collected in the Scholleart Drift (central Gerlache Strait, west
Antarctic Peninsula), the Vega Drift (northwestern Weddell Sea, east Antarctic
Peninsula), and the Nielsen Basin and Iceberg Alley (MacRobertson Shelf, East
Antarctica). These study areas have been selected because (1) the data collected
for these samples will be of direct benefit to ongoing studies of high-quality
long sediment cores recovered from these sites, and (2) these sites provide a
range of contrasting environments in terms of reservoir age of surface waters,
energy of depositional environment, extent and type of benthic biota, and
proximity to potential sources of re-suspended and relict organic material,
which will allow evaluation of the relative importance of these factors for the
radiocarbon age of surface sediments on the Antarctic shelf. The radiochemical
determinations will make use of accelerator mass spectrometry for carbon isotope
measurements, and high-sensitivity gamma spectrometry for analysis of uranium-
series nuclides, two techniques that have been previously used with success for
Antarctic shelf sediments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic continental
shelves are important regions of oceanic deep-water formation, seasonal sea-ice
formation, and marine primary production - processes that are likely to be
strongly influenced by future climatic change. The ability to predict how this
region will be affected by, and modulate, future climate change is critically
dependent on an understanding of conditions on the Antarctic margin during past
climatic variations. This project will make a significant contribution in this
regard, by providing key data that are required to accurately decipher and
interpret Holocene sediment-core records from the Antarctic continental shelf.
In addition, by improving our understanding of the effects of depositional
environment and benthic community on the radiocarbon chronology and resolution
of Antarctic sediment records, this work will assist in the selection of future
sites that are likely to provide high-quality paleoenvironmental records. This
project will also make educational contributions at several levels, including
undergraduate and graduate research as well as web-based public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;