* 0230385
* Development of a High Precision Chronostratigraphic Framework to Connect Antarctic Glacial and Climatic History with Global Proxy Records
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* David Watkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 150,005.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports development of a basic chronostratigraphic
framework for microfossils from the Southern Ocean and Antarctic continental
shelf. Chronostratigraphic data from the Antarctic shelf and Southern Ocean have
advanced to the point where a substantial update and integration is required to
realize their full potential in age resolution and to meet the demands of future
drilling initiatives (as embodied in ANDRILL and SHALDRIL). Questions to be
addressed by ANDRILL and SHALDRIL are pertinent today and critical to understand
the mechanism and pace of significant changes in the Antarctic ice sheets.
Antarctica is integrally linked to the global system through vertical and
horizontal ocean circulation, albedo reflectivity, glacioeustatic control on
paleogeography of coastal regions, and atmospheric exchange. In order to
understand how the ice sheet has responded to, and influenced, the global
climate system, it is vital that we possess the best tools for time resolution
and long distance correlation of geological, and particularly paleontological,
data. Application of graphic correlation to these data will enable the
development of a powerful chronostratigraphic tool, the Composite Standard
Reference Section (CSRS), which can manage diverse and complex stratigraphic
datasets with relative ease, and have strong application across the subtropical
to Antarctic latitudinal gradient. The work supported by this grant will develop
a high precision chronostratigraphy and provide the means to apply this single
integrated system to the diverse types of data generated by Antarctic drilling.
The principal aim is to serve the ANDRILL and SHALDRIL scientific community by
constructing a stratigraphic framework that will provide a conduit for
information transfer between the high and low latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
experienced team of biostratigraphers is committed to revisiting some of the
important sedimentary sections retrieved over the past 30 years and updating
them into a modern taxonomic and chronostratigraphic database. In addition, the
results of parallel, on-going studies of Southern Ocean radiolarians and
foraminifers by Chris Hollis and James Crampton of New Zealand will be
integrated into the database. The broad chronostratigraphic synthesis we propose
for Antarctic and Southern Ocean records is mirrored in the Atlantic Ocean by
SYNATLAN, which offers promise to carry our synthesis and Antarctic
paleoclimatic information within and beyond the equatorial Atlantic Ocean. The
CHRONOS project will serve to integrate this and other global databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a Composite Standard Reference
Section (CSRS) for the Indian sector of the Southern Ocean along a latitudinal
transect. Diatom, calcareous nannofossil, palynomorph and foraminiferal
biostratigraphic events will form the main body of the data. Selected input of
other stratigraphic data (magnetostratigraphy, chemostratigraphy,
tephrochronology) will enhance the chronostratigraphic precision. The robustness
of the CSRS as a chronostratigraphic model will be tested against the records
from selected sites in the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean. Once tested
and refined, this CSRS will then serve as a template for the temporal placement
of Antarctic shelf records derived largely from the Ross Sea. This approach will
result in improvement in chronostratigraphic resolution, will link distinct
biogeographic provinces into one network of sequential events, will propose
numerous new species to remedy the plethora of informal diatom names, and will
provide a common reference scheme for communication between scientists working
on diverse data sets and in different parts of the world. All of these outcomes
will facilitate the training of new scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;