* 0230901
* Collaborative Proposal: Economics Experiments to Prepare Secondary Teachers and Reinforce Understanding of Basic Economics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Lisa Anderson, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 40,028.00

In recent years economists have successfully developed simulated experiments for
use in teaching undergraduate students. These have been created from experiments
that were initially devised for research. For example, a market with a trading
pit can be used to introduce the concepts of supply and demand, and market
efficiency. This approach has been developed for teaching purposes as active and
participatory, which has strongly benefited student interest and understanding
of basic undergraduate-level economics. It has helped to overcome student
frustration with the abstract and technical character of economic theory. In
this project, we extend these teaching materials to a set of three experiments
that are explicitly designed to be used by students preparing to teach economics
in secondary education. Our approach is to use the same materials in workshops
that the students will use once they become teachers in high schools, and to
encourage the use these materials as a basis for student teaching. These
workshops are also available to faculty teaching basic economics in community
colleges. The materials being created for this project cover specific topics
mentioned in National and State Standards of Learning for Economics for grades 8
- 12. This project is also conducting research on the relative effectiveness of
these materials introduced in workshops and used in student teaching as a way of
reinforcing undergraduate students understanding of basic economics. We are
examining the range of student backgrounds in economics that are likely to
benefit from participation in these pre-service teaching activities.