* 0230655
* Curriculum Revitalization in Chemical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Robert Armstrong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230655 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Armstrong, Robert INSTITUTION
NAME: Massachusetts Institute of Technology TITLE: Curriculum Revitalization in
Chemical Engineering

Abstract

The discipline of chemical engineering has evolved dramatically over the past
forty years, yet the core curriculum has undergone only minor changes. The
engineering science paradigm that began in chemical engineering around 1960
still dominates the core curriculum and major educational texts used throughout
the field. That paradigm has served us well; indeed, it has been enabling for
chemical engineering to become a central engineering discipline . The unique
focus of chemical engineering on molecular transformations, processes,
quantitative analysis, and multiscale treatment of problems provides an ideal
platform for productive interactions with a wide range of other science and
engineering disciplines at boundaries that are among the most exciting
technology areas of our time. This broad applicability of chemical engineering
fundamentals has become a defining feature of the discipline, and we are
challenged to convey this breadth to our students. Hence a major driver for
curriculum reform is the need to connect students to these many applications.
Inasmuch as engineering curricula are often taught largely through example
problems, this is a major undertaking if it is to be done well. A second major
driver for curriculum reform in chemical engineering at this time is the advent
of molecular biology. Our disciplinary focus on molecular interactions and
transformations makes for a natural and exciting connection with molecular
biology. Finally, we find ourselves in an era of rapid educational reform, in
which both methods of engaging students in classrooms and laboratories are being
reexamined and methods of incorporating new technology for education are being
explored.

The opportunities for reform in chemical engineering curricula are so compelling
and broad that an appropriate response requires wide-ranging participation
across the entire discipline. In addition to providing a richer response to this
opportunity, extensive engagement of the academic community will facilitate wide
adoption of the results of the reform. Hence this proposal is directed to a
broad planning exercise to engage the chemical engineering discipline in
responding to the challenges of breadth, biology, and new teaching methods. This
will be done through a series of workshops, broadly advertised to the community.
The first workshop will be focused on (re)defining the core curriculum in
chemical engineering, with the product being enumeration of themes for a series
of smaller topical workshops in these core areas. The theme workshops are
charged with developing proposals for creation of texts, web-based supporting
material, and modular experiments, design problems, and subtopics for augmenting
and supplementing subjects.



