* 0230005
* Neuroendocrine Control of Salinity-Mediated Carbonic Anhydrase Expression in the Gills of Euryhaline Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Raymond Henry, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 03/31/2010
* USD 484,261.00

This study will examine mechanisms of how organisms sense environmental changes,
and how they adapt to cope with these changes by turning on specific genes that
give them new physiological abilities. The focus is on crustaceans. Euryhaline
crustaceans are those that tolerate a wide range of salt concentrations in
water, from the open ocean to freshwater rivers. In general, they do so by
taking up salts (sodium and chloride), thus maintaining constant concentrations
of vital blood salts. The molecular basis of this ability is a suite of
transport proteins that are expressed in the gill. A number of proteins have
been identified that are responsible for the transport of individual ions. The
mechanism of transport usually involves the uptake of a vital ion in exchange
for the ionic form of a waste product (e.g., Na+/H+ and Cl-/HCO3- exchange). The
waste products are produced from the reaction of CO2 and water, which is
catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase (CA). Because H+ and HCO3- are used
in exchange for cations and anions in general, CA is believed to be a central
support enzyme in the overall mechanism of ion uptake. Furthermore, the
expression of CA is up-regulated when these organisms are exposed to low
salinity. Preliminary evidence indicates that the regulatory mechanism is
present only in euryhaline species and that it is under inhibitory control by a
CA repressor (believed to be a neuropeptide) found in the major endocrine system
of crustaceans, the X-organ/sinus gland complex. This peptide will be identified
by HPLC, and its action on CA expression investigated through the use of
quantitative PCR and reporter enzyme assays. This research also has broader
impacts, because estuaries are highly productive environments, and one species
being studied is economically important (e.g., Callinectes sapidus) whereas the
other (Carcinus maenas) is an invasive species that has been both ecologically
and economically disruptive. The project will also involve the training of
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates in all
phases of the research.