* 0230327
* Collaborative Research:    A Land surface Model Hind- Cast for the Terrestrial Arctic Drainage System
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Dennis Lettenmaier, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 455,377.00

This study will combine data synthesis and land surface modeling to assemble the
best possible time series (20+ years) for the Arctic terrestrial drainage of
land surface state variables (snow water equivalent, soil moisture, soil
temperature) and moisture and energy fluxes (sensible, latent, and ground heat;
radiation). Development of forcing fields will draw in part from an ongoing NSF
effort known as Arctic-RIMS, geared at historical analysis and monitoring of the
Arctic terrestrial hydrologic budget. The present effort both complements
Arctic-RIMS and lays groundwork for a next-generation monitoring and prediction
capability. The generated time series will be used to address spatial-temporal
variability in sensible heat flux and evapo-transpiration, land surface
feedbacks on precipitation, and development of the summer Arctic frontal zone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will attempt to produce the best possible
quality model forcing over the pan-Arctic domain by blending output from the new
ERA-40 atmospheric reanalysis project with gridded in-situ observations and
satellite data streams. Major challenges include maintaining physical
consistency between time series of variables at different native spatial and
temporal resolutions and providing realistic diurnal cycles. A particularly
novel aspect of the proposed work will be use of a multi-model ensemble
approach. Five different Land Surface Models will be used, all of which have
been extensively tested for Arctic applications under the Project for
Intercomparison of Land-Surface Parameterization Schemes (PILPS) Experiment 2e.
The multi-model LSM ensemble average for each output variable should be superior
to the values provided by a single run with any one
LSM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data will also be useful for model validation
efforts, such as the Arctic Regional Climate Model Inter-comparison Project, and
in providing a source of high latitude evaluation data for the Atmospheric Model
Inter-comparison Project. The project will contribute to educational goals
through support of a graduate student and post-docs. Results from this study and
related projects will be used as part of seminar course on the Arctic climate
system to be taught at University of Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;