* 0230688
* Microscopic and Macroscopic Perspective in Mechanical Engineering:  Technology Enhanced Learning and Integration
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Vish Subramaniam, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,992.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230688 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mendelsohn, Daniel INSTITUTION
NAME: Ohio State University Research Foundation TITLE: Microscopic and
Macroscopic Perspective in Mechanical Engineering: Technology Enhanced Learning
and Integration

Abstract

This grant discusses plans to reform the undergraduate Mechanical Engineering
(ME) educational experience at The Ohio State University (OSU). This is
necessary in order to prepare future mechanical engineers to solve problems in
emerging technologies such as micro/nanotechnology and biotechnology.

The proposed reforms will be focused around four major tasks. (1) The first task
is the introduction of emerging knowledge of multi-scale, multi-physics and non-
linear phenomena in the areas of the curriculum where it is not already taken
into account appropriately. For example this includes address topics such as
problems which cover a wide range of time and/or length (nano-, micro-, nano-)
scales, and coupled phenomena, such as the coupled elastic and electric response
in the piezo-electric effect. The understanding of these non-traditional
phenomena and the associated analytical and experimental tools necessary to
reach that understanding are becoming increasingly important in the emerging
technologies of today, in particular in microelectronics, MEMS, nanotechnology
and bioengineering. The second task concerns the elimination and/or reduction of
emphasis on certain classes of problems, illustrative examples and solution
techniques which predate, and are largely made irrelevant by, the existence of
powerful new computational and visualization environments. The third task is to
replace these legacy materials with problems and examples and techniques which
exploit the modern computational environment, and are used to illustrate basic
concepts in a more dynamic and illustrative way than they were before; this will
necessarily train the students in at least one of a variety of available
computational and visualization environments. The fourth task is to explore and
take advantage of some of the more modern teaching methods, such as active
learning, multiple representation, multimedia presentation, web-based materials,
and mentoring.