* 0230645
* An Education and Engineering Partnership for Development of an Institutional Model for Bridges to Student Success in Science and Engineering at an HBCU
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Larry Powers, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230645&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Schimmel,
Keith&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical
State University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: An Education and Engineering Partnership for
Development of an Institutional Model for Bridges to Student Success in Science
and Engineering at an HBCU&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVED DATE:
06/04/2002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for a
larger pool of African-American students prepared for careers in engineering
has&lt;br/&gt;been documented in many reports. An additional need that has been
well documented is the&lt;br/&gt;need for K-12 teachers who can provide students
with interesting, real-world applications of&lt;br/&gt;math, science, and
engineering. The need for faculty who apply the latest advances in
pedagogy,&lt;br/&gt;assessment, and learning theory to engineering curricula has
also been clearly demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant proposal addresses
these needs through a comprehensive plan to be&lt;br/&gt;implemented initially
through a partnership between the College of Engineering and the
School&lt;br/&gt;of Education at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this planning grant, education and
engineering faculty will work together to develop a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive plan
that will enhance the role of education pedagogy in the engineering
college&lt;br/&gt;and establish a presence of engineering material in the
education curriculum. Current A&amp;T&lt;br/&gt;linkages with K-12 schools in
North Carolina will be exploited to help them develop
effective&lt;br/&gt;strategies for meeting newly established State guidelines in
science. Interactive workshops with&lt;br/&gt;nationally recognized experts on
integration of engineering into K-12 and cognitive science will&lt;br/&gt;be
used to develop effective partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
vision is a novel coordinated effort between the A&amp;T College of
Engineering,&lt;br/&gt;A&amp;T School of Education, A&amp;T College of Arts and
Sciences, K-12 partner schools, industrial&lt;br/&gt;partners, and nationally
known centers of cognitive science to train A&amp;T faculty in
pedagogy&lt;br/&gt;that is effective with HBCU students, train School of
Education students in math, science, and&lt;br/&gt;engineering applications that
can be used to excite K-12 students about careers in these
areas,&lt;br/&gt;train engineering students in education topics that will allow
them to excite K-12 students about&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and provide resources
to current K-12 math and science teachers. The ultimate goal&lt;br/&gt;is to
couple A&amp;T experience with teaching minority scientists and engineers with
state-of-the-&lt;br/&gt;art pedagogy to increase the quality and quantity of
African-American engineering graduates.&lt;br/&gt;The successes of this
institutional model would then be shared with other HBCU as well
as&lt;br/&gt;other universities with engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;