* 0230001
* Palynostratigraphic and Paleoenvironmental Characterization of Upper Miocene Sediments from Western Ross Sea, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2003,08/31/2005
* John Wrenn, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 91,960.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the interaction of
the Antarctic ice sheet and the Southern Ocean during the late Miocene time
period. Numerous lines of geological evidence show that the Earth climate system
changed dramatically during the late Miocene. These changes include the largest
pre-Pleistocene glacioeustatic sea-level low stands during the Cenozoic, a
300-km northward shift of the Polar Front, multiple pulses of ice rafting, a
global carbon isotopic (d13C) shift, a global reduction in ocean salinity, and
several episodes of Southern Ocean abyssal-plain erosion. Primarily on the basis
of deep-sea proxy data, it has been inferred that late Miocene climatic changes
were related to Antarctic glacial intensification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
these proxy data interpretations are based on fundamentally sound geological and
geochemical principles, the conclusions concerning linkages to the Antarctic
cryosphere are equivocal because the specific environmental conditions at the
Antarctic continental margins have not yet been established. The fundamental
purpose of this palynological study is to address the following question: What
were the environmental conditions (i.e. salinity, temperature, and sea ice-
cover) during late-Miocene interglacials and glacials on the western Ross Sea
inner and outer continental shelf?&lt;br/&gt;The secondary goals are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Enhance the existing Ross Sea palynostratigraphy developed from
the Cape Roberts Project.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine if the major glacial advance to
the Northern Basin shelf edge, described by Brancolini and colleagues in 1995
and Bart and colleagues in 2000, was indeed a late Miocene event, and if so,
what were the environmental conditions existing during this glacial
period.&lt;br/&gt;3. Determine the effect of Antarctic environmental changes on
low-latitude climate change, focusing on linkage with the Messinian Salinity
Crisis and the reason behind the global salinity reduction. Indeed, new
palynological data from the Atlantic coast of the paleo-Gibraltar threshold
suggests that a significant Antarctic-linked lowering of sea level occurred
during the late Miocene, restricting Atlantic inflow into the Mediterranean Sea
at the beginning of the crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of this
study, the palynology of the well-dated, inner continental shelf cores DVDP 10
and 11 will be analyzed. Prior work by others showed, on the basis of benthic
foraminifer and diatom distribution, that cycles of open-marine/glacial
conditions existed on the Ross Sea inner continental shelf during the Mio-
Pliocene. Dinocyst distribution should test this theory. In the second part of
this study, a palynological analysis of previously acquired material from the
Northern Basin outer continental shelf will be conducted. Recent seismic-
stratigraphic analyses indicated that the sediments associated with a major late
Miocene (?) glacial advance are exposed over a broad area, on the northwestern
Ross Sea outer continental shelf. Palynomorphs contained in these sediments
should test if indeed, the outcrops were deposited during the late Miocene.
Because basic types of Antarctic and Arctic marine palynomorphs are similar,
paleoenvironmental reconstruction will be based on existing ecological data from
the Arctic, as well as that from Antarctic waters. The oxygen isotopic (d18O)
record recently generated for DVDP sites 10 and 11 should provide a reasonable
proxy for Antarctic ice-volume changes and evaluate if environmental changes
were related to ice-volume changes. In addition to the environmental aspect, the
biostratigraphic information generated by this study should provide improved
chronostratigraphic support for future proposed Antarctic geological drilling
programs, such as SHALDRIL and ANDRILL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;