* 0230696
* Terrestrial Paleoecology and Sedimentary Environment of the Meyer Desert Formation, Beardmore Glacier, Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Allan Ashworth, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 02/28/2010
* USD 220,898.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a study of the paleobiology of the late
Cenozoic Meyer Desert Formation. Terrestrial fossils recovered from the Beogene
Meyer Desert Formation (Sirius Group) are providing paleoclimatic information
about the interior of Antarctica before the growth of the great ice sheets. The
site is located on the Upper Beardmore Glacier at latitude 85S, about 500 km
from the South Pole. Fossils of numerous types of organisms occur in siltstone,
marlstone and lithified peat that are interbedded with lodgment tills. Wood and
leaves of Nothofagus (southern beech) were discovered many years ago but since
1995 the fossils now include seeds of several species of vascular plants,
including Ranunculus (buttercups), the stems and leaves of several species of
mosses, body parts of beetles, including two weevil species, a puparium of a
higher fly, shells of freshwater mollusks, including a lymnaeid gastropod and
sphaeriid clam, valves of an ostracod, and the tooth of a fish. The largest
fossils at the site are cushions of vascular plants buried in their growth
positions by sediments of glacial outwash. The sediments were deposited in
stream channels and shallow pools associated with moraines that had been
colonized by a tundra-like vegetation in that harbored insects and mollusks.
Mean summer temperatures are estimated to have been about 4-5C for at least
three months per year. The fossils provide the best evidence so far obtained of
how much heat the atmosphere near the South Pole can
hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fossils represent organisms that inhabited
Antarctica until climate change forced their extinction. The fossils are
fragmentary but hold the promise that better-preserved specimens are available
for phylogenetic and biogeographic studies. They are more closely related to
living terrestrial and freshwater organisms than any other fossils so far
discovered in Antarctica. They are most probably the direct descendants of an
ancient Antarctic biota that was part of Gondwana. Until the discovery of the
Meyer Desert Formation, no fossils of terrestrial organisms, except for pollen
and spores, were available to answer questions about evolutionary relationships
between organisms distributed in southern South America, Australia, New Zealand,
and the subantarctic islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
revisit Meyer Desert Formation exposed in the Oliver Bluffs on the Beardmore
Glacier. Several studies will be conducted including locating and sampling new
fossiliferous horizons, constructing an accurately scaled and correlated cross-
section of the complex facies, and collecting samples for a pilot project to
directly date the deposits using an approach involving a combination of several
cosmogenic nuclide systems. Paleontological studies will focus on enhancing
paleoenvironmental interpretations and on integrating the fossils in
biogeographic studies. The startigraphic and dating studies will focus on
resolving differences between interpretations of sedimentary environments.
Collectively, the studies will provide information that should help to address
larger questions about the size and the dynamics of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
during the Neogene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is extensive public interest in
Antarctica in part because of the romance of exploration but also because of the
threat of global warming and the potential instability of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet. That interest has been fueled recently by reports of the collapse of the
Larsen B Ice Shelf and the release of huge icebergs, like B17, to the Southern
Ocean. Because Antarctica exerts a huge influence on the Earth's climate,
oceanic circulation and sea level, knowledge about warmer climates during the
Neogene is of broad interest. Media, educators and researchers will be able to
access information about the studies, including a photographic archive for the
fossils, through links to "Biota Austarlis Terrestris," an existing searchable
database for the terrestrial and freshwater organisms of Antarctica and the
subantarctic islands.&lt;br/&gt;