* 0230800
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Analysis and Evaluation of Combinatorial Structures and Algorithms
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* William Stewart, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 21,000.00

0230800&lt;br/&gt;Savage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in applied mathematics involves Carla D. Savage, Pawel
Hitczenko, and William Stewart of North Carolina State University and Sylvie
Corteel and her team at the University of Versailles. The project focuses on an
integrated approach to the analysis of combinatorial algorithms arising in
applications. In many applications, there are problems whose solutions require
examination of an exponential number of possibilities. The current heuristic
approach to these problems requires much time. The investigators focus on an
alternative approach that incorporates probabilistic modeling techniques for
combinatorial problems. The problems are drawn from areas of computational
biology, routing in optical networks, resource management in distributed and
multiprocessor systems, and classical combinatorics. The objectives are twofold:
(1) devise new methods to attack classical problems in combinatorics with
probability and Markov chains; and (2) develop an integrated
combinatorial/algorithmic/probabilistic approach to applied problems for which
traditional methods from a single area have proved inadequate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of a joint proposal to
the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will
cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigators and graduate
students. The CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers to the
United States. US students will benefit from the exchange of scientific
techniques and experience with an international research team.&lt;br/&gt;