* 0230359
* Collaborative Proposal: North Sister Volcano: A Window into Deep Crustal Processes in a Mafic Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Anita Grunder, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 03/31/2006
* USD 136,293.00

Grunder&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0230359 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crustal contamination of
melts formed in subduction zones is widely accepted for arcs formed on silicic
continental crust, but the potentially profound and likely cryptic effects of
contamination by mafic crust are not well understood. The intellectual merit of
the proposed work is the assessment of processes acting in the deep crust above
a subduction zone that affect the magmas rising from the mantle. North Sister
volcano of the Cascades volcanic arc is selected for this study because it is
the least evolved (mafic) and oldest member of an arc volcano suite represented
in the Three Sisters volcanoes, and lies in an unusually mafic segment of arc
where the primitive, mantle contributions are constrained. The study's
objectives are (1) to identify the compositional variety and proportion of
regionally distinctive mantle-derived basalts that contributed to the
construction of the basaltic andesite at North Sister; (2) to evaluate how these
mantle inputs mix and interact with the deep crust; and (3) to constrain the
depth at which the magmatic processes took place. To achieve these goals we will
combine compositional and isotopic analysis of rocks selected to represent the
age and mineralogical spectrum of lavas sampled during the course of mapping
North Sister Volcano. Microanalysis of minerals and their melt inclusions will
supplement the bulk rock analyses to discern magmatic histories. Experimental
work on natural samples will reveal the pressure, temperature and water
conditions under which the North Sister magmas formed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this work includes training in field, analytical and
experimental skills of two graduate students, one of which is female and from an
underrepresented groups in science. Two undergraduates will also be given
research opportunities. The results of the study will be disseminated at
national and international meetings and as papers in refereed journals.
Technique development for high-pressure experimental work and melt inclusion
analysis by laser ablation will contribute to scientific infrastructure. The
project is a carefully crafted partnership between Oregon State and University
of Oregon taking advantage of complementary facilities and investigator
expertise. The proposed work is also of particular societal benefit as it
addresses the history of a volcano that is in a particularly active part of the
Cascades arc, where recently identified uplift has focused attention on
potential volcanic hazards. &lt;br/&gt;