* 0230361
* Data Assimilation Research in Support of Ross Island Meteorological Experiment (RIME)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Ying-Hwa Kuo, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2008
* USD 606,458.00

This award will provide funds to develop and implement an advanced data
assimilation system for use in a regional numerical weather forecasting model
(MM5) specifically designed for the Ross Sea and McMurdo area of
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;With the lack of traditional observations over Antarctica
and the Southern Ocean, and with the difficulty in significantly augmenting
traditional observations, the optimal use of satellite and other non-
traditional, e.g. automatic weather station, data is currently the only viable
path to improve regional weather analysis and prediction. Further, the lack of
data also hampers progress in meteorological research and model development,
since there is insufficient data to study physical processes and to represent
them accurately in numerical models. &lt;br/&gt;Three tasks are included in this
project: (1) development of a mesoscale variational data assimilation system
over the Antarctic region; (2) assimilation of automatic weather station and
satellite data and assessment of their impact on short-range prediction over the
Antarctic region; and (3) performing forecast sensitivity experiments with the
MM5 adjoint model to study what types of data, over what regions, are most
important to accurate forecast over the Ross Sea area. The project will also
form one of the bases of a planned Ross Island Meteorological
Experiment.&lt;br/&gt;