* 0230055
* Radiometric Dating of the Rocky Mountain Foreland Thrust Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Chris Hall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2007
* USD 210,769.00

Whereas direct dating of ductile shear zones is increasingly available through
the&lt;br/&gt;application of U/Pb, Ar mineral dating and other isotopic
techniques, radiometric dating&lt;br/&gt;of shallow faulting in the crust's
brittle regime has remained difficult, because the low&lt;br/&gt;temperatures
typical of these faults prevent complete syntectonic recrystallization
or&lt;br/&gt;resetting achieved in deeper faults. Clay-bearing fault rocks are
common in many fault&lt;br/&gt;zones, but these rocks typically preserve both
primary (detrital) and newly-grown&lt;br/&gt;(authigenic), fine-grained
phyllosilicates. Radiometric ages of these fault zones&lt;br/&gt;therefore
reflect a mixture of both mineral populations, while we are only interested
in&lt;br/&gt;the age of the newly-grown phase to date faulting. A second problem
associated with&lt;br/&gt;dating clay minerals involves the loss of 39Ar during
neutron irradiation, which can&lt;br/&gt;produce erroneously old ages. Using
characterization of the detrital clay fraction in&lt;br/&gt;samples using X-ray
modeling of grain size populations and sample encapsulation
for&lt;br/&gt;dating, the PI's have developed and tested a reliable
geochronologic method to date near-surface faulting. The feasibility of their
approach was illustrated by dating ~52 Ma fault gouge from the most frontal
thrust (Lewis Thrust) of the southern Canadian Rockies. The Pi's propose a
application of their dating method to a geologically important region of western
North America, the Rocky Mountains, that has both regional tectonic significance
as well as fundamental thrust belt implications. Preliminary results from other
faults demonstrate the feasibility of the project and indicate several exciting
implications for regional geology and basic structural geology. The proposed
research will be conducted by two PIs who combine the needed structural,
mineralogic and isotopic expertise, and a PhD student who will complete the work
as part of his dissertation. The X-ray, electron microscopy and Ar facilities
are all available at the University of Michigan.