* 0230276
* Collaborative Research:     What Limits Denitrification and Bacterial Growth in Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley, Antarctica?
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Bess Ward, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2008
* USD 526,532.00

Denitrification is the main process by which fixed nitrogen is lost from
ecosystems and the regulation of this process may directly affect primary
production and carbon cycling over short and long time scales. Previous
investigations of the role of bioactive metals in regulating denitrification in
bacteria from permanently ice-covered Lake Bonney in the Taylor Valley of East
Antarctica indicated that denitrifying bacteria can be negatively affected by
metals such as copper, iron, cadmium, lead, chromium, nickel, silver and zinc;
and that there is a distinct difference in denitrifying activity between the
east and west lobes of the lake. Low iron concentrations were found to
exacerbate the potential toxicity of the other metals, while silver has the
potential to specifically inhibit denitrification because of its ability to
interfere with copper binding in redox proteins, such as nitrite reductase and
nitrous oxide reductase. High silver concentrations might prevent the
functioning of nitrous oxide reductase in the same way that simple copper
limitation does, thereby causing the buildup of nitrous oxide and resulting in a
nonfunctional nitrogen cycle. Other factors, such as oxygen concentration, are
likely also to affect bacterial activity in Lake Bonney. This project will
investigate silver toxicity, general metal toxicity and oxygen concentration to
determine their effect on denitrification in the lake by using a suite of
"sentinel" strains of denitrifying bacteria (isolated from the lake) incubated
in Lake Bonney water and subjected to various treatments. The physiological
responses of these strains to changes in metal and oxygen concentration will be
quantified by flow cytometric detection of single cell molecular probes whose
sensitivity and interpretation have been optimized for the sentinel strains.
Understanding the relationships between metals and denitrification is expected
to enhance our understanding of not only Lake Bonney's unusual nitrogen cycle,
but more generally, of the potential role of metals in the regulation of
microbial nitrogen transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this work include not only a better understanding of regional biogeochemistry
and global perspectives on these processes; but also the training of graduate
students and a substantial outreach effort for school children.