* 0230561
* Planning and Assessing Student Success in Mathematics - Gateway to STEM and Careers (PASS Math)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Sybil Chandler, Penn Valley Community College of MCC
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2006
* USD 249,954.00

Planning and Assessing Student Success Mathematics Gateway to STEM Programs and
Careers (PASS Math) focuses on reviewing and revising developmental and
technical mathematics to increase a pool of students interested in science,
engineering, math, and technical programs and capable of being successful in
those areas at Penn Valley Community College (PVCC) and the Business Technology
Center (BTC) of the Metropolitan Community Colleges (MCC) District of Kansas
City, MO. An underlying assumption is that students' success in math increases
when they relate math to other disciplines, engage in mathematics inquiry and
problem solving, explore careers (particularly the STEM careers), and learn to
communicate mathematically.

The PASS Math project is assessing previous projects in mathematics, planning
new developmental math pilots, including self-paced options, and planning a
developmental math program that is more effective in remediating math students
and preparing them for college-level math courses as well as for STEM careers.

The intellectual merit of PASS Math is that efforts aim to create a significant
increase in students transitioning from developmental mathematics to successful
completion of college-level mathematics. Since mathematics is a significant
barrier to completing associates and bachelors degrees, more students are in
turn completing college degrees. By having students explore careers,
particularly STEM careers, more students are ready, prepared, and interested in
completing degrees in the required programs.

The broader impact of PASS Math is that this model program can be disseminated
to other community colleges in the country where almost 800,000 students are
enrolled in developmental mathematics. A summative and formative evaluation
provides data on successful activities.

Project objectives include: (a) Students who participate in developmental math
pilot projects experience a 50% better success rate than developmental math
students who do not participate in the pilots. (b) 65% of students in
developmental math pilots enroll in and successfully complete a college level
math course. (c) 10% of the students in the pilots progress to college-level
math courses in a shorter period. (d) 65% of minority students in developmental
math pilots enroll in and successfully complete a college level-math course. (e)
10% of the minority students in the pilots progress to college-level math
courses in a shorter period. (f) The number of students courses who enroll in
STEM programs doubles. (g) The number of minority students who enroll in STEM
programs doubles.