* 0230966
* Purchase of 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Arthur Pardi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Arthur Pardi at University of Colorado, Boulder
that provides partial funding for purchase of a state-of-the-art 800 MHz nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. A consortium of three Universities in the
Rocky Mountain Region; the University of Colorado, Boulder, the University of
Colorado Health Science Center (UCHSC) and the University of Utah School of
Medicine, will equally share this instrument. This high field NMR will benefit
the research programs of the seven major users (Drs. A. Pardi and D.S. Wuttke at
Boulder; Drs. W.L. Sundquist and D.R. Davis at Utah; and Drs. B. K. Bendiak,
D.N.M. Jones, and M.J. Overduin at UCHSC) as well as other minor users at the
three institutions and in the Rocky Mountain Region. The various research
programs are focused on structure-function studies of proteins, nucleic acids
and carbohydrates. Recent methodological developments allow acquisition of very
high-resolution NMR spectra on much larger macromolecules than was previously
possible. These powerful new techniques are most effective at ultra-high
magnetic fields, and the requested 800 MHz NMR will make it possible for the
members of this consortium to dramatically enhance their research programs on
larger and more complex macromolecules.&lt;br/&gt; This instrument will
accelerate new and ongoing research projects in the following areas:
Oligosaccharide Structures and Cell Surface Carbohydrate-Protein Interactions -
B. K. Bendiak; Structural Studies of HIV Primer/Template Complex - D. R. Davis;
Structure-Function Studies of Proteins and Carbohydrates Involved in Disease -
D. N. M. Jones; Structures, Interactions and Dynamics of Membrane-Associated
Proteins - M. J. Overduin; Structure-Function Studies of RNA - A. Pardi;
Structural Studies of HIV-1 Assembly and Budding - W. I. Sundquist; Structural
Studies of Biologically Important Molecular Recognition - D. S. Wuttke. The
major users currently have access to lower magnetic field NMR instrumentation so
the 800 MHz NMR will be exclusively used for projects that have a demonstrated
need for the higher field, higher resolution and higher sensitivity of this
instrument. In addition to using the 800 MHz NMR to determine solution
structures of biologically important macromolecules, some of the major users are
actively involved in development of improved techniques for determining
structures of biomolecules in solution. Thus this ultra-high field NMR will also
be used to aid in the development of new methods for probing the structures and
dynamics of larger proteins, RNAs, DNAs, and carbohydrates than was previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt; There is a growing awareness of the potential of
structure/function studies of biomolecules for revolutionizing human medicine
and health care. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and X-ray
crystallography are the two techniques for determining high-resolution
structures of biomolecules. The research performed on this 800 MHz NMR
instrument will lead to technological innovations that maximize structural and
dynamical information on potential drug targets which can aid in the development
of improved therapies for cancer, viral and microbial infections and
developmental diseases. The acquisition of this state-of-the-art 800 MHz NMR
will also have significant impact on the educational training of graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers, undergraduates, and faculty at the three
Universities in the consortium. The 7 major users groups together support a
large number of graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral researchers
and technical staff. Access to this state-of-the-art instrument for solution
structural studies of proteins, carbohydrates and nucleic acids will provide an
outstanding training opportunity, leading to much higher level of expertise of
these NMR users.&lt;br/&gt;