* 0230497
* Collaborative Research:   Impact of Solar Radiation and Nutrients on Biogeochemical Cycling of DMSP and DMS in the Ross Sea, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Ronald Kiene, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2008
* USD 363,922.00

Areas of the Southern Ocean have spectacular blooms of phytoplankton during the
austral spring and early summer. One of the dominant phytoplankton species, the
haptophyte Phaeocystis antarctica, is a prolific producer of the organic sulfur
compound dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and Phaeocystis blooms are associated
with some of the world's highest concentrations of DMSP and its volatile
degradation product, dimethylsulfide (DMS). Sulfur, in the form of DMS, is
transferred from the oceans to the atmosphere and can affect the chemistry of
precipitation and influence cloud properties and possibly climate. DMSP and DMS
are also quantitatively significant components of the carbon, sulfur and energy
flows in many marine food webs, although very little information is available on
these processes in high latitude systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study how solar radiation and iron cycling affect DMSP and DMS production
by phytoplankton, and the subsequent utilization of these labile forms of
organic matter by the microbial food web. Four interrelated hypotheses will be
tested in field-based experiments and in situ observations: 1) solar radiation,
including enhanced UV-B due to seasonal ozone depletion, plays an important role
in determining the net ecosystem production of DMS in the Ross Sea; 2)
development of shallow mixed layers promotes the accumulation of DMS in surface
waters, because of enhanced exposure of plankton communities to high doses of
solar radiation; 3) DMSP production and turnover represent a significant part of
the carbon and sulfur flux through polar food webs; 4) bloom development and
resulting nutrient depletion (e.g., iron) will result in high production rates
of DMSP and high DMS concentrations and atmospheric fluxes. Results from this
study will greatly improve understanding of the underlying mechanisms
controlling DMSP and DMS concentrations in polar waters, thereby improving our
ability to predict DMS fluxes to the atmosphere from this important climatic
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both Drs. Kieber and Kiene actively engage high
school, undergraduate and graduate students in their research and are involved
in formal programs that target underrepresented groups (NSF-REU and the American
Chemical Society-SEED). This project will continue this type of educational
outreach. The PIs also teach undergraduate and graduate courses and
incorporation of research experiences into their classes will enrich student
learning experiences.