* 0230204
* Microscale Mineralogic Controls on Microbial Attachment to Rock Surfaces: Implications for Microbial Mineral Dissolution
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Jennifer Roberts, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2005
* USD 84,745.00

Microorganisms are ubiquitous in the shallow subsurface, attached to sediment
surfaces and in the aqueous phase. When attached, microorganisms can alter the
geochemical microenvironments at the point of attachment, shifting mineral
equilibria and driving weathering reactions. However, microbial attachment on
sediment grains is heterogeneous and the variability of microbial occurrence
cannot be simply explained by electrostatic interactions between the cell and
the mineral surface. Several studies have shown that other factors such as,
solution chemistry, surface coatings, and surface roughness can change
attachment behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Previous research by the PI on subsurface
microbial colonization in a petroleum-contaminated aquifer suggests that the
distribution of microorganisms on different mineral surfaces in situ is related,
in part, to the nutrient content of the mineral. Microorganisms preferentially
colonize and destroy silicate minerals that contain limiting trace nutrients,
such as P and Fe, occurring as trace apatite and iron oxyhydroxides (Rogers et
al., 1998; 2001). It is still unclear, however, whether the mineralogy of the
point of attachment is nutrient-rich inclusion or silicate matrix. Nor is it
known if these inclusions impact only initial attachment, or if they influence
permanent attachment, subsequent growth and colonization, and surface
etching.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to study the influence
of nutrient-bearing mineral inclusions on microbial surface attachment.
Specifically, this study will examine how apatite and iron oxide inclusions in
feldspars influence microbial attachment. It is hypothesized that microorganisms
will preferentially attach to surface expressions of these inclusions leaving
the silicate groundmass barren. Inclusions may increase attachment through
increased surface charge or chemotactic behavior to nutrients or terminal
electron acceptors.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will use laboratory
experiments to characterize microbial attachment to silicate rocks that are
compositionally heterogeneous. Laboratory experiments will be used to examine
attachment under static (no-flow) conditions and will approximate "maximum"
initial attachment. Pure strain cultures, including Geobacter metallireducens
and Methanosaeta concilii and native anaerobic consortia will be used in
experiments to characterize any changes in attachment behavior due to type-
specific interactions, competition, and/or symbiosis. The solid phases used in
these experiments will consist of feldspars containing inclusions of P and Fe
minerals, as well as controls without these nutrient phases. Pyrex glasses will
also be manufactured containing dispersed P and Fe as well as, included P and Fe
minerals. Glasses will serve as "artificial" rocks to test whether cells
preferentially attach to inclusions or if patchy behavior is prevalent when
nutrients are dispersed. For all attachment experiments the underlying surface
mineralogy/composition will be mapped and correlated to attachment patterns.
Finally, field microcosms using the same suite of solids will be reacted with
the native consortia in situ. It is assumed that attachment of microbes to
mineral surfaces is necessary for substantial mineral etching to occur, and
field results will be used to link attachment to microbial weathering processes
observed in situ.&lt;br/&gt;