* 0230641
* New Mexico State University Bridges for Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Ricardo Jacquez, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The need for effective teaching and learning is reflected in the national
literature on education practices and in the recently revised accreditation
criteria for schools of engineering - Engineering Criteria 2000 - recently
implemented by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET).
Engineering Criteria 2000 (EC 2000) has been a catalyst for reform in
engineering education, providing an opportunity to increase effectiveness of
teaching and learning within the engineering curriculum. The NMSU Bridges for
Engineering Education (NMSU BEE) program, proposes to extend this emphasis on
effective teaching and learning within engineering education to the pre-college
level through a strongly aligned multi-level curriculum designed to attract
students to the engineering profession, beginning at the middle school level,
and ensure that they are academically prepared to be successful in university
engineering programs. Full implementation of the interventions and strategies
developed under this planning grant would provide important opportunities to
local middle and high school students for enhancing their educational success
early on in their pre-college schooling, thereby increasing their chances for a
smooth and successful transition into the NMSU College of Engineering
undergraduate degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this collaborative
effort of middle and high school teachers and NMSU faculty from engineering,
education, and the cognitive sciences, the goals are to develop a strong
organizational structure grounded in a professional development framework that:
1) supports teachers and students in exploring and understanding engineering
content in K-12 education through professional development activities and
engineering-specific curriculum units, 2) improves the pedagogy in undergraduate
engineering education in a manner that is responsive to the new ABET criteria
and which incorporates writing-to-learn approaches and current theories of
learning and cognition, 3) extends the application of and response to the ABET
criteria in meaningful ways to the middle and high school levels; 4) results in
a rich collection of data that can effectively contribute to curriculum
revisions at all three levels; and 5) produces a responsive evaluation
methodology that is accountable to the project's many stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;