* 0230797
* Cabled Observatories for Regional Oceanographic Research
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Joanne Bintz, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Ocean Studies Board Study on Cabled Observatories for Regional Oceanographic
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many years, Geoscientists have realized that
Earth cannot be studied adequately in a static manner by simply characterizing
it over limited regions or for short periods; instead, we must understand the
myriad global processes that actively shape the Earth and ultimately impact
society. These processes occur over a vast range of temporal and spatial scales
and exhibit considerable co-variation and dynamic linkages. To characterize the
temporal behavior of these dynamic systems, the establishment of long-term
observational capabilities has been proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
proposed Ocean Observatories Initiative would provide new modes of access to the
ocean in order to study these interconnected processes. The system would consist
of three elements: 1) a regional-scale observatory consisting of interconnected
sites on the seafloor that span several geological and oceanographic features
and processes; 2) several relocatable deep-sea observatories that are based
around a system of buoys; and 3) an expanded network of coastal observatories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1999, OCE funded a National Research Council study
designed to examine the scientific merit of, technical requirements for, and
overall feasibility of establishing a system of seafloor observatories. The
Committee on Seafloor Observatories was formed and the "Symposium of Seafloor
Observatories" was held in January 2000. This symposium and study resulted in
the publication of "Illuminating the Hidden Planet: The Future of Seafloor
Observatory Science" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a follow on to the previous study,
this study will describe the scientific problems that could most effectively be
addressed through a regional-scale cabled ocean observatory. It will then
discuss the strategies needed to design an observatory that can best carry out
this science. Strategies considered should include criteria for locating a
cabled observatory, sensor requirements, data transfer rates, power needs, and
other design considerations. In arriving at its findings and recommendations,
the study committee will consider recent reports that outline ocean science
research priorities, existing cabled observatory strategies and implementation
plans, and input from the ocean research community.&lt;br/&gt;