* 0230662
* Polyamorphism and Structural Transitions during Glass Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2005
* John Kieffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 263,498.00

0072258&lt;br/&gt;Kieffer&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing evidence that the glassy
and liquid states are structurally and thermodynamically distinct, although both
amorphous. This implies that the glass transition is a "polyamorphic"
transformation. Furthermore, a tendency of the substance to undergo structural
transitions in the glassy state could affect materials properties such as non-
linear optical responses and mechanical behaviors. This project comprises the
investigation of the structural evolution in glass-forming materials as a
function of pressure and temperature. The extent to which structural relaxation
during glass formation involves polyamorphic structural transitions, as opposed
to a viscous slowing within an invariant structure, will be determined.
Structural characterization in supercooled melts will be accomplished using a
combination of Brillouin and Raman light scattering and molecular dynamics
simulations, which will allow one to identify the mechanical response of the
structure and the nature of structural building blocks. Brillouin light
scattering will be used to determine the high-frequency complex mechanical
modulus of glass-forming melts at the molecular scale. The real component, or
storage modulus, provides information on the structural integrity and network
connectivity, while the imaginary component corresponds to the energy dissipated
in aperiodic motions of small structural constituents (e.g., atomic hopping).
Simultaneous Raman scattering will allow one to establish a direct correlation
between this visco-elastic behavior and the symmetries and abundance of
molecular building blocks. Molecular dynamic simulations will be used to
reconcile the experimentally determined Raman spectra and visco-elastic
properties with a detailed geometric description of the molecular structure. The
manifestation of polyamorphism will be revealed by examining a series of glass-
forming systems, chosen to systematically sample a wide range of glass-forming
attributes, such as the valences, bonding types of the network elements, and
melt fragility. Systems will include germanates, phosphates, tellurites, and
chalcogenides. The relationship between the nature of the network former and the
mechanisms of transitions between different non-crystalline polymorphs will be
established by studying the effects of simultaneous pressure and temperature on
the transition processes using heated diamond anvil
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to clarify the
concept and manifestations of polyamorphism. With this clarification, our
understanding of important issues in glass science will be advanced, since a
tendency of a material to undergo structural transitions in the glassy state
could affect its properties, such as non-linear optical responses and mechanical
behaviors, which are important for high tech applications. Expanding the range
of applicability of glasses will enable new technologies, including photonics,
optical telecommunication and computing, drug and radiation delivery, bio-
medical implants, sensors, energy storage and generation, nuclear waste
containment, and light-weight metallic alloys. &lt;br/&gt;