* 0230088
* Striking a Balance between Engineering Science and Engineering Design: Development of an Engineering Systems and Design Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Nancy Hubing, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230088&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Stone,
Robert&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Missouri-Rolla&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Striking a Balance between Engineering Science and Engineering Design:
Development of an Engineering Systems and Design
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop an undergraduate engineering curriculum that prepares
students to work as design engineers at the boundaries of two or more
traditional engineering disciplines. The proposed interdisciplinary program,
focusing on engineering systems and engineering design, encompasses the study of
theories and methodologies that develop creative solutions to open-ended
engineering design problems. Graduates of this program, called Engineering
Systems and Design, will use modern design methodologies,&lt;br/&gt;simulation,
analysis and optimization techniques to develop safe and functional solutions to
complex interdisciplinary design problems while adhering to constraints
involving economics, reliability, durability, aesthetics, ethics and social
impact (including legal and environmental issues).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
increased flexibility incorporated in the Engineering System Design program will
appeal to a large number of bright students who are not interested
in&lt;br/&gt;traditional engineering programs with rigid requirements. The
program will also meet increasing industry demands for broad-based product and
systems designers capable of immediately working in interdisciplinary
engineering areas such as mechatronics, nanosystems and
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;