* 0230154
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Mechanical Modeling of Major Mantle Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Lars Stixrude, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 381,541.00

EAR-0230154&lt;br/&gt;Lars Stixrude&lt;br/&gt;Translating the record of deep-
seated geological processes as revealed by seismic structure or xenoliths
requires sophisticated knowledge of the essential physics, chemistry, and atomic
scale structure of minerals at high pressures and temperatures. Over the course
of their prior collaborative project, the investigators have developed a new
approach to the study of mantle materials based on density functional theory
that is complementary to experimental efforts in mineral physics. They have
shown that theory can provide insights into the fundamentals of material
behavior that form the basis of our ability to interpolate among and extrapolate
from necessarily limited experimental or theoretical results to a complex earth.
The investigators past studies of pure end-member phases have predicted
properties that have lent important new insight into the nature of the earth's
interior. In this proposal, they move toward considering the interaction between
mantle minerals through phase transitions and chemical
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will pursue for the first time with
ab initio methods the theoretical investigation of mantle solid solutions,
including their structure, thermochemistry, and physical properties, and of
phase equilibria,. The investigators will also continue with established
directions including the prediction of thermoelastic properties. This research
is expected to contribute to our understanding of: 1) The origins of lateral
heterogeneity in the mantle, through predictions of the effects of temperature
and composition on the elastic properties of solid solutions, including Mg-Ca-
Al-Fe perovskite at lower mantle conditions. 2) The origin, structure, and
geodynamical consequences of seismic "discontinuities", through predictions of
one-component and multi-component phase equilibria including the akimotoite to
perovskite transition, and the pseudobinary ringwoodite to perovskite plus
magnesiowustite transition. 3) The interpretation of samples of possible
transition zone and lower mantle origin, through predictions of phase equilibira
and element partitioning among major coexisting phases, including Mg-Ca
partitioning and exsolution in silicate perovskite.&lt;br/&gt;