* 0230370
* Infrared Measurements of Atmospheric Composition over Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Frank Murcray, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 12/31/2005
* USD 614,262.00

The proposed project is to develop a program of observations of atmospheric
chemistry using passive infrared instruments at McMurdo and the South Pole. The
measurements will be made year round for two years, and will provide
significantly more and better data and constraints for photochemical transport
models. Since these models are used to predict future ozone depletion and
climate change, it is important that they be as accurate as possible. The
Antarctic ozone hole has shown the sensitivity of the southern polar
stratosphere to chlorine, and it is expected that the gradual healing of the
hole to mark the success of the policy. However, model predictions indicate the
possibility of a delay in recovery due to the impact of global warming on the
catalytic ozone destruction process. Since most current satellite instruments do
not sample the polar regions in the winter, ground based instruments can make
important contributions and data from the proposed instruments would also
provide validation for new satellite sensors. These instruments are the four
Fourier Transform Spectrometers (FTS) operated at Arrival Heights (in
collaboration with the New Zealand National Institute for Water and Air
Research) and at South Pole. Two of these FTS (0.1-1.0 cm resolution atmospheric
emission) will be placed at South Pole and at McMurdo for year round operation,
and a 0.003 cm-1 resolution solar FTS will be deployed at South Pole to be
operated during the summer. The emission instruments will provide important
information during the polar night regarding HNO3 and denitrification, as well
as dehydration. The transmission FTS's will provide high resolution spectra from
which we will derive vertical profiles as well as vertical column amounts of
many molecules important in the ozone destruction process as well as atmospheric
tracers such as HF. The spectra from the emission instruments will provide year
round column abundance measurements of HNO3, CH4, O3, H2O, N2O, the CFC's,
ClONO2, and NO2 prior to its conversion to other odd nitrogen. The solar
instruments will additionally provide some altitude profile information about
those molecules, as well as HCl, ClONO2, NO, NO2, HNO3, HF, and others. The
obtained spectral data set will be used to determine the current state of NOx
partitioning, to measure the extent of the denitrification, to measure water
vapor profiles into the stratosphere, to measure dehydration, to determine the
current CFC 11, 12, and 22 levels as well as stratospheric Cl in the form of HCl
and ClONO2, and to perform comparisons between the two Antarctic sites in an
effort to gain more insight into vortex related chemical and dynamical effects.
In addition, the collected data will provide photochemical transport modelers
the ability to compare model outputs to actual measurements, especially at
intermediate stages. It is important at this time when we are approaching the
beginning of the recovery from Cl-catalyzed ozone destruction, that we have a
data set that comprehensively covers the major constituents of both the
catalytic ozone destruction sequence and global warming, so as to be able to
place in perspective the relative influence of the two mechanisms.