* 0230336
* Seismic Attenuation and Anisotropy in the Carpathians and Adjacent Basins:  Upper Mantle Role in the Last Stages of Tethyan Closure
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Raymond Russo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 72,080.00

EAR-0230336&lt;br/&gt;Raymond M. Russo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Carpathian arc
marks the suture of a now-closed major embayment of&lt;br/&gt;Tethys, the
expansive ocean basin that once stretched along the southern&lt;br/&gt;margin of
Eurasia from the western Mediterranean to Indochina. The arc&lt;br/&gt;is unique
in several respects: Closure of the remnant Tethys here entails&lt;br/&gt;some
degree of very recent (Miocene-present) continent-continent
collision&lt;br/&gt;and disappearance of, most likely, a part of the Tethyan
oceanic lithosphere&lt;br/&gt;into the upper mantle. However, study of
Carpathian tectonics may have wide&lt;br/&gt;application, since the processes
now visible there must have taken place&lt;br/&gt;elsewhere in the past along
the diachronously closing Tethys margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unusual
seismicity, volcanism, and surface deformation at the Vrancea&lt;br/&gt;bend
zone of the Carpathian arc (45.5 N lat., 25.5 E long.) has yielded&lt;br/&gt;a
debate about their cause(s): one viable tectonic scenario
invokes&lt;br/&gt;subduction of a piece of Tethyan oceanic lithosphere, a
remnant of which&lt;br/&gt;is presumed to be just detaching from continental
lithosphere of the&lt;br/&gt;East European and Moesian platforms. A second model
holds that oceanic&lt;br/&gt;lithosphere subduction ended some time in the late
Miocene, and that since&lt;br/&gt;then a portion of East European or Moesian
platform continental lithosphere&lt;br/&gt;has been delaminating along a
horizontal mid-lithospheric interface and&lt;br/&gt;dripping down into the upper
mantle. The predicted distribution of high&lt;br/&gt;velocity `slab' and low
velocity asthenosphere in the upper mantle beneath&lt;br/&gt;Vrancea zone
differs between these models and can be determined seismically&lt;br/&gt;by a
combination of tomography (ongoing in Romania and independent of
this&lt;br/&gt;project) and measurements of seismic attenuation and shear wave
splitting,&lt;br/&gt;which delineate the distribution of cold lithosphere and
warm asthenosphere,&lt;br/&gt;and the flow directions of any upper mantle
asthenosphere. The active&lt;br/&gt;seismicity at Vrancea can be exploited to
delimit both slab distribution&lt;br/&gt;and upper mantle flow directions via
measurements of seismic attenuation&lt;br/&gt;and shear wave splitting. Targeted
tests of mantle responses to Tethys&lt;br/&gt;closure will include establishment
of the presence and thickness of&lt;br/&gt;mantle asthenosphere beneath the
study region, observations of mantle&lt;br/&gt;flow directions, estimation of
seismic attenuation and associated&lt;br/&gt;inferences concerning mantle
temperature fields, and, ultimately, a&lt;br/&gt;strong test of competing
hypotheses put forth to explain the unusual&lt;br/&gt;seismicity and volcanism
of the Carpathian arc. Finally, improved&lt;br/&gt;understanding of seismic wave
propagation and attenuation in the study&lt;br/&gt;region will directly enhance
our understanding of seismic hazard in&lt;br/&gt;this populous
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;