* 0230583
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Molecular Rydberg Wave Packets for Quantum Information
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Stephen Leone, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2005
* USD 16,900.00

0128826&lt;br/&gt;Leone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-France
collaboration in experimental physical chemistry and quantum information science
involves researchers and students at the University of Colorado and the Aime
Cotton Laboratory in Orsay, France. Stephen R. Leone in the US and Christian
Jurgen in France lead this collaboration of experimentalists and theorists. The
objective of their combined efforts is to investigate Rydberg molecular packets
of complex sodium or lithium compounds (dimers) or nobelium as potential sources
for quantum information. The US group will assemble and prepare molecular wave
packets with ultrafast pulsed lasers in order to construct coherent
superpositions of states. Pairs of superposition states, called qubits, will
then be used to investigate algorithms proposed for quantum information science.
The French investigators will provide the theoretical expertise to identify the
states involved and to interpret the complex wave packet dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration advances understanding of research in
laser control of chemical reactions and molecular spectroscopy. The new
knowledge will be used in quantum information science, optical communications,
and femtosecond laser optics. The collaboration advances research training of
graduate students and provides them with opportunities to establish
international partnerships early in their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF
will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator,
postdoctoral researcher and students. The CNRS will support visits by French
researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;