* 0230030
* Promotion, Recruitment and Retention:  STEM Initiatives for a Public Liberal Arts College
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Timothy Fossum, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/2006
* USD 95,965.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a multi-part planning and pilot
testing effort design to increase enrollment in the ten science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs at the college. Specifically the
four pilot projects and two planning studies cooperatively attack the challenge
of low enrollment and low degree production in STEM programs at SUNY Potsdam.
Through a variety of activities the project is developing planning strategies to
address program promotion, recruitment, and retention. The goal is to study how
best to plan for and attract students into science courses and programs. These
plans and pilot studies involve exploring ways to help students to enter the
program through bridge programs that support their learning, by encouraging
experiential learning and undergraduate research, and by providing a bridge to
post-graduate life. The college is also studying the development of new
interdisciplinary minor and major programs in Informatics. The curriculum
planning in Informatics models another way to introduce interdisciplinary
science-based programs for students in the future. The impact of the pilot
projects is being disseminated through campus and regional newsletters, a
website, and at the national level through annual meeting at the Association for
Institutional Research Forum, National Education Association, and the Consortium
for Computing in Small Colleges.