* 0231246
* A Web-Based Writing and Peer Review Component in Introductory Earth Science Classes: Adaptation of the Calibrated Peer Review Tool Used in Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Cinzia Cervato, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2006
* USD 39,828.00

This proof-of-concept project is designing and evaluating three prototype
Calibrated Peer Review (CPR) assignments for use in introductory Earth and
environmental science classes. CPR is a technical writing tool established by a
consortium of institutions in California and used by chemistry and biology
departments at universities and colleges. This instructional assessment tool
employs an interactive web-based approach that&lt;br/&gt;allows a student to
develop increased understanding by writing about timely, relevant topics.
Students develop short essays and review their peers' essays in a manner that is
both time-efficient and effective. This CPR project is implementing digital
tools for three Earth science-based assignments providing managed review,
analysis, assessment of student input, and preparation of reports for both
student and instructor. Central to the identification of topics that are
content-rich and, from a citizens' perspective, relevant, the Lexis-Nexis news
database is being utilized. Using this searchable resource, three topics of
particular relevance are being used: earthquake and plate boundaries, evidence
for global warming, and flood hazards. Collaboration with a group of faculty
involved in the CPR project is being established to facilitate the PIs use of
available technological infrastructure and to help develop a medium appropriate
for use by Earth science departments nationwide. The project is being evaluated
at Iowa State University and by instructors at a community college,
undergraduate-oriented state college, and a research university.&lt;br/&gt;