* 0231710
* SBIR Phase I:    Studies on Preparation and Reactivity of Surface Derivatized NanoActive Metal Oxides
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Shyamala Rajagopalan, NANOSCALE MATERIALS INC
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop new
surface derivatized reactive nanoparticles. These nanoparticles are expected to
be highly active adsorbents and should be important in a number of applications.
In the project, attention will be focused on preparing nanoparticles containing
Lewis acid or base centers. The chemical modification involves introducing Lewis
acidic boron or Lewis basic alkoxy functionalities on the surface of the
nanoparticles. It is expected that introduction of such sites should enhance the
adsorptive capability and the destructive ability of the nanoparticles
appreciably. In particular, boron, by virtue of its affinity for electronegative
atoms (in nerve agents) and the thio group (in mustard agent and nerve agent VX)
should bind and help pull these agents quickly through the nanoparticles. Lewis
basic sites should enhance the chemical reactivity of the nanoparticles thereby
promoting destruction of agents by reactions such as elimination and/or
hydrolysis.

Commercially, these materials will find application in both civilian and
military markets; for example, in civilan markets as adsorbents in air filters
for various industrial toxic agents, scrubbing agents for raw natural gas and as
novel catalysts. Militarily, the new nanoparticles will provide faster and more
efficient decontamination of chemical warfare agents and environmental toxins.