* 0231573
* GK-12: The Syracuse University/Onondaga County Schools Partnership for Improvement of Science Education Proposal
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Marvin Druger, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,716,422.00

The project is: establishing a mutually beneficial parallel educational
partnership between school districts and Syracuse University; leveraging
Syracuse University research- and practice-generated expertise in STEM pedagogy,
educational technology integration, and assessment through Graduate Teaching
Fellows daily participation in the school system; developing innovative,
process-oriented, standards-based, hands-on STEM curriculum units and resources
that use local environmental issues to connect teaching basic STEM concepts in
biology, chemistry, earth sciences, physics, and technology; enhancing K-12
teachers' content knowledge through dissemination of new STEM teaching resources
through print materials and the Web and through professional development
workshops for science teachers; and establishing content-rich, inquiry-based
benchmark programs in schools through mutually beneficial collaborations between
STEM graduate students and science teachers as a forerunner for a permanent
collaboration model and replicable national model. The broader impact grows from
the partnership and collaboration between Syracuse University and 18 Onondaga
County school districts. Two of these school districts, Syracuse City and
LaFayette, are classroom sites for the project and serve as project centers that
share and disseminate initiatives and local environmental experiments
integrating science with technology. Fellows receive extensive training in STEM
pedagogy and K-12 science education. Materials and resources are being developed
for appropriate grade levels. STEM activity-based units emphasize science
process, inquiry and critical thinking skills. In addition, STEM Fellows are
providing content-rich training sessions for area science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project title: The Syracuse University Onandaga
County Schools Partnership for Improvement of Science
Education&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Syracuse University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Marvin
Druger, Samuel Clemence, Tiffany Koszalka, Peter Plumley&lt;br/&gt;Partner
School Districts: Syracuse City, LaFayette&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $
1,486,402&lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows/year: 10 graduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban
Rural&lt;br/&gt;Target audience: 8-12&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines
involved: Biology, Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Mathematics, Computer Science,
Physics, Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;