* 0231319
* Biochemistry and Functional Genomics of Methanococcus Jannaschii
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Robert White, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2008
* USD 636,500.00

The methanogenic archaea convert simple carbon compounds into methane gas.
Because biologically produced methane is both a commercially attractive energy
source and a greenhouse gas, it is desirable to find methods to regulate
methanogenesis. This project uses comparative genomics, analytical biochemistry,
enzyme purification, protein chemistry and molecular genetics to identify new
genes that are required for growth and methane formation in the complete genome
sequence of one of the best-studied methanogens, Methanococcus jannaschii. This
autolithotrophic organism uses hydrogen to reduce carbon dioxide to methane and
produces all the organic compounds that it requires for growth from gases and
minerals released from mid-ocean hydrothermal vent fluids. To catalyze these
reactions, M. jannaschii requires at least 19 organic coenzymes including seven
coenzymes that are essential for methane formation. This project will identify
and characterize enzymes from M. jannaschii that are required for the
biosynthesis of coenzymes and amino acids, but have not yet been identified from
that organism's complete genome sequence. These "invisible" enzymes are
attractive targets for designing specific inhibitors of methanogenesis. Two
coenzymes produced by M. jannaschii, riboflavin and the deaza-riboflavin
coenzyme F420, are derived from a common precursor. Although both archaea and
eukaryotes biosynthesize this precursor by the same pathway, the archaea use
different enzymes to catalyze several reactions including the GTP cyclohydrolase
and pyrimidine deaminase steps. In addition to studying these unique enzymes,
this project will characterize proteins involved in subsequent steps of coenzyme
F420 biosynthesis, including the CofC, CofD,CofE, CofG and CofH proteins. This
research also studies novel enzymes required for the biosynthesis of
4-aminobenzoic acid (used to produce the methanopterin coenzyme). Finally, this
project will identify "invisible" enzymes that catalyze proline, cysteine and
methionine amino acid biosyntheses, 3-dehydroquinate biosynthesis (a precursor
of aromatic amino acids) and purine nucleotide
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microorganism Methanococcus jannaschii
grows in mid-ocean hydro thermal vents, using hydrogen and carbon dioxide to
make methane gas. This project uses molecular genetic, biochemical and
computational techniques to identify new genes in the complete genome sequence
of M. jannaschii that are required for growth and methane formation. Results
from this research will help explain how methanogenic organisms have evolved to
produce methane and suggest molecular targets for the beneficial regulation of
biological methane formation, useful to produce fuel or to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;