* 0231263
* Spatial Perspectives on Analysis for Curriculum Enhancement (SPACE)
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Richard Appelbaum, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,444,040.00

Social Science-Other (89) SPACE is a three-year program to achieve systemic
change within undergraduate education in the social sciences, with extension to
the environmental sciences. Our approach is based on the value of spatial
thinking, and associated technologies (geographic information systems, tools for
spatial analysis), as the basis for greater integration among the social science
disciplines, greater motivation for students, greater relevance to societal
problems, greater integration of technology into undergraduate instruction, and
greater employment prospects for graduates.

The program is centered on a series of professional development workshops, with
extensive follow-on activities; and features additional programs designed to
leverage these workshops, to achieve high rates of participation among
traditionally under-represented groups, and to bridge the gap between research
and teaching in the social sciences. It is managed by a consortium led by the
University of California, Santa Barbara, and includes The Ohio State University
(PI, Mei-Po Kwan) and the University Consortium for Geographic Information
Science (PI, Arthur Getis), a consortium of over 60 institutions with strong
commitments to the principles on which SPACE is based.

The program is building on the successful experience of the Center for Spatially
Integrated Social Science (CSISS), a project funded by NSF since 1999 under its
program of support for research infrastructure in the social sciences. CSISS
organizes workshops for graduate students and young faculty, to introduce them
to GIS and spatial analysis as research tools. SPACE is a major new initiative
to teach the teachers, and move the focus from research to undergraduate
learning.

SPACE focuses on providing undergraduate instructors with basic skills in GIS
and spatial analysis and some of the latest techniques, software, and learning
resources. SPACE is also organizing sessions at major conferences to provide
instructors with basic introductions to using spatial technologies in the
classroom, to maintain engagement with participants in the national workshops,
and to reach wider audiences than the workshops. The project is in the process
of developing an extensive set of Web resources to facilitate the sharing of
materials and assessment instruments among undergraduate instructors.