* 0231536
* Fellows Enhancing Science and Technology Program (FEST 6-12)
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Alberto Rivera-Rentas, Universidad Metropolitana
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,640,509.00

Teacher-Fellow teams are developing and delivering a roster of hands on
experiences and workshops at the schools that promote student interest and
awareness of the&lt;br/&gt;environmental sciences and current environmental
issues in Puerto Rico. The Fellows are bringing environmental materials and
tools to the classroom and helping teachers and K-6 students develop the ability
to use these materials and tools. The teams are also bringing the classroom to
the site of experimental fieldwork. The participants are working with and
learning from a variety of partners in addition to the resources provided by
UMET: the Institute of Tropical Forestry, an NSF-funded Long-Term Ecological
Research project site, and the doctoral program in marine sciences at the
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez. Faculty participating include the Dean of
the School of Environmental Affairs and represent a wide array of disciplines at
UMET that have the environment as the central focus: marine sciences,
oceanography, chemistry, toxicology, forestry, ecology, botany, geology,
environmental education, coastal resources, natural resources, and environmental
communication. These efforts to develop a comprehensive and cohesive effort in
environmental sciences education for the island are enhanced by collaborating
with the Mayaguez Campus of the University of Puerto Rico as UMET focuses on the
northeastern part of Puerto Rico and the Mayaguez Program focuses on the west
coast of the Island. The schools involved are in an area of the island that has
a high degree of unemployment and only minimal access to basic services. The
broader impacts of this project include the model it provides of bringing
environmental sciences content knowledge and technical skills to a set of
students and teachers who previously had little access to either and the
opportunity it provides for the university involved to broaden and enrich its
own program through cooperation with neighboring institutions. This project is
receiving partial support from the Directorate for Biological
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project title: Fellows Enhancing Science and
Technology (FEST) &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Universidad Metropolitana (UMET)
&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Juan Musa, Alberto Rivera Rentas&lt;br/&gt;Partner School
Districts; Carolina&lt;br/&gt;Financing: $1,492,509 &lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows
per year: 8 graduate, 8 undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Rural &lt;br/&gt;Target
audience of the project: elementary &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines
involved: Environmental Sciences and Technology&lt;br/&gt;