* 0231670
* SBIR Phase I:    High Performance Transparent AlON via Novel Powder Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Ching-Fong Chen, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a
transparent AlON with superior mechanical and optical properties using a novel
powder synthesis method. This innovative powder synthesis method can not only
reduce the particle size but also enhance the uniformity of the reactants.
Increasing the sinterability and reducing the diffusion path can reduce the
sintering time and sintering temperature reduced significantly. The advantage of
these sintering conditions is a lower processing cost and a microstructure with
much smaller grain size compared with the conventional processed AlON.
Mechanical and thermal shock capabilities of transparent polycrystalline
ceramics are limited by their mechanical strength, which in turn is enhanced
when the grain size is decreased. The optical properties can also be improved
due to less milling process, which results much less impurities pick-up. This
innovative synthesis method can convert the surface of the powder into oxide,
which makes it possible to process the powder in aqueous solution. The
processing cost can be reduced significantly by using the aqueous solution. The
transparent AlON developed in this program can be used to replace translucent
Al2O3 for the sodium and halogen lamp applications. It can also be used for IR
missile domes, transparent armors, supermarket scanners, glass for Xerox copy
machine and scanners, and optical lenses. This new material could revolutionize
the optical industry by replacing glass and sapphire.