* 0231019
* The Neuron Connection: a neuroscience lab manual for the 21st century
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Bruce Johnson, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 12/31/2006
* USD 72,446.00

The objective of this project is to collect and develop pedagogically sound,
inexpensive, teaching tools for the undergraduate Neuroscience laboratory, that
can be used by a wide variety of institutions including those that have
limitations on funds for laboratory equipment. This collection, "The Neuron
Connection", contains tested labs that span the breadth of the discipline. It is
a collection for the 21st century that is in digital format and includes digital
videos, which show lab set-up and technical tips. The digital format allows
continuity of access, and materials that can be modified according to the needs
of each institution. The audience for this manual is instructors at 2 and 4-year
colleges and their students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This first phase develops an
initial series (at least three) of laboratory exercises.&lt;br/&gt;These could
be in the form of any of the following:&lt;br/&gt;Simulations or animations of
"classical" experiments where students are referred to the original literature
to make predictions of what should happen.&lt;br/&gt;Laboratories that require
little or no equipment.&lt;br/&gt;Equipment based laboratory exercises that
could include instructions on how to make commercially expensive equipment (such
as amplifiers) on a relatively low budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These materials
will be distributed in a form that is compatible with National Science Digital
Library (NSDL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Advisory Board is responsible for
assessing the direction and implementation of the goals outlined in the grant
application. This assessment involves one formative evaluation and two summative
evaluations of the project's progress in selecting appropriate laboratory
exercises, developing prototype simulations, and delivering at least three
working examples of hands-on laboratory exercises accessible to a wide range of
college and university environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authors are from 3
different academic institutions and represent both the biological and
psychological sub fields of neuroscience. They will draw advice and ideas
through their connections with other faculty-teaching undergraduate
Neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;