* 0231651
* NSF/USDOT Development and Testing of a Vehicle Based Zero-Public-Infrastructure Real-Time Traffic Information System
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Athanasios Ziliaskopoulos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2005
* USD 299,678.00

\Proposal Title NSF/USDOT: Development and Testing of a Vehicle Based Zero-
Public-Infrastructure (Zero-PI) Real-Time Traffic Information
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract: The research focuses on an
innovative traffic information system, fully decentralized and based only on
information exchanged by the vehicles themselves. The system (called Zero-PI)
assumes that on-board devices are installed on vehicles, but no infrastructure
installed on the network. Vehicles exchange traffic information as they move
through the network, which allows drivers to adjust their routes and avoid or be
prepared for congestion, incidents or other hazards. Since the system is solely
based on in-vehicle devices, it will be market driven and self-maintained. It
will work on all types of roadways, given sufficient market penetration. It will
be upgraded as newer cars, with more advanced technologically capabilities for
exchanging and processing information are introduced into the market. The only
requirement will be for newer systems to be compatible downwards with the older
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The feasibility and performance of the Zero-PI
system (NSF/USDOT FY2001) both analytically and in a simulated environment
provided very encouraging results. It was demonstrated that meaningful
information is communicated to vehicles, even at low levels of market
penetration. A preliminary feasibility analysis of the communications
requirements of the system suggests that existing wireless technologies, such as
the IEEE 802.11b/g provide sufficient bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop and test the necessary communication
and computing devices and methods, the routing algorithms, and the data schemata
that will enable relevant real-time traffic information to be exchanged,
processed and used. &lt;br/&gt;To meet these objectives, a small number of
prototype devices will be developed and tested in a limited field experiment.
Efficient data structures will be designed to concisely store and exchange the
experienced traffic data. Routing algorithms will be developed that take
advantage of the exchanged data and produce navigational information. Finally, a
large-scale traffic simulator will be modified to represent the behavior of the
Zero-PI system. The simulator will allow investigating system-wide impacts and
analyze issues of network equilibria and stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the
system is successful, it can radically change the way traffic information is
collected, disseminated and how the traffic network is managed. It can lead to a
system that: &lt;br/&gt;does not require tax-payers' money to be
implemented/maintained,&lt;br/&gt;is self-maintained,&lt;br/&gt;will work on all
roads,&lt;br/&gt;will be market driven,&lt;br/&gt;will be totally decentralized
(and more robust to failure and terrorist attacks).&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
transportation agencies will benefit from such a system, since they can
strategically locate receivers on the network and obtain information that, in
turn, can be used for control, management and planning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;