* 0231404
* Development of Web-Based Real Time Virtual Model Based Simulation Laboratory for Soil-Structure Interaction Problems
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Anand Puppala, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 12/31/2005
* USD 74,382.00

The project develops a Web-based virtual model-based simulation laboratory
(VMBSL) module with graphical and animation capabilities using the techniques of
finite element method (FEM) to study the behavior of steel building frames
subjected to static loads (gravity, wind, etc.), including their respective
concrete foundation and foundation soil models, for implementation in structural
engineering courses. The objective is to couple structural and geotechnical
courses in civil engineering curriculums by integrating&lt;br/&gt;the true
behavior of frame structures with soil and foundation properties that support
them. It also addresses the issue of structural systems from grounds up to
delineate the true behavior of the entire structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Web-based VMBSL and animation modules are incorporated into two undergraduate
courses, namely structural analysis and steel design. The VMBSL tools developed
in this project provide examples to demonstrate how the three-dimensional model
of actual beam-to-column and column-to-foundation connections, concrete
foundation, and soil properties effect the lateral sway and member forces in the
structural systems as compared with the idealized two-dimensional models. The
modules promote an environment for interactive-learning, virtual environment,
team-based projects, and lifelong learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;