* 0231796
* Teaching, Experimentation And Mentoring in Science
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* James Blankenship, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,590,807.00

The Pharmaceutical and Chemical Sciences Graduate Program (PCSP), a joint
program from the School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry in the College
of the Pacific at the University of Pacific in Stockton, California, is placing
eight Project Fellows (graduate students) each year in grades 7-12 classrooms
within San Joaquin County, California. Project partners include the San Joaquin
County Office of Education, and retired scientists from UC Berkeley's Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California. Project objectives are
1) to enhance science lessons and labs with standards based inquiry approach
provided by targeted teachers and Project Fellows, and 2) to complete a yearlong
research investigation matched to grade level state science standards which
involves students and is conceived, led and carried out through a collaboration
between teachers, Project Fellows, master teachers, retired scientists, and
faculty mentors (TEAM Science). TEAM Science combines excellence in teaching, an
emphasis on inquiry and experimentation, and the important benefits of retired
scientist and university faculty mentoring. Eight teams recruited for each year
of the project consist of two elementary grades 7-8 teachers, two 9-12 teachers,
one retired research scientist, one Project Fellow, and one master teacher or
university faculty mentor. Teachers recruited for the teams are a combination of
non-, partial or newly credentialed teachers and experienced credentialed
teachers. Each member of the eight teams participates in the following
activities according to their role: 1) presentations on inquiry teaching and its
application, and support for its implementation, 2) networking, ongoing support
and coaching for Project Fellows and collaborating teachers and faculty, and 3)
training in the research process which is enhanced through interaction with the
retired research scientists including a final research project presentation at a
university research symposium. Project participants are exposed to the National
Board for Professional Teaching Standards certification process, science
careers, cutting edge content presentations; inquiry based teaching, and
specific strategies for English language learners. The teams represent a unique
collaboration that brings together a blending of content and pedagogy expertise,
teacher professional development leadership and school district involvement.
Team meetings and training sessions during the summer and throughout the year
target the building of a community of learners to enhance science content
expertise and pedagogy for teachers and achievement for students with the
assistance of graduate students, master teachers, retired scientists and faculty
mentors.

Project title: Teaching, Experimentation and Mentoring in Science Institution:
University of the Pacific PI/Co-PI: James Blankenship, Patrick Jones, Judi
Wilson Partner School Districts: San Joaquin County, Lincoln Unified, Linden
Unified, Stockton Unified, Ripon Unified, Tracy Unified, Manteca Unified, Galt
unified Funding: $ 1,466,807 total for 3 years Number of fellows/year: 8
graduate Setting: urban, rural, suburban Target audience: 7-12 NSF supported
disciplines involved: biology, chemistry

