* 0231867
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Field Fluctuations, Microstructure Evolution and Coupled Phenomena in Random Heterogeneous Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Nicolas Triantafyllidis, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2007
* USD 31,200.00

0231867&lt;br/&gt;Ponte Castaneda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
US-France collaboration in materials engineering involves researchers at the
University of Pennsylvania, California Institute of Technology, University of
Michigan, the French National Center for Scientific Research, Ecole
Polytechnique and Ecole Normale Superieure. Pedro Ponte Castaneda in the US and
Pierre Suquet in France lead a cooperative project on computation and
measurement of nonlinear behavior of model composite materials. They will study
problems of homogenization, including nonlinear properties, field fluctuations,
microstructure evolution and coupled physical phenomena in different materials
systems. The research is motived by several applications of technological
questions. These include creep and forming operations of metal polycrystal
systems, studies of porous elastomers, high-temperature behavior of metal-matrix
composites and smart/active materials (including shape-memory alloys and
ferroelectrics). The goal is to predict the behavior of macroscopic composite
materials by investigating the components. The US investigators have theoretical
expertise. This is complemented by the French investigators' experimental and
numerical expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of
parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and
living expenses for the US investigator and his students. The CNRS will support
visits by French researchers and students to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;