* 0231037
* Supporting and Sustaining the Learning of Professional Teaching Communities in the Institutional Setting of the School and School District
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Paul Cobb, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,475,442.00

This is a five-year longitudinal study of the process of supporting and
sustaining the learning of professional teaching communities by building on a
collaboration that has been established over the past two years with two groups
of middle-school mathematics teachers who work in contrasting urban districts.
In one district, administrators have responded to high stakes accountability
testing by attempting to monitor and regulate teachers' instructional practices
whereas in the second district administrators have responded to accountability
pressures by providing teachers with access to new tools and new forms of
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the proposed project is to
develop an analytic framework designed to&lt;br/&gt;situate mathematics
teachers' instructional practices in the institutional setting of
the&lt;br/&gt;school, the school district, and the broader policy environment. A
major purpose of this framework will be to assist, within the institutional
setting, in scaling up innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As second goal, the
framework will be pilot tested and refined through ongoing collaboration with
the teachers and administrators in the two districts by using it to guide the
formulation of specific strategies for supporting substantial change in
mathematics teaching in the two contrasting districts. In doing so, strategies
and conjectures will be tested and revised on an ongoing basis, thereby revising
the framework in the context in which it is designed to be used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third goal of the project will be to investigate the
travel of an innovation by testing, modifying, and revising a conjectured
trajectory for the development of professional teaching communities, in the
process relating the actual learning trajectories of two professional teaching
communities to the contrasting organizational contexts at the two sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fourth goal will be to investigate the organizational
conditions necessary for sustainability by documenting the development of the
two professional teaching communities when the researchers' direct support is
withdrawn in the final year of the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal in analyzing these data will be to develop longitudinal accounts of the
initial&lt;br/&gt;emergence and subsequent development of the professional
teaching communities over a&lt;br/&gt;five-year period. In doing so, the two
communities will be situated within the institutional&lt;br/&gt;settings of
respective districts, thereby locating the collaborating teachers'
evolving&lt;br/&gt;instructional practices in both the social contexts of the
professional teaching&lt;br/&gt;communities and the organizational settings of
the districts. The student outcome data&lt;br/&gt;will allow the researchers to
document the consequences of changes in the teachers' instructional practices
for the students' mathematical learning.&lt;br/&gt;