* 0231171
* Environmental Science Activities for the 21st Century
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Charlene Waggoner, Kennesaw State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 04/30/2007
* USD 322,245.00

This project is building upon a proof-of-concept grant to create a comprehensive
library of course activities for environmental science courses. In the proof-of-
concept phase, four multi-week, Internet-based laboratory modules were developed
on topics in environmental science for Kennesaw State University's (KSU) general
education course in Interdisciplinary Science. The laboratory program utilizes a
combination of field studies, wet labs, and Internet-based experiences to allow
students to examine local environmental issues and their individual contribution
to regional and global environmental impacts. The exercises were tested at KSU
in Fall 2001 and Spring 2002 with approximately 1,500 students, and our
experiences, assessment data, and outside evaluation indicate significant
benefits to our approach and strongly suggest continued development. In this
full development phase, we are expanding upon and improving our existing
collection of laboratory modules to encompass all of the major topics covered in
environmental science courses. The 10 modules being developed are textbook-
independent, and available to any interested party through the Internet. The
modules are being created by an interdisciplinary team of scientists from four
diverse institutions, and tested in the various class formats for environmental
science courses (no lab, "open" lab, and conventional lab). In addition to the
laboratory modules, the development team is creating an extensive collection of
instructor resources, tailored to each course format.