* 0231361
* National Dissemination of the National Engineering Projects in Community Service (EPICS) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2010
* Edward Coyle, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Don Millard
* 01/31/2010
* USD 2,549,960.00

&lt;br/&gt;It has become widely recognized that engineering students need skills
that go beyond their technical strengths: skills in communication, project
planning, awareness of the customer, of ethical and professional issues, and of
the social and global context in which engineering is practiced. Together with
start-to-finish design experience, these skills mark an increased emphasis on
experiential education. Integration of these dimensions into engineering courses
is critical to the quality of education. However, it has also been widely
recognized that traditional engineering programs are not graduating students who
fully possess these skills. There is also a growing sense that broadening the
notion of an engineer's core competencies to include these skills may be
critical to achieving a population of engineering professionals that is gender-
and ethnically diverse. Engineering Projects in Community Service (EPICS) is an
award-winning academic program that was initiated at Purdue to address the dual
needs of teaching engineering design and meeting community needs for access to
expertise in engineering and technology. Based on numerous measures of success,
EPICS is effectively integrating highly mentored, long-term, large-scale, team-
based, multidisciplinary design projects into the undergraduate engineering
curriculum as well as being an exemplary program that is addressing a critical
need in engineering design education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with
Microsoft Research, this project is implementing a national dissemination of the
EPICS model. The dissemination plan consists of five components: sharable
software infrastructure, faculty development workshops, seed grants,
partnerships for institutionalization, and content dissemination. Dissemination
to over 1000 faculty over a period of five years is proposed. &lt;br/&gt;