* 0231503
* SBIR Phase I: High-Resolution Imaging and Petrophysical Characterization of Oil Reservoirs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Alexander Popovici, 3DGEO DEVELOPMENT INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
key technology designed to enhance the definition and characterization of oil
reservoirs, by using state-of-the-art 3-D prestack depth imaging technology
coupled with advanced rock physics principles to produce high-resolution
petrophysical and structural information. Briefly stated, this technology will
allow oil and gas companies to extract rock information from seismic data.
Extensions to this technology are not limited to only 3-D or 4-D (time lapse)
imaging, but can also be applied to medical imaging, EPA projects of identifying
buried hazardous substances, remote imaging using ground penetrating radar, etc.
The complete software package will be a state-of-the-art program offering
features and utilities that are presently unavailable in the exploration
industry.

The commercial potential of the technology proposed is considerable because it
allows 3-D and 4-D seismic data to be much more effectively used to characterize
and delineate oil reservoirs and to monitor enhanced oil recovery processes.
This area of seismic imaging and reservoir characterization is greatly
influenced by technology developments and represents a fast commercial growth
sector. This advanced technology directly impacts the discovery and recovery of
hydrocarbons and could decrease dependence on imported oil. In existing oil
fields, better seismic images of complicated subsurface geology directly coupled
with petrophysical information, can reduce development costs and increase the
amount of hydrocarbons recovered.