* 0231287
* Developing and Disseminating New Laboratories on Plant Molecular Genetics and Genomics
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* David Micklos, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 01/31/2007
* USD 499,603.00

Plant molecular genetic and genomic research still lag behind medically-oriented
research on microbes and higher animals. As a result, relatively few lab
experiences that expose students to the growing insights into plants offered by
genomic biology are available at the lower college level. This CCLIproject is
developing a laboratory- and Internet-based curriculum to bring students to the
forefront of modern plant research. The project is based largely on data
emanating from major NSF-funded plant research at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
(CSHL) and includes substantial input from active researchers. It builds on the
Dolan DNA Learning Center's 16 years of experience developing and disseminating
innovative laboratory curricula, and its experience as a publisher of Internet
sites with strong multimedia content and shared use of student-generated data.
&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive set of laboratoriesis based on rapid and reproducible
PCR chemistry developed&lt;br/&gt;under a previous grant from the Advanced
Technological Education Program. Using the model plant Arabidopsis and important
food crops, the laboratories illustrate key concepts of gene and genome
analysis, including: the relationship between phenotype and molecular genotype,
genetic modification of plants and detection of transgenes in foods, and linkage
and bioinformatic methods for gene mapping. Students also have the unique
opportunity to explore functional genomics by assisting CSHL researchers with
the cellular analysis of Arabidopsis genes of unknown function. An Internet
"super site" supports the laboratories with online protocols, custom analysis
tools, shared databases, and collaborative bulletin boards and chat
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is comprised of an initial development phase,
culminating in a focus workshop of&lt;br/&gt;faculty advisors drawn from two-
and four-year colleges representing six regions of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;During the dissemination phase, faculty advisors will organize
weeklong training workshops to reach 144 instructors. Applied Biosystems, Bio-
Link National Center for Advanced Technological Training in Biotechnology,
Carolina Biological Supply Company, and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press are
committed to provide key assistance to the project.