* 0231320
* Advanced Neutron Scattering Network for Education and Research with a Focus on Mechanical Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2010
* Hahn Choo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 01/31/2010
* USD 4,250,000.00

The International Materials Institute [IMI] at the University of Tennessee, in a
strong partnership with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, supports the
international neutron-scattering community for innovative, multidisciplinary
materials education and research in the area of mechanical behavior of advanced
materials. The participants include 16 universities worldwide, 7 neutron user
facilities worldwide, and 8 US industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of the IMI are to: [1] develop an international network of researchers and
educators who are actively involved in neutron-scattering materials research;
[2] facilitate the exchange of scientific and educational information through
collaborative research and curriculum-development projects; [3] develop a world-
class work force in neutron science by providing US students, scientists, and
engineers the training and access to research programs and facilities worldwide;
[4] identify and lead innovative materials-research efforts; and [5] establish
an international Internet-based virtual institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
core research thrust areas include [1] in-situ studies of mechanical behavior;
[2] real-time measurements of internal stresses; [3] in-situ studies of
microstructures; and [4] theoretical modeling that complements the experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the IMI activities are
multi-faceted. Most importantly, IMI will train young scientists in the cutting-
edge neutron research, instilling the ability and motivation to go beyond
disciplinary and regional boundaries, and integrate knowledge from multiple
areas to address global problems. Therefore, one of the major outcomes will be a
world-class scientific work force in neutron science with a unique education and
research background. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The International Materials
Institute [IMI] at the University of Tennessee, in a strong partnership with the
Oak Ridge National Laboratory [ORNL], supports an international neutron-
scattering community for innovative, multidisciplinary materials education and
research in the area of mechanical behavior of advanced materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutron scattering is one of the most powerful
characterization techniques available for materials research, and its proven
capabilities and anticipated potential justify the 1.4 billion dollar
construction of the Spallation Neutron Source [SNS] at ORNL as well as a number
of multi-million dollar facility upgrades at the Los Alamos Neutron Science
Center [LANSCE], New Mexico, Intense Pulsed Neutron Source [IPNS], Illinois, and
High Flux Isotope Reactor [HFIR], Tennessee. The international competition is
fierce in the neutron-science arena, e.g., the European Union [EU], Japan,
China, and Australia are also currently building or designing the next-
generation neutron sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the IMI, a group of
the most active researchers in the neutron-scattering materials research field
will form an international network to provide a synergistic effort in advancing
the science, education, and training on the application of neutron scattering in
materials research, specifically regarding the study of mechanical behavior of
advanced materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the proposed IMI are
to [1] accomplish the national agenda of advancing neutron science in the US to
the leadership position in the world by providing international cooperative
education and research opportunities to the neutron-scattering materials
research community, and [2] train young scientists at the undergraduate,
graduate, and postgraduate levels to fully utilize the neutron facilities
worldwide for dramatically expanding the development of new materials, and
thereby, establish a global leadership in the neutron-science
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;