* 0231593
* A Preliminary Evaluation of the Impact of CO2 Injection in Deep Rock on Flow Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Satya Harpalani, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2005
* USD 66,426.00

CMS-0231593&lt;br/&gt;PI: Satya Harpalani&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale&lt;br/&gt;Title: "A Preliminary Evaluation of
the Impact of CO2 Injection in Deep Rock on Flow
Behavior"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Injection of
fluids in deep rock, and its flow, are important in the fields of petroleum,
mining, natural gas and environmental engineering. Flow of any fluid through
rock is very dependent on the fracture network pattern in the rock mass and the
effective stresses which are altered as the pore pressure in the rock changes.
With fluid injection, the effective stress in situ decreases causing geometric
and volumetric changes in solid and pore/fracture space, and thus a significant
increase in the permeability results. Yet, when CO2 is injected in deep
carbonaceous rock, reduction in permeability of as much as 150 times has been
observed. Injection of CO2, its movement in the fractures and entry in to the
solid matrix where it gets stored in the micropores, therefore, results in a
decrease in the fracture aperture. However, there is no evidence in the
literature that this phenomenon has been studied, or that a proper model
available to represent and effectively simulate the flow of CO2 in rock. The
basis for this research is the hypothesis that the volume of solid
coal/carbonaceous rock increases when exposed to high pressure CO2 and the
negative effect of this volumetric strain on fracture aperture is more
pronounced than the positive effect of decreased effective stress. It is further
hypothesized that these two effects are coupled. &lt;br/&gt;This research deals
with determining the effect of injecting CO2, coupled with changes in effective
stress, on solid volume/fracture compressibility and permeability of coal.
Experimental, theoretical and numerical procedures will be used to reach the
following goals: (a) To determine the volumetric strain of solid and fractures
as a result of inejction; (b) To further determine if the effects of volumetric
strain and effective stress are coupled; and (c) To determine the impact of
injection on the amount of CO2 that can be injected. &lt;br/&gt; The
experimental component of the research will include first measuring the
volumetric strain for coal exposed to increasing amounts of CO2 to determine the
effect of CO2 injection on solid and fracture volumes. This will be followed by
measuring the volumetric strain for increasing amounts of CO2 while the sample
is held under triaxial state of stress. The results will show whether external
stress prohibits/inhibits, or induces, an additional change in solid volume in
the presence of CO2, and the magnitude of the change. The theoretical part will
include using the measured volumetric changes to determine the corresponding
changes in fracture volume, and hence, the fracture porosity and permeability
for both cases using standard flow equations. The numerical part will include
utilizing the calculated permeability/porosity changes to model the impact of
volumetric strain on flow of CO2 in deep coal/carbonaceous shale over the long-
term.&lt;br/&gt; Upon successful completion of the proposed research, the
results for the stressed and unstressed tests will be compared to determine the
impact of stress on volumetric strain induced by CO2, that is, whether the two
effects are coupled resulting in an overall reduction in the fracture aperture.
Also, a relationship between pressure and porosity/permeability will become
available. This will enable a preliminary and improved simulation of the CO2
injection scenario. One graduate student will work on this project and research
findings will be published in a journal and/or conference proceedings in rock
mechanics and petroleum engineering. &lt;br/&gt;