* 0231863
* GK-12: Partners Investigating our Environment (PIE)
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Kemuel Badger, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2007
* USD 1,487,156.00

The primary focus of the project will be to develop learning teams comprised of
middle school students, teachers, graduate student fellows and Ball State
University faculty. The partnership works together on inquiry-based
environmental studies at the local, regional and global levels. The common
experience for all participants is The Global Learning and Observations to
Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. GLOBE integrates science, mathematics
and technology into its educational format. The learning teams devise a system
wide student inquiry project to investigate an environmental issue of local
significance. Schools collect local environmental data using established
scientific protocols and, through the technology of the GLOBE web site,
communicate with students from other regions and countries. These activities are
integrated with and support the Indianapolis Public School's science curriculum
frameworks. The core experiences emphasized by the project include: (1) content
in life, physical and earth/space science, (2) the inquiry process, (3) data
gathering and analysis, and (4) graphing and interpretation of scientific data.
PIE teaches students to trust the observations they make and conclusions they
draw. The broader impact of the project include its focus on bringing
environmental educational experiences to an urban student population and the
opportunity it provides for middle school students to become scientists in their
own backyard. This project is partially supported with funds from the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: GK-12 Partners
Investigating our Environment (PIE) &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Ball State
University &lt;br/&gt;PI: Kemuel Badger, Walter Smith &lt;br/&gt;Partner School
District: Indianapolis Public&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,257,156 total for 3
years&lt;br/&gt;Graduate Fellows per year: 10 &lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Urban&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: grades 6-8 &lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported
Disciplines: Biology, Geology, Natural Resources, Chemistry, and Physics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;