* 0231913
* GK-12: Cornell Science Inquiry Partnerships (CSIP)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Marianne Krasny, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,743,056.00

The Cornell Science Inquiry Partnerships (CSIP) will involve graduate fellows
working with science teachers in grades 7-12 in rural and urban schools in
upstate NY. CSIP will have a broad disciplinary base, incorporating fellows from
the Colleges of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Arts and Sciences, and
Engineering. Through CSIP, middle school and high school students will be
engaged in three types of inquiry: (1) open-ended explorations of unexplained
phenomena, (2) highly structured investigations that proceed toward known
outcomes and are designed to teach specific concepts or principles, and (3)
activities that lead to an understanding of the nature of scientific research,
(e.g., the importance of peer review). Fellows also will teach specific concepts
related to their research, the students' inquiry projects, and required course
content. GK-12 fellows will develop leadership, mentoring, and teaching skills;
the ability to work in multidisciplinary teams; and partnerships with faculty,
peers, and teachers--all of which will aid them in their research and future
employment. Teachers will enhance their ability to guide student researchers and
will develop collaborations with universy faculty and community organizations.
Through CSIP, university students, faculty, and high school and middle school
teachers will develop long-term partnerships, create new approaches to enhance
inquiry learning, and update science content taught in secondary schools. An
important outcome of CSIP will be that these new instructional materials and
models can be disseminated for the benefit of other students and teachers
nationwide.

Partner School Districts: Cortland City, Ithaca City, Newark Valley Central,
Rochester City, Seneca Falls Central, Tompkins-Seneca-Tioga BOCES, Whitney Point
Central Budget: $1,500,006 (total for 3 years) No of Fellows/year: 10 Graduate
Fellows Target Audience: Middle & High School Setting: Urban, Rural Disciplines:
Life Sciences, Earth Science, Chemistry, Physics, Engineering