* 0231325
* Development of a Pedagogical Computer Game Engine Library in Support of Computer Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* John Laird, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,913.00

This is a proof of concept project in which software modules that support the
development of a variety of computer game genres are developed. These software
modules can be used to teach undergraduates computer game design and
development. The software can also be used as a shell for explorations of many
computer science disciplines for undergraduates where students can replace one
of the modules with their own, thereby allowing them to concentrate on specific
CS disciplines ranging from basic data structures and algorithms, to database
management, issues in concurrent programming, design of network protocols,
distributed systems and security, graphics programming, user interface design,
and design of artificial intelligence algorithms; but still having the ability
to create a computer game. The computer gaming context provides a very strong
motivational construct to which most computer science students have a natural
affinity. Placing these disciplines within the construct of a computer game
helps students concretize and apply the concepts studied. The software is
developed by University of Michigan undergraduate and graduate students. The
results and software of this project are disseminated to the broader computer
games and computer science community via appropriate conferences and the
Internet. At the University of Michigan, the PI has been offering a Computer
Games course since 1997 and the coPI has been teaching a Computer Networks
course. Both PIs have developed pedagogical software packages in their
respective fields that have been used by faculties in other universities
nationwide.