* 0231291
* Materials Informatics and Combinatorial Materials Science: An Information Portal for Materials Discovery & Design
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Krishna Rajan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 02/28/2006
* USD 2,150,000.00

The International Materials Institute (IMI) for Materials Informatics &
Combinatorial Materials Science, which is based at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, is a joint effort with the University of Maryland and Florida
International University (the largest Hispanic Serving Institution in the US).
This International Materials Institute (IMI) will pursue two broad goals: i)
enabling global access, sharing, and utilization of materials information and
knowledge to solve critical problems; and ii) demonstrating and promoting new
methods (combinatorial experimentation, informatics, modeling and
databases)which dramatically enhance the performance of materials engineering
locally and internationally. In addition, the IMI is in a unique position to
meaningfully promote diversity in higher education at a national level and to
provide a significant opportunity for the IMI to showcase the diversity of the
American scientific community at the international level. The Institute will be
initiated with a consortium of laboratories that are world leaders in materials
science databases and combinatorial methodologies in materials science,
representing ten countries spread across Europe, Japan, the Middle East, and the
Americas.

The IMI will foster and coordinate collaborations on materials issues, which
strongly impact on technological progress and economic growth from globalization
in fields such as information storage and energy technologies. Illustrative
examples include new chemistries for novel magnetic materials and combinatorial
process design for functional and structural ceramics. These activities will be
carried out as international collaboration platforms that advance the
informatics/combinatorial methodology. The research themes will serve as
platforms for enhancing the scope of informatics and combinatorial methods as
well as serving to address materials related technologies that address pressing
global social and economic concerns. To ensure the integration of research and
education the IMI will interface the research efforts directly into an
accessible information network that will serve as the information technology
vehicle for education and information dissemination as part of an international
materials network. The IMI will also serve as the hub for this information
network, providing ready access through a web-based portal to support the
training of a new scientific workforce well versed in the skills of both the
materials sciences and the information sciences. A collaboratory infrastructure
will be built around the networking capabilities of INTERNET 2 so as to take
advantage of the backbone of the next generation of the information highway. To
further promote the integration of research and education, an avenue will be
provided for the international materials community to effectively use an array
of digital libraries, databases, experimental facilities and computational
expertise distributed in laboratories around the world. Within this
infrastructure, educational vehicles to exploit this rich IT environment will be
built to deliver real time access to remote instrumentation, multimedia links
between classrooms and laboratories, and simulation-based electronic learning
systems which convey the concepts and benefits of combinatorial experimentation
and materials informatics. %%%

The International Materials Institute (IMI) will introduce this new paradigm of
research and education into the materials sciences, addressing important
materials needs in the fields of energy, environment and communications. The
synergism between informatics and combinatorial experimentation provides the key
for accelerated development of materials science from "atoms to applications".
The work of the IMI will also involve the development and integration of ultra
large-scale databases and digital libraries in conjunction with new technologies
permitting highly efficient and rapid experimentation. The Institute will
exploit international materials collaborations through the use of information
technology in order to rapidly develop and discover solutions to critical
materials technologies relevant to global economic concerns. By selectively
working on topical materials science themes of global interest and interfacing
them into an accessible information network, the IMI will serve as the hub for
an internet-based international materials network. An international educational
infrastructure that is readily accessible through a web-based portal will be
established to support the training of a new scientific workforce well versed in
the skills of both the materials sciences and the information sciences. INTERNET
2 will serve as the physical infrastructure on which the IMI will build the
International Materials Information Highway.

