* 0231742
* Enhancing Scientific Literacy Through Environmental Science:  Developing Scientists and Citizens
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Richard Beal, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,479,228.00

&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and Undergraduate Fellows are working directly with Teachers
drawn from 13 participating Environmental Science and Forestry in the High
School schools to cooperatively lead course-specific, co-curricular and inter-
school environmental science classroom, laboratory, and field experiences. In
addition they are helping organize a district-wide 7th/8th grade science fair
(The Environmental Challenge) and a 13-high school student science research
symposium (The Environmental Summit) as two specific synthesizing events.
Formative evaluation information is being collected and used to monitor, take
corrective actions as necessary, and ensure the project achieves four outcomes:
improved Fellow communication and teaching-related skills; teacher content gain
and professional development; enriched student science learning; and
strengthened school/college partnerships The project uses specific instructional
and professional development activities to present environmental science themes
such as sustainability, human population growth, a global perspective, the urban
environment, and ethics. As examples: the Onondaga Lake Ecosystem Study provides
a setting for study of a severely polluted urban lake and its
restoration/recovery plan; the Onondaga City Park landscape frames vital issues
of urban ecosystem biodiversity, land use and sustainability; and the Adirondack
Highlands Regional Ecosystem Study offers opportunities for learning about the
globally significant phenomenon of ecological impacts of chronic atmospheric
deposition on aquatic and terrestrial communities and projected recovery as
Clean Air Act emissions reductions are implemented. The broader impacts of the
project include the widely diverse audience in the schools served; the Syracuse
City School District with 25,000 students is one of New York State's "Big Five"
urban school districts, while the additional partnering school districts
represent a rich mix of suburban and rural characteristics. This project is
partially supported from funds from the Directorate for Biological
Siences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Enhancing Scientific Literacy
Through Environmental Science: Developing Scientists and Citizens
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: State University of New York College of Environmental
Science and Forestry (SUNY ESF) &lt;br/&gt;PI/co-PI: Dudley J. Raynal, Charles
Spuches, Richard Beal, (SUNY) and Donna DeSiato (Syracuse City Schools)
&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Syracuse City Schools, Liverpool Central,
Chittenango Central, Marcellus Central, Fabius-Pompey Central, DeRuyter High,
Beaver River High, &lt;br/&gt;Skaneateles High &lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,295,228
total for 3 years&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per year: 8 Graduate; 4
Undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;Setting: urban, Suburban, Rural&lt;br/&gt;Target
Audience: High School&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines: Biological Sciences
&lt;br/&gt;