* 0231743
* The Prospective Value of Space Solar Power as Renewable Energy:   Implications for the Biosphere, Energy Security, and Overall Sustainable Economic Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Molly Macauley, Resources For the Future Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 08/31/2006
* USD 198,001.00

0231743 Macauley This proposal responds to the NASA/NSF request for the "study
of costs and opportunities, and how to optimize them, for understanding the net
impact of SSP on the biosphere and on sustainable growth." This proposed
research will model and analyze the relationship among space solar power (SSP)
and the earth environment, energy security, and sustainable development. It is
responsive to key areas of understanding of costs and opportunities, and how to
optimize them, for the net impact of SSP on the biosphere and on sustainable
growth. The research will involve detailed computer-based modeling and
evaluation of the economic value of SSP as a source of commercial power by the
year 2020. The research will focus on the potential effects on the biosphere
from SSP operation and the potential contribution of SSP to energy security and
power supply resiliency. Both of these factors are key determinants of the role
of SSP in sustainable economic growth around the world. To fully understand the
contribution of SSP to sustainable growth, however, requires a broader economic
context. Additional intellectual merits of the model will be explicit and the
formal incorporation of uncertainty for all parameters, including terrestrial
and SSP energy supplies, costs, biosphere and security effects, and adoption
rates towards the year 2020. The research will result in a computer-based
simulation model of the relative benefits and costs of SSP and explicit
representation of energy, environmental, and security impacts.