* 0231834
* Rhode Island Marine and Environmental Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Gail Scowcroft, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,767,254.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Rhode Island's (URI)
Graduate School of Oceanography (GSO), Office of Marine Programs (OMP), fifteen
of the university's marine and environmental academic departments and four Rhode
Island school districts are building upon a previous GK-12 partnership to
introduce K-12 students to current issues in ocean and environmental sciences
through locally created classroom modules and field exercises involving coastal,
estuarine, and fresh water ecosystems. In addition to partnering in the
classroom, Fellows and teachers are spending three weeks in a summer institute
during which Fellows present current information and concepts concerning ocean
and environmental sciences and lead field studies, while Teacher Partners
instruct the Fellows in classroom management, student assessment, and curriculum
implementation. The teams produce academic plans for integrating the Fellows and
relevant science content into the school year. A URI faculty member mentors each
Fellow and makes two visits each year to their Fellow's K-12 classroom. The
Faculty Mentors, Fellows, and Teacher Partners convene for a mini-institute each
November to build partnerships, reacquaint everyone with the goals of the
project, and investigate national and state science standards relevant to their
ocean and environmental modules. In addition to their classroom experiences
Fellows give presentations relating to their coursework, theses research and
Fellowship experiences to parents, teachers, and other members of their school
district communities in district-organized events. The broader impact of the
project includes its affects on the participating Fellows, teachers, and K-12
students and is reflected in the demography of the school districts involved.
The Fellows are learning how to present their scientific findings and interests
to a broad audience and are developing useful teaching strategies that reflect
current insight into teaching and learning. The teachers are gaining increased
confidence in their knowledge of environmental and ocean sciences, in conducting
inquiry activities and in taking groups of students out into the field. The K-12
students are gaining a new appreciation and understanding of science because of
seeing the Fellows as role models for themselves, improving their science
literacy, and engaging in a study of science that investigates global issues
that have definite local implications. The school districts involved range from
an urban district with 88% of the students eligible for free or reduced lunch
and 71% from minority populations to a suburban district with 13% eligible for
free or reduced lunch and 5% from minority populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Rhode Island Marine and Environmental Graduate
Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education (RIME)&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Rhode Island &lt;br/&gt;PI/co-PIs: John Merrill; Gail Scowcroft; Sara
Hickox&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Central Falls, Warwick, Cranston and
Narragansett&lt;br/&gt;Award: $1,499,753 total for 3 years&lt;br/&gt;Number of
Fellows/year: 11 graduate&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: K-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Urban, Suburban&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported Disciplines Involved: Ocean and
environmental sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;