* 0231790
* SGER:  An Integrated Approach to Prediction, Assessment and Inspection of Form Errors in Machined Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Christopher McCord, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2004
* USD 75,134.00

The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is to
characterize and correlate form errors in machined parts with machining process
sequences and process variables used for generating the form. This information
will be used to: (a) Provide feedback and establish clear guidelines for
reducing form errors by optimal selection of process sequences and process
parameters, (b) Develop methods for individualized optimal inspection plans for
assessing the true value of each form error that are process sequence/ process
variables specific, and (c) Develop form process capability indices for
processes/machines. For this research, two types of form errors, namely,
Circularity and Cylindricity, will be considered. The domain of processes
considered will be limited to form features generated by conventional hole
making processes and turning processes. These form profiles/surfaces will be
modeled using analytical Fourier Models and Generalized Cylinders. Attributes of
profiles/surfaces such as general shape, number of lobes, amplitude of lobes,
eccentricity, evenness of lobe spacing, form errors, will be extracted by
mapping profiles to a novel s-theta and psi-s domains. A Neural network based
approach will be used for training the system to predict standardized profiles,
ranges of standardized attributes (lobes, amplitude etc.) as well as range of
form errors based on process sequence and parameters. For each family of
standardized profiles, a Design of Experiments (DOE) based approach will be used
for determining the optimum combination of sample size, sampling method, and
evaluation algorithm (least square or minimum zone) for form inspection that is
process specific for each profile family, and can estimate the true form error
with a certain level of confidence. A novel combinatorial optimization
formulation in conjunction with Genetic Algorithms (GA) will be used to
calculate minimum zones of the form errors. Finally, based on standardized
profiles and form errors for each profile family, a form process capability
index will be developed for each of the form errors.

If successful, this research will provide a basis for predicting form profiles
and errors based on process variables and sequence. This could result in
selection of optimal process plans/variables for reducing form errors. This
research will also provide guidelines for optimal inspection plans for assessing
form errors that are specific to the process creating the form. Finally, the
form process capability indices developed can be used for optimal manufacturing
tolerance allocation, design centering and machine selection. Such a plan can
readily be used by designers as well as practitioners on the shop floor.