* 0231016
* POC: Interactive Video Assignments for In-Class Experimentation in Developmental Cognition
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Gail Gottfried, LessonLab, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 11/30/2004
* USD 74,999.00

Inventive computer-based technology has been developed over the last few years
to allow students to design and conduct supervised experiments within their
undergraduate courses. This is a desirable trend because encouraging students to
view psychology as a science enhances their critical thinking and hypothesis-
testing skills. At present, however, resources for classroom experimentation in
developmental cognition are scarce, largely due to logistical difficulties that
arise with children as research subjects. To fill this gap, in this proof of
concept project we are developing Interactive Video Assignments -- a digital
library accompanied by researcher-designed activities that guide students'
interactions with the videos, ultimately allowing virtual experimentation with a
diverse group of children, both longitudinally and cross-culturally. To test our
concept, we are using LessonLab's innovative technology to develop two
interactive video assignments.

The primary components of the project include a) videotaping children
participating in related experimental tasks (i.e., the theory of mind
Assignment) and/or in naturalistic settings (i.e., the language acquisition
Assignment); b) digitizing and transcribing the videos; c) compiling a digitized
set of empirical readings and researcher interviews to accompany and enhance the
videos; d) creating integrated, concept-based tasks that encourage students to
interact with the resources in the digital library and to think critically about
the research methods as well as the behavioral outcomes; and e) conducting
assessments of the prototype based on student/faculty interest and engagement as
well as educational outcomes. CD-ROMs containing the digitized resources will be
distributed to our beta testers at universities and colleges, along with access
to the interactive tasks through the LessonLab network portal via licensed
password.