* 0231349
* PLTL National Dissemination: Building a National Network
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Victor Strozak, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,632,880.00

As the faculty, staff, and administrators of institutions of higher learning
respond to the call to shift to student-centered pedagogy, there is a need to
inform them of robust and flexible curriculum reforms that have documented
success. This project seeks to create a national dissemination network for the
Peer-Lead Team Learning (PLTL) teaching strategy. &lt;br/&gt;PLTL is an
instructional model that emphasizes student achievement through active learning
in a peer-led workshop. The workshops are integrated into regular coursework and
provide an opportunity for students to engage in the workshop discussion and
problem solving activities under the guidance of a trained undergraduate leader.
&lt;br/&gt;In prior work, the PLTL Workshop Project has managed to stimulate
interest, deepen understanding, assist implementation, and develop new
leadership in PLTL in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics across a wide
range of institutions. The project has also built partnerships that enable
science students to broaden their career and professional interests and has
introduced the pedagogy to the high school sector. In this phase of the project,
the emphasis is on consolidating this informal network and engaging this faculty
fully in the national dissemination effort. The network of faculty committed to
PLTL will also conduct research regarding student learning in the context of a
well-defined pedagogical model. &lt;br/&gt;A final goal of this project is to
mobilize the project network to increase the number of peer-leaders who join a
teacher preparation program, thus creating a large nationwide pool of science
and mathematics majors who may become highly qualified teachers. &lt;br/&gt;