* 0231751
* GK-12: North Mississippi GK-8 Project
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Maurice Eftink, University of Mississippi
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,775,832.00

The Fellows are familiarizing themselves with best-practices pedagogy as well as
state and national standards for mathematics and science as they work with the
local teachers to develop interdisciplinary mathematics and science materials
for all classes at the K-8 level. These modules are consistent with state and
national standards and try, as far as is possible, to incorporate the theme of
the Mississippi River basin in order to provide continuity through the
curriculum and help to bring home the impact of math and science on the
student's lives; an example of the project's intellectual merit.. The Fellows
work with six schools: Bramlett, Oxford, and Central Elementary schools and
Oxford Middle School (City of Oxford Schools) and Lafayette Elementary and
Middle Schools (Lafayette County Schools). There are two key/contact teachers
(one math, one science) at each of the middle schools and one key/contact
teacher at each of the elementary schools. The broader impacts of the activities
reach a number of beneficiaries. The Fellows are developing: improved
communication skills; an understanding of good pedagogy; and an ability to
effectively use technology as a teaching / learning tool and to use inquiry-
based teaching and learning tools. Participating teachers are increasing their
understanding of STEM related subjects; are demonstrating an increased use of
inquiry-based teaching and learning tools; and are gaining access to a variety
of professional development opportunities (ASTM, NSTA and other conferences). In
addition there is an increasingly strong relationship developing between the
University of Mississippi STEM-related departments and local school systems.
Part of the support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics
and Physical Sciences

Title: The North Mississippi GK-8 Project Institution: The University of
Mississippi PI/Co-PIs: John O'Haver / Maurice Eftink, Cliff Ochs, David Rock
Partner School Districts: Lafayette County, Oxford Funding: $1,499.832 Number of
Fellows / Year: 12 Graduate Target Audience K-8 NSF Supported Disciplines:
Mathematics, chemistry, geology, biology, physics, engineering, computer
science, economics