* 0231543
* Paleogene Sedimentary Basin Development in the Bolivian Altiplano and Implications for Initial Mountain Building in the Central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Brian Horton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2002
* USD 18,821.00

&lt;br/&gt;9908003&lt;br/&gt;Brian K. Horton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Altiplano plateau of the central Andes contains up to 10 km of Tertiary
sedimentary rocks and is arguably the type example of a sedimentary basin in the
center of a contractional orogenic belt. Despite numerous hypotheses regarding
the history of the Altiplano's surface, particularly the timing and mechanism(s)
of surface uplift, there has been no systematic analysis of the exposed Tertiary
sedimentary rocks which ultimately contain the most complete record of surface
processes. This project aims to evaluate the Paleogene succession of the north-
central Altiplano in order to provide an understanding of the early-middle
Tertiary tectonic-sedimentary evolution of the region and a detailed assessment
of local stratigraphic geometries (including thickening trends, facies
transitions, and unconfonnities) and regional correlations that will aid
syntheses of the tectonic-sedimentary development of the central Andes. The
project will evaluate four hypotheses regarding Paleogene basin development in
the Altiplano. First, that it was a single integrated foreland basin receiving
sediment from an early fold-thrust belt to the west. Second, that it was
composed of a number of sub-basins, probably related to strike-slip deformation,
that received sediment from localized source areas. Third, that it was a rift
system flanked by sediment sources to the east and west. Or fourth, that it
represents simple ponding (or "trapping") of sediment in a closed topographic
basin. The hypotheses are distinguishable on the basis of the age of the
deposits, sediment dispersal patterns, location and composition of sediment
source areas, and subsidence histories-unknowns that will be determined by
stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and 4OAr/39Ar geochronologic research. This study
will place constraints on the early-middle Tertiary history of the plateau, thus
improving modeling efforts aimed at understanding Altiplano uplift, and would
provide a conceptual basis (and possibly new hypotheses) for the origin of
sedimentary basins in the cores of mountain
belts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;