* 0231766
* Collaborative Workshop: Research for Multidisciplinary Principles in Manufacturing, January 9-11, 2003, Birmingham, Alabama
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Jacqueline Isaacs, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 10/31/2003
* USD 24,401.00

This award supports a workshop to be held in conjunction with the 2003 NSF
Design, Service and Manufacturing Grantees and Research Conference in
Birmingham, Alabama, January 9 - 11, 2003. It is expected that 60 invited
participants will attend this 2 day workshop, including international
participants. The objective of this workshop is to establish an integrated
approach that captures the fundamentals of environmentally benign manufacturing
(EBM), directed beyond finding particular solutions to problems, to the creation
of a research agenda to achieve behavior that incorporates these fully
integrated concepts. This workshop will take an educational and
multidisciplinary approach to understanding attributes, and awareness of the use
of, four topical areas as the basis of EBM. These areas are 1) product
performance, / technology; 2) supply chain dynamics; 3) decision-making (with
organizational dynamics) and 4) environment. These four threads are to be
represented by individuals with expertise in each fields, who will then work on
common product topics to create the framework for this integrated
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is a major step in implementing the
findings of the Environmentally Benign Manufacturing World Technologies
Evaluation Center (WTEC) study published in 2001.