* 0231507
* Integrative Metabolism: An Interactive Learning Tool for Biochemistry, Physiology and Nutrition
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Gale Carey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 02/28/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This "proof of concept" project is developing a computer-animated,
pedagogically-based, interactive learning prototype called "Integrative
Metabolism". The purpose of this prototype is to enhance student exposure to and
understanding of metabolism at two- and four-year undergraduate institutions
comprised of diverse male and female students. By integrating nutrition,
physiology and biochemistry, the prototype overcomes barriers to student
engagement and understanding of metabolism. Two objectives are: (1) to produce a
prototype that will allow self-paced learning of science terms and engage the
user by framing nutrition, physiology, and biochemistry within everyday
lifestyle choices, and (2) to overlay case-based, interactive learning onto the
prototype to promote effective learning. Female and male students and faculty
from a 2- and 4-year school are collaborating to technically enrich and
pedagogically enhance a sample of this prototype developed this past year. Using
a case-based and learner-centered design, students explore metabolism at the
whole body, organ, cellular and enzyme levels. The intellectual merit of this
project lies in its ability to demystify metabolism and engage students in risk-
free, engaging and interactive learning. The broader impact resulting from this
project is an infusion of enthusiasm and understanding of metabolism to our
youth that could influence not only their choice of careers, but also their
health. Results from this "proof of concept" project will serve as a basis for
full development and a commercial publisher.&lt;br/&gt;