* 0231406
* Design and Development of a Computer-Based Materials Science Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Edward Anderson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 02/28/2006
* USD 74,913.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proof-of-concept project is to develop a
software virtual laboratory tool that is based on emerging learning theories and
effective pedagogy. The tool may be of use by engineering students in
engineering disciplines to enhance their understanding of engineering concepts,
analysis methods, and problem solving procedures that are used in material
science and engineering courses and laboratories. All of the normal laboratory
operations and functions such as following procedures, using equipment,
following safety rules, making measurements, and performing analysis of data are
performed in a virtual laboratory environment. The software development approach
is focused on the NSF theme of integrating technology into education using
existing software technology, digital video and still photography techniques,
simulation, and a logical and structured approach to the presentation of
materials laboratory tasks and objectives. A decision tree approach is
incorporated at various levels of the virtual experiments to allow the user to
make decisions (correct or incorrect), observe the results of the decision, and
perform the experiment in an iterative process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software tool to serves as a virtual experience that may be used in conjunction
with a lecture course that does not have a laboratory element, or as a
preparation tool for an existing laboratory course. The main objective of the
virtual experience is to facilitate a self-paced discovery environment in which
the user can verify physical concepts and learn laboratory procedures through
both correct and incorrect decisions and answers. From previous work the
investigators have developed one virtual experiment on metallography techniques
that requires a memory space of approximately 200 Megabytes. In this project,
four additional virtual experiments will be developed based on important
concepts in materials science and engineering. (The storage requirements for
these experiments should also be about 200 Megabytes each.) The software tool
will be evaluated for its effectiveness in meeting learning objectives for a
diverse group of students including women and members of underrepresented groups
at Texas Tech University, Tuskegee University, and Drexel University. The
software is to be disseminated in national and international markets, as an
educational supplement accompanying a materials science textbook through McGraw-
Hill publishing company.&lt;br/&gt;