* 0231807
* Investigating the Interrelated Development of Mathematics and Literacy in Urban Secondary Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Helen Doerr, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,062,084.00

The central idea in this proposed work is to conceptualize the nature and
development of teachers' knowledge as they, in turn, learn about how students in
culturally diverse urban secondary schools negotiate the literacy demands of
reform-based mathematics curricula. We make three central claims as a rationale
for this proposed work. First, the mathematical tasks that students and teachers
encounter in the reform-based secondary school curricula represent a significant
shift from traditional curricula in terms of the literacy demands they make on
students and teachers. Second, students in urban settings, where literacy and
mathematics achievement often lags behind achievement of students in other
settings, are at great risk for not being able to meet the increased literacy
demands of the reform-based curricula and of the communications standard put
forward by the NCTM. Third, secondary mathematics teachers are underprepared to
mediate the intersections between mathematics and literacy. Our driving
perspective in this work will be to understand the nature of what teachers need
to know to support students' development of mathematical communication in ways
that lead to effective learning of algebra and to understand how it is that this
knowledge is developed among a community of urban mathematics teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will investigate these research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do teachers understand student use of the
language of algebra for mathematical communication when using reform-based
mathematics curricula in diverse, urban settings?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do
teachers' understandings about the language of algebra for mathematical
communication develop in ways that lead to the effective teaching of
algebra?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will use qualitative research methods to
explore the sociocultural aspects of mathematics communication. These analyses
will describe the nature and development of the teachers' learning, in the
context of the students' learning of algebra, using reform- based curricula. We
will use quantitative measures of mathematics and literacy performance to
discern relative effectiveness of teachers' instructional strategies that attend
to the literacy demands of the curricula. This study will address important
theoretical issues in understanding the underlying structures of language in the
acquisition of algebraic thinking and learning. The analyses of the data on the
learning and growth of teachers through an examination of the artifacts of
practice will contribute to theoretical issues as well as pragmatic issues in
the use of reformed-based curricula by secondary mathematics teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be: (1) a model
and underlying principles for how teachers acquire knowledge in areas in which
they are underprepared; (2) processes for teachers to analyze mathematical tasks
and their contexts in terms of their literacy demands; (3) principles for
transforming their analyses into practice; (4) principles for ways of using
multimedia cases of practice to support teacher