* 0231780
* Learning Sciences and Brain Research - A Focus on Research in Literacy, Mathematical Thought and Lifelong Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Bruno Della-Chiesa, Organization For Economic Cooperation & Development
* Standard Grant
* Gregg E. Solomon
* 09/30/2006
* USD 388,800.00

One of the main barriers to progress in creating synergy between discoveries in
cognitive/brain sciences and innovation in educational practice has been a lack
of well orchestrated exchanges between communities of researchers and
practitioners who can enact change. For the past two years, the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and more specifically its Centre
for Educational Research Innovation (CERI), with a financial and substantive
support from NSF, have been actively engaged in a programme which has
endeavoured towards translating the findings from brain research into the
formation of public educational policy.

Thus far, relevant and targeted neuroscientific findings have emerged from the
project. Research in reading has begun to demonstrate that comprehension of
written documents can be improved with new teaching strategies. Mathematical
skills, linked to both linguistic competence and visuo-spatial representations,
can be addressed more efficiently. Neuroplasticity is more prevalent than
previously recognised: this has a tremendous importance for educational policies
on lifelong learning, especially in adults.

The project is now in its second phase (July 2002 - June 2005), with the focus
on forming innovative networks that seek synergistic points of contact between
current domains of research in cognitive and brain science on the one hand, and
education practice and policy on the other. That might be particularly relevant
to the creation accessible theories of expertise and development of foundational
educational abilities, and might help address recurring educational problems and
difficulties. In order to meet the challenges of the second phase, the project
will undertake a three-dimensional approach: firstly, it aims to be problem
focused (grounded on particular educational challenges that may be considered
foundational in education), secondly, trans-disciplinary (involving a wide
collection of researchers from different disciplines), and thirdly to maintain
an international scope (involving researchers from over 20 different countries).

Three separate networks of leading scientists have been formed. They are to work
on inter-related topics. The two first will address the fundamental abilities in
comprehending written materials and numerical information. The major activities
of these networks will be centred around three global goals:

- Synthesis of existing and emerging findings from cognitive and brain science
that represent consensus knowledge about brain mechanisms of foundational skills
in literacy and numeracy. - Dissemination of information to a wide audience of
educational policy makers, curriculum designers, educational researchers,
educators, and other brain and cognitive researchers. This effort will result in
several publications, an open website and open web forum. - Innovation, in
providing a forum for educators to challenge cognitive neuroscientists to tackle
questions of direct educational relevance and providing a forum for policy-
makers to challenge cognitive neuroscientists and educators to advise on
questions of educational investments at national and local levels.

The project also aims to actively pursue data sources from research to
synthesise existing and emerging findings from cognitive and brain science, and
to dispel popular misunderstandings of the brain and its relationship to
learning and teaching. There will be a strong emphasis on broad dissemination
and communication of the research findings by way of establishing collaborative
focus groups and forums for educators and policy-makers whereby they may
challenge cognitive neuroscientists and exchange questions of educational
relevance.

The project will capitalise on OECD/CERI.s proven track record in record in (a)
convening meetings of leading international experts (which are to be held
throughout the duration of the project); (b) communicating findings to senior
policy-makers; (c) disseminating best practices; (d) informing decision making;
and (e) translating complex research findings into practical application. The
rich and complex research findings will be translated into practical
application, in order to build more specific curricula based upon brain research
that will be accepted by educational policy-makers as well as practitioners and
end-users.