* 0231105
* Helping Students Make Connections:  Biology Cases that Link with Chemistry and Math
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Lillian Tong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2005
* USD 74,753.00

Research in the life sciences is becoming more and more interdisciplinary,
relying on knowledge from physics, chemistry, and mathematics. However, as
undergraduates, most future scientists study these disciplines in a series of
unrelated courses that do not help them learn how to apply the tools and key
concepts from one discipline to another. This proof-of-concept project is
creating and testing learning materials, specifically a set of life science
cases, that require students to use information from their math and chemistry
courses to address tough biological problems. This teaching/learning approach
aims to foster the development of critical thinking, teamwork and communication
skills. The cases are being implemented and assessed in the context of Biology
Interest Groups (BIGs), a UW-Madison program in which first year students co-
enroll in calculus, chemistry, and a special topics biology seminar. A faculty
team with representatives from biology, chemistry and mathematics is developing
cases on Infectious Disease, Ecology, Food Production and Exercise Physiology.
Topics emphasize real world problems and are drawn from the research disciplines
of the case developers. Overall project evaluation is assessing student
attitudes and learning, and determine the success of the team process for
development. Project outcomes will be shared with science/math faculty at the
UW-Madison and other UW-System campuses statewide.