* 0231900
* GK-12 PRISM Problems &amp; Research to Integrate Science &amp; Mathematics
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Preetha Ram, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,876,387.00

Basing their work on their expertise in science and mathematics, teams composed
of teachers, and graduate and undergraduate Fellows are developing new materials
and adopting and adapting existing materials for problem- based learning (PBL)
and interactive case based learning (ICBL) cases that integrate grade
appropriate science and math content into locally relevant classroom modules.
The Fellows are assisting teachers in introducing and testing these cases and
problems in a variety of middle and high schools in the Atlanta area. In
preparation for this work, the teams are participating in workshops on PBL and
ICBL pedagogy, as well as teacher- designed introductions to urban education.
Each team is collaborating on developing plans that include a needs assessment,
an action plan, an implementation plan and a communication plan. The teams are
also providing professional development for other teachers in the school. The
broader impacts of these activities include benefits to the Fellows, the
teachers and the K-12 students involved. The Fellow are gaining the skills and
knowledge necessary to: engage in active learning teaching pedagogies and
reflective practice; practice the teamwork required for interdisciplinary
science collaboration that leads to success in modern scientific research;
communicate science effectively to a broader audience; and to include outreach
activities in their career goals when they are practicing scientists. The
teachers are enhancing and updating their Math /Science content knowledge and
are sharing this knowledge with other teachers. They are benefiting as well from
enhanced articulation and communication between middle school and high school
teachers and between teachers and college faculty and students. The high school
and middle school students involved are benefiting not only from the classroom
modules being developed but are also interacting with role models to whom they
can relate, leading to improved student interest in science and mathematics
careers. Part of the support for this project comes from the Directorate for
Mathematics and Physical Sciences &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Problems and
Research to Integrate Science and Mathematics (PRISM) &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Emory University &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Joseph B. Justice; Patricia Marsteller,
Preetha Ram &lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: DeKalb County, City Schools of
Decatur, Fulton County, Atlanta Public&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,493,055&lt;br/&gt;#
of Fellows/yr: 10 Graduate, 10 Undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Urban&lt;br/&gt;Grade Band: middle-high school&lt;br/&gt;Disciplines Affected:
Science and Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;