* 0231611
* GK-12 Learning Partnerships: Creating Problem Centered, Interdisciplinary Learning Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Joan Gosink, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,680,522.00

At the request of the hosting school district, teams that include a practicing
teacher, a college faculty member, a graduate student and an advanced
undergraduate student are developing problem centered, interdisciplinary
learning environments that focus on the application of mathematics to earth
science and engineering for middle school students. Through workshops and
classroom experiences, this project is improving the instruction of middle
school and high school students and the preparation of future teachers and
faculty. The broader impacts of these activities include enriching: the teacher
preparation experiences of undergraduate and graduate students who are
interested in pursuing pre-college or college education as a potential career;
the content, application and interdisciplinary knowledge of practicing science
and mathematics teachers with respect to the application of mathematics to earth
science and engineering; the learning experience of middle school students by
creating problem centered, interdisciplinary learning environments that focus on
the application of mathematics to earth science and engineering. Part of the
support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences.

Title of Project: GK-12 Learning Partnerships: Creating Problem Centered,
Interdisciplinary Learning Environments Institution: Colorado School of Mines
PI/Co-PI: Barbara M. Moskal (PI); Barbara B. Bath, Joan P. Gosink, Cathy Skokan
Colorado School of Mines; Tina Falconer, Adam's County School District School
Districts Involved: Adams County District 50 Total Funding: $1,494,022 total for
3 years Number of Fellows per year: 8 graduate students and 8 undergraduate
students Target audience: grades 6-8 Setting: Suburban, rural NSF supported
disciplines involved: Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Engineering and
Geophysics