* 0231245
* A Collaborative Project: Development of an Undergraduate Data Mining Course
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Guozhu Dong, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 12/31/2004
* USD 20,489.00

Data mining is an emerging field. The knowledge of data mining has been in
demand in the IT industry and in new areas like bioinformatics, information
assurance, and homeland security where data are massive. Traditionally, data
mining courses are offered at the graduate level; now, this type of course is
needed at the undergraduate level to increase interest in this area and address
labor market demands. This collaborative project between Arizona and Wright
State Universities develops an undergraduate data mining course for junior and
seniors. The objectives are: develop a course that can be taught either by
semester ASU or quarter WSU term, establish vehicles and approaches to increase
student retention in the course, and promote data mining skills essential to
problem solving. The objectives are accomplished in several ways: designing a
pre-assessment instrument measuring student knowledge of data mining, and on-
line tutorials; develop course materials that will enhance problem solving
skills through reflection, critique, exercises, discerning theory from practice;
and using a continuous evaluation process that addresses not only student
achievement but also enrollment retention. Input from leading IT industry is
used to incorporate immediate practical needs. The results of the project
including evaluation are published via various means. Notes, supporting
materials, projects, and exams are made available on the course web site.