* 0231358
* Material and Energy Flow in Engineered and Natural Systems:   Textbook Proposal for a Focused Introductory Environmental Science Course Incorporating Laboratory &amp; Computer Mode
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Curtis Bohlen, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 04/30/2007
* USD 74,856.00

Public policy issues involving aspects of environmental science are
characterized by their complexity and by the changing nature of the day's
critical problem. Traditional environmental science textbooks that catalog
current issues are useful in making students literate about today's problems but
do little to prepare students to solve or think critically about tomorrow's
undiscovered problems. We are developing and teaching a course structured to
teach students how to conceptualize and tackle scientific problems in the
environment. We wish to turn our work into a textbook that includes suggested
laboratory/field projects designed to introduce students to experimental
approaches and their constraints as well as suggested modeling problems using
the user friendly modeling software Stella. We already have a conceptual core
for our project, several successful laboratory/field exercises that incorporate
sequential development of skills and sophistication, and a number of problems
and cases. The aim of this project is to develop additional field/laboratory
exercises; collect more current environmental data to support problems,
laboratory modules and student inquiry; develop new problems; write additional
computer models; write our ideas in chapter form; discuss our work with others
and discuss the work of others with them; and develop and implement methods for
judging our work's effectiveness&lt;br/&gt;