* 0231883
* GK-12, Wayne State University/ Detroit Public Schools Science and Mathematics Teaching Fellowship Program
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* D. Carl Freeman, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,636,265.00

Building upon and expanding a previous GK-12 project (DGE 9979550), this
partnership between the Colleges of Science and Education at Wayne State
University (WSU) and the administration and teachers of the Detroit Public
Schools (DPS) Fellow/teacher teams is working in two Detroit inner city middle
schools, (Foch and Hally). The teams negotiate the role of each team member and
discuss science and mathematics content and concepts; effective classroom
management techniques; and teaching methods and the research on teaching and
learning that undergirds them during summer workshops in pedagogy and classroom
management and academic year Math and Science workshops. The subject foci of
these workshops are determined by the requirements of state standards and the
needs of the middle school classes. They provide fellows with content knowledge
outside of their major and give the teacher and fellow teams a more coherent
view of middle school math and science. In addition to their work with teachers
in the classroom, the Fellows organize and participate in family mathematics and
science nights, assist with science fairs, and forge ties between the schools
and community based outreach organizations, such as The Greening of Detroit,
Earth Force and Friends of the Rouge. Wayne State science, math and engineering
faculty visit the partner schools and conduct science and math activities with
the students. The broader impacts of the program include the strong partnership
being forged between the students and faculty of Wayne State and the students
and faculty of two urban schools with predominantly African American student
populations and the many community groups, including parents, it is enlisting in
its effort to build a local comprehensive learning community that nourishes
children's interests and abilities in mathematics, the sciences and technology.
Overall broader student and teacher contacts are being developed and there is an
increase in the number of faculty participating in outreach activities. Part of
the support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and
Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: GK-12, Detroit Science and
Mathematics Fellowship Program, &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Wayne State University
&lt;br/&gt;PI/co-PI: Regina Zibuck, PI; Maria Ferreira, Carl Freeman, Wayne
State; Karen Harrison, Nancy Varner, Detroit Public Schools&lt;br/&gt;Funding:
$1,498,265 total for 3 years&lt;br/&gt;Partner School District: Detroit Public
&lt;br/&gt;Fellows per year: 6 graduate and 14 undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;Target
grades: 6-8 &lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines
involved: Science and Mathematics &lt;br/&gt;