* 0232083
* U.S.-Ukraine Workshop:  Information Technology in Ukraine:  From a Worthy Past to a Bright Future
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Anne Fitzpatrick, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 10/31/2003
* USD 21,660.00

This is a US-Ukrainian workshop, "Information Technology in Ukraine: From a
Worthy Past to a Bright Future." The principal investigator is Dr. Anne
Fitzpatrick from the University of New Mexico. Her Ukrainian collaborator is Dr.
Boris Malinovsky from the Glushkov Institute of Cybernetics in
Kiev.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will draw together computing scientists
and scholars not only from Ukraine and the U.S. but also from the former Soviet
countries of Russia, Armenia, Moldova, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Georgia. Other
participants are expected from Bulgaria, Hungary, Great Britain and Germany. The
workshop will allow the participants to compare the evolution of computer
technology in two very different cultures and determine what it meant to pursue
the field of computer science in the Soviet Union with far more certainty than
was ever possible before. It will also allow the scholars to establish contacts,
learn, and publish about a very important and little studied part of computer
history and the history of Soviet and Ukrainian science and technology. Only the
last decade has allowed former Soviet scholars to uncover and openly discuss the
historical aspects of significant science and engineering projects undertaken in
the USSR, much less give foreigners easier access to this information. The
detailed investigation of the success and failure story of the Soviet computing
can be instrumental for an orientation in the nature and perils of other hi-tech
communities under totalitarian rule of today." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project in the history of science fulfills the program objectives of bringing
together leading experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.