* 0232669
* SBIR Phase I:    C5:    An Educational Simulation Architecture For Wireless Handhelds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Alexander Repenning, AGENTSHEETS INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project uses wireless handheld
devices that are interconnected to create an educational simulation architecture
called C5, supporting simulations that are compact, connected, continuous,
customizable, and collective. C5 tightly connects four information technologies:
handheld devices to run individual and distributed simulations; a desktop
computer with a wireless network hub acting as the simulation manager; the Web
as a live data and information source; and. end-user customization entailing
customization of simulations and the integration of real time Web information
into simulations. Because next generation handheld devices are sophisticated
regarding the following features: speed, networking, and display; they are
capable, respectively, of running complex simulations, of running distributed
simulations over fast wireless networks, and of displaying high resolution
color. Thus, handheld devices promise tools well beyond electronic versions of
paper and pencil applications. Individuals can run handheld versions of
interactive simulations and collectively create advanced distributed
simulations. The research objectives of this project are to explore cognitive
(interface), pedagogical (classroom), technical (hardware and software) and
commercial issues for handheld-based simulations. &lt;br/&gt; The proffered
education simulation architecture portends the revolution to come; it has the
potential to provide cost effective information technology enabling learning and
scientific exploration in wide range of fields, such as life sciences, biology,
health, political science, and economics. While the project initially focuses on
K-12, it ultimately aims to generate the more general lifelong learning markets
that include distance learning, secondary education, home schooling and
corporate training.&lt;br/&gt;