* 0232043
* SBIR Phase I:    Next Generation Binary Decision Diagrams (BDD)-Based Logic Optimization System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Qiushuang Zhang, LogicMill Technology
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need to
synthesize very large silicon chips designs in very short time. Currently
available commercial synthesis tools are based on the methodology, data
structures, and algorithms that are predominantly algebraic (as opposed to more
efficient Boolean methods), and are characterized by slow run time and
inadequate design quality. This SBIR project is devoted to the development of
efficient algorithms and techniques for logic synthesis based on modern BDD data
structures. At the heart of the algorithms is a novel BDD decomposition theory,
recently developed by company researchers. The resulting commercial product is a
software solution for very fast, high-performance logic synthesis; as indicated
by initial experiments it will be at least an order of magnitude faster than
software tools available on the market today. The main version of the product is
a core engine for logic synthesis used in several classes of applications:
ASICs, microprocessors, and FPGAs. Another version of the tool will target
formal verification, which also relies on fast logic optimization. The logic
optimization engine can be plugged into any existing synthesis flow utilized by
customers and offered by the existing EDA software vendors The SBIR Phase I
project will stimulate research in design automation and inject much needed
innovation in the EDA industry. This work will culminate in the development of a
next generation, high-performance logic synthesis system that will have a
significant commercial impact on the EDA tools market. This activity will also
have important educational impact. It will educate a new generation of design
engineers and students by exposing them to new design methodologies and
innovations pioneered by this project.