* 0232733
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Synthesis and Processing of Nanocrystalline Hydroxyapatite
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Edward Ahn, Angstrom Medica, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop processes
and controls for producing commercial quantities of nanostructured
hydroxyapatite (HAP) biomaterials suitable for load bearing orthopedic and
dental applications. Though hydroxyapatite's osteoconductivity has generated
interest in many clinical applications, conventionally processed hydroxyapatite
materials have been limited by their poor sinterability and lack of mechanical
strength attributed to poor phase purity and homogeneity. By controlling
physical processes such as the method of mixing of reactants, particle recovery
and synthesis conditions during the chemical precipitation of HAP, the
crystallinity, stoichiometry and particle morphology of HAP will be optimized
for mechanical strength. Hydroxyapatite optimized for mechanical strength will
be nanocrystalline and possess increased chemical and thermal stability; these
properties will lead to enhanced sinterability and minimal grain growth. As a
result, fully dense, nanocrystalline HAP monoliths possessing superior chemical
homogeneity, microstructural uniformity, ultrafine grain sizes and minimized
flaw sizes will be achieved. In the final result, the nanocrystalline HAP
monoliths produced will provide superior compressive (900 MPa) and bending (200
MPa) strengths as well as fracture toughness (1.3 MPam1/2).

Commercially, these nanostructured materials can be formed into constructs and
utilized in experimental models commonly employed to validate orthopedic
implants. Nanostructured hydroxyapatites will contribute to better osteoblast
attachment, proliferation and mineralization.