* 0232246
* SBIR Phase I: Authentication of Mobile Video Recordings (MVRs) Based on Real-time Hybrid Digital Watermarking
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Zhenyu Wu, MY EZ Communications LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,768.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
developing an authentication technology that enables the deployment of a digital
Mobile Video Recordings (MVR) system. MVR data are collected daily by a very
large fleet of patrol vehicles operated by the law enforcement community across
the country that record events involving contact with civilians. Due to
staggering costs associated with operating current analog, non-indexing systems,
there is an overwhelming need for a computerized digital MVR technology. Its
deployment, however, is hindered by legal acceptance, because a digital medium
can be easily altered. Authentication plays a critical enabling role by
providing an effective means to safeguard the integrity of MVR content. The
objective of this research project is to develop a prototype for real-time MVR
authentication software, based on a novel, hybrid watermarking algorithm, that
integrates seamlessly with existing digital infrastructure. This algorithm is
specifically designed to meet stringent operational requirements set forth by
next generation MVR system. It achieves progressively varying robustness in one
single watermark by means of error-correcting signature coding and rate-
distortion guided bit embedding. It combines fragile watermark's ability to
localize content tampering and robust watermark's ability to characterize the
severity of content alteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MVR authentication,
envisioned in this SBIR project, provides an enabling technology for the
deployment of a digital MVR system for law enforcement agencies across the
country that is more effective and much less costly to operate than the current
analog system. The company's technology is inspired by and modeled after a set
of realistic and specific requirements of the MVR program of the New Jersey (NJ)
State Police, and its software-only solution is designed to integrate easily and
seamlessly with its digital infrastructure. It provides a secure and economical
mechanism for safeguarding MVR content integrity that is minimally invasive to
the daily routines of patrol officers and MVR administrators. This NJ State
Police and similar agencies across the country can easily adapt this technology
so as to realize enormous cost saving through the deployment of a digital MVR
system. &lt;br/&gt;