* 0232833
* SBIR Phase I:  Highmarks Advanced Planning and Scheduling System for Schools
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Jonathan Snyder, Highmarks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop an innovative technology to radically change the organization of
teaching and learning at schools; in particular, grade 7-12 public and private
schools in the United States. The main problem to be solved concerns the current
.assembly-line. nature of most schools, whereby semester and quarterly classes
force students with greatly different needs to proceed at roughly the same pace
through a curriculum. This largely inflexible pace, combined with a lack of
transparency of student needs across semesters/quarters, leads to a greatly
stratified typical class as each student accumulates his own unique gaps in
meeting the learning objectives of the school. Based on teacher interviews,
Highmarks found a typical classroom of students in a given semester/quarter
class can be broken down into 3-6 subgroups of readiness to learn. Most teachers
cannot effectively teach to these subgroups simultaneously, and they do not
receive enough training from those teachers who, being masters in the art of
teaching, can handle these classes. A primary objective of the prototype
proffered is to ensure that every class consists of a group of students fully
ready to learn the material being taught; that is who have no key gaps in
knowledge so far as the current material is concerned. To enable this to happen,
the proposed technology will overhaul how classes are assembled at a school,
making the scheduling and organization of teaching and learning far more dynamic
than it is today. With a similar technique, the proposed technology will also
have an impact on the learning disabilities and bilingual sectors, by making it
far easier to integrate special needs students into regular classes. The
prototype will also overhaul teacher training at schools, because teachers will
no longer be locked. into quarterly and semester classes; and in-house, hands-on
training will become a much greater percentage of their daily schedules. So not
only will the standard .readiness to learn of a class be vastly improved; the
standard .readiness to teach. of an average teacher will also be greatly
enhanced. The combination of enhanced readiness to learn and readiness to teach
should build more effective and enjoyable schools, in a way that is measurable
by all standard assessment regimens including standardized national, state or
local tests. The prototype will be highly scalable, aligned with K-12 content
standards and will feature the direct, heavy involvement of curriculum and
teacher designers.

The kind of radical change in school scheduling proposed could provide a
critical step toward the goal of "leaving no child behind."