* 0232640
* STTR Phase I:  Nanoscale Transport Processes Prediction/Design/Analysis Tool for NEMS Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Ilya Staroselsky, Exa Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will produce a unique
computational tool for predicting transport in nanoscale systems. The novel
approach to be used here is based on Lattice Boltzmann Methods (LBM) which will
enable virtual prototyping of nanodevices using grids of up to a hundred million
computational cells thus opening the way for computer aided design and analysis
of NEMS devices in the data storage industry. Existing LBM codes will be
extended to handle the high Knudsen number range applicable for the head disk
interface in computer disk drive system. This new analytical model will then be
implemented in a commercial software package, PowerFLOW, which is now used for
automotive applications worldwide and has early applications in the data storage
industry. With this platform, the highest standards of numerical accuracy,
parallel efficiency, and geometric flexibility (including full integration with
commercial CAD tools), will be obtained. Upon benchmarking this algorithm
against simplistic flow data, a nanoscale transport problem of industrial level
complexity will be simulated, with the goal to resolve all the relevant
geometric details of the slider and to obtain detailed pressure and shear (head)
stress distributions. Commercially, this nanoscale transport prediction tool
will open new simulation markets, especially at the engineering design level.
Secondly, this new technology should open broad new markets for computer aided
engineering (CAE), especially in NEMS and related industries, by enabling
nanoscale transport prediction in devices of real world complexity which are now
designed/optimized using either experimentation or semi-empirical rules. Market
analysis shows that the existing CAE market of about $150 MM per year should
increase 10- to 100-fold by introducing new prediction technologies at the
engineering design level.