* 0232800
* SBIR Phase I:  Computerized Tool for Baggage Screening
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Edward Sommer, National Recovery Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is directed at
homeland security and will determine the feasibility of developing a
computerized tool for airport security checkpoint baggage screening that will
assist baggage screeners in x-ray image inspection and which will provide
networked electronic communications among security checkpoint personnel. Current
baggage screening methods at airport security checkpoints are essentially manual
systems that take little advantage of today's computerized technologies,
electronic communications, and data networks. The proposed system introduces
networked database capabilities to the airport enabling security personnel to
analyze and correlate real time and/or historical data on passengers and their
baggage throughout the airport and will significantly improve the airport's
ability to run smoothly while enhancing safety. With post 9/11 diminishing of
consumer confidence, our nation's airports are in search of ways to make the air
travel experience as streamlined as possible, so that the day-to-day economics
of travel are profitable, and, at the same time, to make the entire system safer
thus protecting lives, their investments, and promoting a national grassroots
level perception of safety that enhances our lives, our consumer confidence, our
economy, and our willingness to travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a software
product with a hardware platform that interfaces with existing and new hardware
systems being utilized to meet security needs at airports, the proposed
technology promises to offer a relatively low cost way to introduce significant
improvements to the situation. This technology brings screeners a communications
infrastructure to build on each other's knowledge and expertise, and with the
addition of such an infrastructure platform to daily processes, to be constantly
evaluated on their statistical accuracy. This will improve their performance
while also speeding the process of luggage searchers, and thus improve security.
The proposed computerized inspection system can be utilized in any of the
nations' 429 commercial service airports either directly or through
relationships with security consultants and hardware manufacturers. Similarly
the technology can be used advantageously in international markets as
well.&lt;br/&gt;