* 0232829
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Manufacturing Method for Conformal, Embedded Electronics and Sensor Systems:  Combining Thermal Spray with Laser Micromachining
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Chengping Zhang, Potomac Photonics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,987.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
approach that combines two new, unique, and complimentary technologies to
fabricate mesoscopic electronics and sensors. For example, thermal spray as an
additive process to deposit a wide variety of high-quality ceramic, metal,
semiconductor, polymer, etc. materials, with the precision subtractive
capabilities of High-Speed High-Resolution Ultraviolet Laser Micromachining to
fashion mesoscale (~10-1000 microns) devices on a wide range of substrates. The
technology is based on a direct-write process that requires no masks,
photoresist, or wet chemistry. The benefits of such a combined technology are
vast, and will allow a dramatic reduction in feature size to the ~10 um level
and below, while being able to utilize an enormous variety of materials and
perform design iterations in a matter of minutes or hours, compared to the
traditional 1-4+ week turn-around time for typical photoresist mask
alterations/fabrication.

The potential commercial applications are unique and far-reaching. Examples
include strain gauges, thermistors, thermocouples, thermopiles, magnetic and
piezoelectric sensors, interdigitated capacitors for LCR circuits, antennas,
microheaters for integration into chemical and biological sensors, and others.
The devices can be integrated into existing components and embedded or
overcoated for added reliability and survivability in harsh environments.