* 0232955
* SBIR Phase I:    Automated Discovery and Removal of Hidden Data in Digital Documents
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Ronald Hackett, SRS Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,978.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
information security risks posed by sharing desktop publishing documents, which
occurs frequently over the Internet, and the feasibility of mitigating those
risks using rigorous software techniques. Microsoft's Object Linking and
Embedding (OLE) and Component Object Model (COM) standards permit seamless
integration of software applications to produce professional looking documents
commonly described as Desktop Publishing. Unfortunately, these standards do not
consider privacy or security, leading to significant vulnerabilities. These
security problems are created during the routine use of an application, and the
user is generally unaware that this information has been included in the file.
SRS Technologies will demonstrate the risks caused by embedded objects, Meta
data, and file fragmentation using the Microsoft Office XP suite to generate
digital documents with known problems that the average user is likely to
unwittingly create. Next, SRS Technologies will demonstrate why existing review
techniques are inadequate for identifying and removing unintended data. Finally,
SRS Technologies will develop and demonstrate software techniques to decompose
OLE/COM documents and expose the hidden data for sanitization.&lt;br/&gt;
Information sharing over the Internet is expanding exponentially. Any
organization, Government or commercial, that has sensitive information to
protect will benefit. Society will benefit from the availability of simple,
reliable, easy-to-use tools for use by professionals (law, health, financial,
etc.) with sensitive client information. &lt;br/&gt;