* 0232022
* SBIR Phase I:    Porphyrin and Porphyrin-TiO2 Nanoparticles: Method of Preparation and Application
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Xianchang Gong, KAVA TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,603.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a method
for&lt;br/&gt;preparation of porphyrin and porphyrin-titanium dioxide (TiO2)
nanoparticles. Porphyrin and porphyrin-TiO2 nanoparticles are promising advanced
materials for catalysis, artificial photosynthetic systems, nonlinear optical
and electronic materials. In initial work, a broad range of porphyrin
nanoparticles of 10-100nm diameter were prepared by mixing solvent techniques.
The prepared porphyrin nanoparticles were characterized by DLS, AFM and UV-Vis.
The prepared porphyrin nanoparticles are stable in air from weeks to months and
have been successfully transferred to an alumina (Al2O3) surface. The porphyrin
nanoparticles were found to have excellent catalytic activities in epoxidatin of
olefins. The method has been scaled up to prepare 1g scale porphyrin
nanoparticles. The elegance of the method lies in its simplicity and can be
economically scaled up to industry scale, which is the subject of this project.
The preliminary results also show that the agent used to prevent agglomeration
can be covalently attached to the dye forming the particle or as part of the
solvent system. &lt;br/&gt; The potential commercial application of porphyrin
and porphyrin-TiO2 nanoparticles will&lt;br/&gt;include epoxidation of olefins,
partial oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons,&lt;br/&gt;photosynthetic reaction
centers, novel photonic materials and electronics.&lt;br/&gt;