* 0232277
* SBIR Phase I:  Fluorescence-Amplified Nana-Assembly for Sensing Bio-Toxins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2003
* Winston Ho, MAXWELL SENSORS INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 09/30/2003
* USD 99,912.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
novel functional nanostructure for detection/identification of biological
warfare agents (BWA). A new class of fluorescence-amplified nano-assembly (FLAN)
is proposed for real-time, selective, and ultra- sensitive BWAs and toxins
assays. The basic concept of this technology is to mimic the cell membrane under
certain organisms and toxins initially attack. Living cells quickly recognize
and selectively respond towards invasion. The FLAN using three key elements for
target detection: 1) molecular recognition, 2) fluorescence transduction, and 3)
fluorescence amplification, to provide simple and direct fluorescent assay. The
molecular receptors recognize the BWA; the binding causes a change in the local
ternary structure, and which leads to an amplified fluorescent structure that
can be quantified optically. The synthetic nanostructures exhibit bioactivities
and high stability. The BWA-FLAN receptor binding is a rapid one-step reaction;
it does not require complicate separation and washing steps, labeled
fluorophore, or visualization reagents. During the Phase I project, the
investigator will design and synthesize functional nanostructures with BWA-
specific receptors, develop FLAN molecular assembly, develop fluorescence
sensing system, characterize, test, and evaluate its technical merits. Highly
selective and sensitive molecular recognition is important throughout biology,
biotechnology, and clinical diagnostics. COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS Homeland and
civilian defense applications include medical diagnostic of pathogens and
diseases as well as non-medical contamination avoidance sensors for biological
terrorism agents. The proposed nanostructure-based assays could be easily
adapted to targets of interest to the medical community, environmental and
agricultural testing, and food industry and used in conjunction with the
portable reader for diagnostics in clinical or hospital setting.