* 0232399
* SBIR  Phase I:    Lean Physics:    Streamlining the Supply Chain Using Factory Physics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Mark Spearman, Factory Physics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of a new manufacturing improvement, planning and execution system
that combines the data of a supply chain management system with the incentives
of the lean manufacturing philosophy along with the author's own Factory Physics
knowledge base in a systematic manner. The result will be a system containing
implementation methods, training, and software that is repeatable, portable, and
will always result in predictable, improved manufacturing logistical
performance. Understanding manufacturing measures such as cycle time,
throughput, capacity, work in process, inventory, and variability allows one to
develop effective control procedures that are uniquely suited for any particular
manufacturing environment. This project attempts to create a system that
includes benchmarking (diagnostic) tools, analysis (planning) tools, and
execution tools. What makes the proposed approach different is Factory Physics,
Inc.'s systematic way of improving the manufacturing operation and addressing
the planning and control needs. The broader impact of this research will be a
well-defined methodology to improve the effectiveness of production systems that
can be marketed to the manufacturing sector. In addition, using the system will
result in better-educated manufacturing managers and engineers.