* 0232000
* Collaborative Research: Radiometric Age Validation of the Patagonian and Antarctic Toothfishes (Dissostichus Eleginoides and D. Mawsoni)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Gregor Cailliet, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 02/29/2008
* USD 356,089.00

Recent years have seen the re-establishment of large-scale marine resource
utilization by humans in the Antarctic. In contrast to early sealing and whaling
activity, the modern impact is directed on krill and finfish populations, most
notably of the Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides), but also its
congenor the Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsoni) in the Ross Sea.
Toothfish are a valuable resource and are likely to continue to command a high
price in world markets. However, extensive illegal fishing has lead to
considerable concern that Patagonian toothfish populations are being over-
harvested. In other parts of the world, over-harvesting of larger, commercially
valuable species has led to fishing down of marine food webs, leaving
impoverished, less valuable ecosystems. The goal of the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, part of the Antarctic Treaty
System, is to allow harvest while avoiding disruptions to the Antarctic
ecosystem. To achieve this, the sustainable management of the fishery depends on
reliable age data. Age data allow population age structure to be modeled, so
that growth, mortality and recruitment rates can be estimated and used to
understand population dynamics. Age data provides the basis to determine the
life history pattern of a species, to model population dynamics, and to
determine which age classes are vulnerable to over-exploitation under a
particular set of environmental conditions. Current age and growth information
for toothfish is based on age determination methodologies which are not
validated and depend on the specific laboratory and principal investigator.
Recently, the Commission of the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources has endorsed three preparation methodologies using otoliths and a
common set of criteria for estimating age from otolith micro-structure. The
CCAMLR Otolith Network has also been initiated as a medium for exchanging
samples to ensure that age estimates are comparable between readers and
laboratories. However, considerable work is needed to ensure that age estimates
generated by the three methodologies are accurate. One technique that has been
successful is radiometric age determination, which uses the disequilibria of
lead-210 and radium-226 in otoliths as a natural chronometer. This proposal
brings together an international collaboration to examine population age
structure for both toothfish species, in an experimental design built around
radiometric validation tests of age data generated by all three preparation
methodologies. To integrate the validation component within an Antarctic-wide
effort to examine toothfish population age structure, sub-samples for validation
work will be drawn from sample sets taken for population age studies by research
teams working in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and France, as well
as the United States. Scientists at Moss Landing Marine Laboratories will use
radiometric age determination to independently age otoliths from Patagonian and
Antarctic toothfishes. Scientists at Old Dominion University will use a system
already established for aging to generate validated age data, allowing growth,
mortality, and longevity to be estimated by geographic areas. The project will
provide validated otolith sample sets that can be used as a foundation for a
unified and validated age estimation system for the toothfishes. This study will
provide information which will be disseminated to the public, policy-makers and
the international community. The project will provide opportunities for under-
represented students at both universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;