* 0232675
* SBIR Phase I:    Process for Production of Carbon Nanotubes from Re-Usable Catalytic Substrate
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* F. Carpenter, Nanomaterials Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel process for manufacturing carbon nanotubes (CNTs). There is great demand
for CNTs from composite materials manufacturers, but current technology cannot
yet provide large quantities of CNTs at an affordable price. Multi-wall carbon
nanotubes will be grown from a re-usable catalytic substrate by pyrolysis of a
carbon feedstock gas. The reusable catalytic substrate will provide control over
the diameter of the CNTs in the range from 5nm to 100nm. After the CNTs have
been grown from the catalytic substrate they will be physically removed
(harvested), and the catalytic substrate can be reused. The resulting CNTs will
be free of catalyst metal contamination and largely monodisperse. This process
can be fully automated and is scalable to high volumes at very low cost. This
project will prove the feasibility of this approach by demonstrating repeatable
synthesis of carbon nanotubes from the same catalytic substrates. Nanotubes of
different diameter will be produced and their structure will be characterized.
The experimental data will be used to create a detailed analysis of the
manufacturing economics for the approach and its competitiveness will be
evaluated.

The commercial and broader impacts of this technology would offer a major
breakthrough in the cost/quality relationship to produce and sell loose CNTs.
End customers will use CNTs in composite materials with improved structural
integrity, and unique electrical and thermal performance. Potential customers
are also focused on the use of carbon nanotubes for energy storage. Spin-off
applications could include electromagnetic radiation shielding and field
emission cathodes for flat panel displays.