* 0232647
* Software:  Improving Performance of Out-Of-Core Applications with Memory Access Pattern Guided Prefetching, Page Replacement and Clustering
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Yiming Hu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 06/30/2004
* USD 52,188.00

Many large, important scientific and commercial applications use very large data
sets that do not fit into available RAM. Such applications have to frequently
move portions of their data sets between main memory and secondary storage (such
as disks). Unfortunately, because disks are several orders of magnitude slower
than RAM, many large applications spend most of their running time on disk I/Os,
resulting in a significant performance degradation.

A lot of research has been carried out to address this problem. Generally, the
previous solutions include application-specific algorithms and libraries,
compiler-based techniques, and limited Operating System (OS) support. While
these solutions are effective, they also have some serious drawbacks. In this
proposal, the PI proposes careful OS and architecture co-designs of several
novel methods that can significantly improve the performance of large, memory-
intensive applications. The basic idea is to use hardware/software to collect
and analyze the runtime memory access patterns of applications. The knowledge of
these patterns is then used to guide prefetching and to improve the page-
replacement algorithms.

Preliminary results from the proposed systems show very promising improvements
in performance. They can drastically reduce the amount of page I/O traffic, and
hide latencies of many page I/Os. Simulation results based on NPB (NAS Parallel
Benchmarks) benchmarks show that pattern-guided prefetching and page-replacement
can improve performance by up to 100 times. The proposed methods are transparent
to user applications. The proposed studies, if successful, will have broad
impacts on the field of high performance computing.

