* 0232373
* Exploratory Research: Presence and biodiversity of uncultured fungi in Antarctic Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Jack Fell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/2004
* USD 89,895.00

Fell&lt;br/&gt;0232373&lt;br/&gt;Exploratory Research: Presence and biodiversity
of uncultured fungi in&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic Dry
Valleys&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary/Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungi, as decomposers of organic material, have worldwide
importance as primary drivers of the global carbon cycle. The present knowledge
of fungal roles and capabilities is derived from cultured organisms. A large
unknown commodity is the presence and biodiversity of uncultured species.
Studies of uncultured prokaryotes have indicated that the culturable species may
represent a minor and possibly functionally unimportant fraction of the
community. The present study will determine the community structure of the
uncultured fungi in soils from the Antarctic Dry Valleys. Because the occurrence
of these eukaryotes in these samples is theoretical and problematical, the
research is a high-risk venture. The research will be undertaken as a "project
of opportunity" in conjunction with a field project conducted by the University
of Maine (UM) to examine the biological role of yeasts in the Dry Valleys. The
UM field team will provide soil samples for the U. Miami Rosenstiel School of
Marine and Atmospheric Science (RSMAS) studies. Methods to examine uncultured
fungal communities are made possible through the development of molecular
techniques. UM will identify, by sequence analysis, the cultured species. RSMAS
will identify uncultured fungi by DNA extraction from Antarctic soils, PCR
amplification of ribosomal DNA with eukaryotic-, fungal-, basidiomycete- and
ascomycete-specific primers. The resulting amplicons will be cloned and sequence
analyzed. Based on positive results, the cooperative UM/RSMAS research will
provide the opportunity to study the roles, functions and species interactions
of previously unknown components of the soil microbiota in the Antarctic and
other ecosystems throughout the world. This project will provide a research
opportunity and training for a post-doctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;