* 0232199
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Process Technology for Novel Polymer Based Microcellular Nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Paul Gramann, The Madison Group: Polymer Processing Research Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is intended to establish
the technology for the production of an innovative polymer-based microcellular
nanocomposites (MCNC). The synergistic marriage of microcellular foaming with
nanocomposite technology would create an end product with enormous market
potential. This new composite would fill a critical need for the next generation
of materials for the aerospace, automotive, medical and electronic industries.
Nanocomposites offer enhanced mechanical and physical properties while the
microcellular foaming process offers distinct processing advantages and weight
savings. The project research entails three inter-related stages: application of
mixing theory, computational simulation, and experimental investigation. This
systematic study of the processing technology will permit for the efficient
production and facilitate market penetration of MCNC materials.

The project has the potential for numerous commercial applications. Current
trends across various industries create the demand for materials that offer
enhanced physical and mechanical properties, reduced weights, and improved
processing times. These requirements lead to a significant impetus to develop a
new class of materials derived from the marriage of nano-fillers and
microcellular foaming technology. Some estimates put the worldwide market for
nanocomposites by 2009 to be in excess of 1 billion lbs. MCNC materials have the
potential to capture part of this market, while opening new ones due to the
attractive properties that these materials possess.