* 0232565
* SBIR Phase I:    Study of Particulate Composites of Aluminum with Intermetallic Reinforcements
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,10/31/2003
* Gollapudi Murty, TOUCHSTONE RESEARCH LABORATORY LTD
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 10/31/2003
* USD 99,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop composites
of aluminum with intermetallic reinforcements. These are important for products
that demand higher strength and more ease in processing than is currently
available in metal/ceramic discontinuously reinforced aluminum (DRA) matrix
composites. The project will explore the mechanical properties of particulate
composites of aluminum with intermetallic reinforcements from a fundamental
viewpoint. Silicon carbide has been a common choice of the particulate phase in
DRA composites. Because the fracture toughness and strength properties of DRA
are influenced by the interfacial bond strength between the matrix and the
reinforcing phase, there are advantages to a metal/intermetallic particulate
composite approach rather than silicon carbide. This will be demonstrated in the
project.&lt;br/&gt; From a commercial point of view, discontinuously reinforced
aluminum matrix composites are attractive for various applications because of
low cost, greater flexibility in processing and isotropy of properties. The
resulting material may be used with greater strength for vehicle drive shafts,
brake drums, engine pistons, jet engine fan exit guide vanes, satellites,
aircraft ventral fins and fuel access covers, bicycle components, golf clubs and
a wide variety of other commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;