* 0232072
* Experimental Implications of Theoretic Models:  Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* T.K. Ahn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2003
* USD 24,387.00

The researchers are holding a workshop as part of the Political Science
Program's Experimental Implications of Theoretic Models activity. They are
focusing on the linkage between formal and empirical analyses of repeated social
dilemma games. Understanding cooperation in the context of social dilemma games
is fundamental to understanding how alternative institutional arrangements may
foster collective action in a wide diversity of political settings. An abundance
of experimental evidence is inconsistent with predictions from existing non-
cooperative game-theoretic models based strictly on self-regarding preferences.
In recent years, scholars have turned to alternative representations of utility
in an attempt to capture motivational heterogeneity across individuals. While
multiple models have been posited, no one model yet appears to explain the rich
data that has been obtained by multiple experimental researchers who have
conducted a very large number o repeated social dilemma experiments using
various specifications of many variables including:&lt;br/&gt; The size of the
collective benefit obtained if all participants cooperated;&lt;br/&gt; The level
of knowledge that individuals have about each other's identity;&lt;br/&gt; The
number of participants involved;&lt;br/&gt; The nature of communication among
subjects; and,&lt;br/&gt; The possibility of sanctioning one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many theoretical possibilities have been
generated, no one has been able to test his or her ideas against an aggregated
data set covering all of these conditions precisely, because such a data set has
not yet been put together and made publicly available. Given the diversity of
formal models and large number of experiments that have already been conducted,
the time is ripe to create a multicampus, multidisciplinary Research Work Team
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;plan the construction of an easy-to-use consistent
database containing many data &lt;br/&gt;sets contributed by experimental
researchers;&lt;br/&gt;review recent formal models explaining levels of
cooperation in repeated social dilemmas in order to examine similarities and
differences in theoretical structure as &lt;br/&gt;well as in predictions
derived from alternative models;&lt;br/&gt;plan further analyses of these data
in order to test the models comprehensively;&lt;br/&gt;refine better theoretical
models to explain cooperation in repeated social dilemmas;&lt;br/&gt;provide a
general scientific plan for developing further theoretical and empirical
research in light of the results of the above steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers are holding the first meeting of the Research Work Team in January,
2003, and this project focuses primarily on the plans for this
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;