* 0232211
* Identifying and Implementing a Coordinated Strategy for Computer and Network Security for Higher Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Mark Luker, Educause
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 08/31/2004
* USD 249,970.00

EDUCAUSE has recently been asked by the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office
(CIAO) of the federal government to coordinate the contributions of the higher
education community to the National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace. This report,
scheduled to be delivered from the Critical Infrastructure Protection Board to
the President of the United States this summer, will examine the following:
government's role, private sector contributions, whether or not legislation is
needed, and the impact of improved security education. The activities in this
proposal will make a direct contribution toward this important national
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and education community faces a
pressing need for effective and efficient&lt;br/&gt;strategies for securing its
networked computers. The security of college and university&lt;br/&gt;computer
systems has become a matter of critical importance for higher education and the
greater Internet community. In one well-known example, vulnerable systems on
campus networks have been implicated as unknowing participants in a Distributed
Denial of Service (DDOS) attack on critical government and commercial Internet
sites. College and university computer systems have also been the target of
attacks, exposing confidential medical and student records. A comprehensive and
systematic cybersecurity strategy is needed in the higher education community,
including an executive-level appreciation for the critical importance of this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a need for a coordinated approach on two
fronts: (1) the examination and&lt;br/&gt;identification of best practices
regarding available technologies, policies, and procedures to support secure
operations, and (2) publications, presentations, and other communication methods
to disseminate these best practices throughout the research
and&lt;br/&gt;education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these
tasks, EDUCAUSE will bring together the leading experts in
both&lt;br/&gt;technology and higher education business practices and policies
to develop the best&lt;br/&gt;practical approach to solving these problems in
the higher education community. EDUCAUSE will distribute the best practices
though extensive national and regional meetings,publications for IT staff as
well as higher education executives, web libraries, and through partner
organizations such as the American Council on Education (ACE),
the&lt;br/&gt;National Association of College and University Business Officers
(NACUBO), and the&lt;br/&gt;National Association of College and University
Attorneys (NACUA). This proposed effort will build on previous work by the
EDUCAUSE/Internet2 Security Taskforce, member institutions, SANS, and CERT and
would seek to incorporate the best efforts of the federal government and private
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;