* 0232449
* SBIR Phase I:    Animated Real-Time Road Traffic Visualization for Broadcast and The Internet
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Andre Gueziec, Triangle Software
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,700.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide
practical tools for visualizing real-time road traffic data and computer-
generated traffic simulations using 2D and 3D animation for broadcast and the
Internet. Except for weather forecasts, data-driven animations are rarely
produced in real-time from live data. Traffic visualization contains more
challenges than weather visualization. The objective of this project is to
determine the feasibility of building practical, fully functional tools to
access data in a timely fashion and produce a compelling animation within
seconds. This tool must model traffic incidents and flow in a timely and
accurate fashion. The anticipated result includes animation and video-production
tools that will be converted to a commercial product during Phase II.

Potential applications include TV broadcasts, traffic control centers, police
dispatch centers, and visualization tools for transportation studies and
planning. In addition, the animation principles derived from this project could
be applicable to visualizing other real-time data in an animation. The first
application is broadcast television, for morning traffic segments. Further
applications include traffic control centers, dispatches, and tools for
transportation planning. A third domain of application is information
dissemination on small-screen displays (PDA, etc) when the bandwidth and market
materialize.