* 0232016
* The GK-12 Program in Hawaii: Using the Native Biota for Science Education
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Sheila Conant, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,709,720.00

Building on a currrent GK-12 project (DGE 9979656) the University of Hawaii and
the the Hawaii Department of Education are working to ensure sustainability of
the collaboration that has been forged between them. Graduate students in
Ecology, Evolution and Conservation Biology (EECB) are interacting with and
improving the content knowledge and inquiry skills of students and teachers at
K-12 schools in Hawaii. The graduate and undergraduate Fellows are learning
current science education reform efforts including national and state standards
for science education while teaching science through inquiry to improve their
own communication and teaching skills. Science teachers are provided with
professional development opportunities to gain current knowledge of research in
ecology, evolution and conservation biology in Hawaii. The graduate and
undergraduate Fellows serve as role models of practicing scientists by engaging
K-12 students and teachers as active participants in ongoing research in the
EECB program. Thus a culture of collaboration between science research and
science education is being developed in Hawaii. The graduate fellows bring
information from the natural laboratory to the K-12 students and teachers in the
classroom, and also bring the K-12 students and teachers to the natural
laboratory in field-based activities. Previous projects have contributed to
real-life situations within the local communities. In one case, the data
collected by the K-12 students resulted in the eradication of an incipient
invasion of an alien ant species as well as the discovery of two previously
unrecorded species of ants. Thus, besides the intellectual merits of the current
program in Hawaii, the individual projects are having a broad impact on issues
being addressed by the local communities. Collaborative relationships are being
developed with more than 20 community, government (federal, state and county),
and professional agencies/organizations. Through these collaborations K-12
educators and students are developing a better understanding of the fragility of
the island ecosystems and the importance of efforts made to conserve
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project title: Using the Native Biota for Science
Education&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI:
Kenneth Kanashiro, Sheila Conant, Robert Kinzie, Donald Young&lt;br/&gt;Partner
School Districts: Hawaii State Department of Education&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $
1,482,270&lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows/year: 10 graduate, 2
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban, Suburban, Rural&lt;br/&gt;Target
audience: K-12&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved: Biology&lt;br/&gt;