* 0232976
* SBIR Phase I:  Industrial Scale Formation of the Stable and Processable Core/Shell Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Yongqiang Wang, NANOMATERIALS AND NANOFABRICATION LABORATORIES
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,738.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new technology for the industrial production of high quality core/shell
semiconductor nanocrystals, which have shown great potential for a variety of
electronic, biological and medical applications. At present, all of these
commercial applications are constrained by the availability of stable, high
quality core/shell semiconductor nanocrystals on a large scale with an
affordable price. Different from the existing organometallic approach, this
project is built up on the greener, inexpensive and high performance Solution
Atomic Layer Epitaxial (SALE) synthetic strategies developed by the NNL and the
University of Arkansas. The SALE makes possible the scale-up and the high
quality of the core/shell semiconductor nanocrystals by growing cationic and
anionic ion shell materials on the core nanocrystals surface in the solution
layer by layer alternatively. This new synthesis scheme for producing the
core/shell nanocrystals should be extendable to the continue batch (CB) method
that maximizes the power of the existing synthetic schemes. The core/shell
nanocrystals could be stabilized by dendron ligands and further crosslinking. In
this way, both the quality and the quantity of the resulting core/shell
nanocrystals are guaranteed. The commercial applications and other benefits of
this technology is in the value of the core/shell colloidal semiconductor
nanocrystals in the field of electronic and medical applications lies on the
large area display, portable electronic devices, medical devices and medical
diagnostics, etc. A multi-billion dollar market for the production of those
electronic devices and medical diagnostics is in rapid development