* 0232823
* Meeting the Challenges in Emerging Areas: Education Across the Life, Mathematical, and Computer Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Tina Straley, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2005
* USD 282,917.00

The Mathematical Association of America, in cooperation with the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, is holding a conference of leaders
in the emerging fields that integrate computer science, mathematics and the life
sciences, and leaders in undergraduate education in all three areas. This
conference is encouraging the nation to meet the educational challenge of
producing students competent to enter these cross-cutting areas. Conference
results are reports and resources for those interested in creating courses and
programs. The most important product is a report to the nation for all
stakeholders informing them of issues, needs, and opportunities, and what they
can do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research and development in the
life sciences have escalated as a result of: 1) the Human Genome Project, 2)
national priorities to enhance and protect the health and well being of the
people, and 3) the use of new technologies. The data being generated has
outstripped our capability to analyze it. However, knowledge that can result
from proper analysis of the data will lead to greater advances. New research
initiatives lead to new ways to integrate the life, mathematical, and computer
sciences. There are emerging fields of study that integrate these three
disciplines, such as biotechnology, biostatistics, and bioinformatics. What is
missing in this picture are the people who have the knowledge and skills to
enter these new crosscutting areas. Students must be prepared for entering the
workforce from all levels of undergraduate education, and students must be
prepared for graduate programs in order to contribute to research and
development needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Reports resulting from
the conference are being distributed widely to the major stakeholders and
presentations are being made at professional meetings for higher education
faculty in the three areas and at meetings of administrators and other
educators. These presentations further bring the report and the issues addressed
in it to their attention. New programs in the emerging areas at the crossroads
of the three disciplines, interdisciplinary coursework, recruitment of students,
and better-prepared students will be the benefits of this project. The nation
will be in a stronger position to meet its priorities and further the dynamic
work being done in the life and biomedical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;