* 0232318
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Rate Production of Nano-Architectured Hybrid Oxide Materials for Lithium Battery Cathodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Leon Wu, Nanotek Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of a novel method, Reactive Vapor Deposition (RVD), which is capable
of mass producing thin-film, meso-porous and nano-phased cathode materials for
use in lithium-ion and lithium-metal batteries. Theoretical calculations and a
primitive bench-top set-up have given the initial indication that this highly
versatile method could potentially produce various stable cathode materials at a
high throughput rate and at low cost. The Phase-I research is aimed at designing
and building a bench-top RVD apparatus to demonstrate the general technical
feasibility and commercial viability of this method as applied to the
fabrication of nano-phased hybrid oxides for re-chargeable battery cathodes.

The commercial applications and other benefits will be lower-cost and more
stable lithium-ion and lithium-metal batteries. This could have a major impact
on the markets of portable electronic, computer, and communications devices. The
market demands for all types of rechargeable cells is expected to grow at a
compound rate of 11% per year, reaching a total of 3 billion cells by 2005. The
lithium ion cells are expected to capture a 20% market share with a total of $6
billion (based on a wholesale price of $10 per cell). An even greater market
size will become possible when much lower-cost and stable lithium-ion batteries
are widely used in electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles.

