* 0232641
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Location-Based Services Clients:  Accessing Real-time Virtual Information Spatially Embedded in Mission-Critical Environments
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Scot Refsland, VRGIS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will test the
feasibility of an innovative method for extending traditional Location-Based
Services clients into a real-time, 3D spatially correct, interactive system that
interacts with virtual information embedded into mission-critical environments.
The demand for 'point-of-need' information delivery is most evident in mission-
critical environments typical of first responders, homeland security and other
themed-specific situations. However, current LBS's suffer from inadequate
networks, clients, delivery mechanisms and imprecise spatial/contextual
relationships between the physical environment and virtual media information.
VRGIS Corporation proposes an innovative Enhanced Location-Based Services system
that integrates Geographic Information Systems, Global Positioning Systems,
wireless and augmented reality technologies to enhance in situ 'Just-In-Time'
information and communication layers aware of both a user's physical environment
and information requirements. By accessing this system through an augmented
client (PDA, portable, wearable computing devices), users can maneuver through
mission-critical environments interacting with 3D positioned, real-time,
intelligent data points derived from online GIS databases, early warning
systems, critical building information, sensors, hydrological data and
communications through a multi-user network. The proffered technology has the
potential to produce an Enhanced Location-Based 3D software client that can be
utilized in homeland security and emergency services applications.