* 0232127
* SBIR Phase I:  HIVbase, Data Integration Software to Support the Study of Chronic Viruses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Susanna Lamers, Gene Johnson, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support the
development of software, designated HIVbase, which will modernize the way that
clinical researchers manage their data. For researchers that need to maximize
the value of their collected information, we will offer a product that contains
unique applications for integrating multiple sources of disparate data into an
automated high-dimensional warehouse, applications that perform repetitious
tasks common to genetic and clinical research projects, and applications that
are easy to use. Investigators of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus have an
unsurpassed amount of research information in user-hostile formats, error-filled
spreadsheets, out-dated databases, directories containing thousands of
individual files and even paper records. Never before has so much informational
power been available to HIV scientists. We will exploit current technological
advances and put together a program containing several novel applications:
protein identification tools to eliminate repetitious sequence editing, the
ability to create user-defined searches based on specific genetic attributes,
and the ability to efficiently share information with outside collaborators.

The outcome of this project will have broad implication in the health (HIV) and
data mining areas. Health service providers will now have access to more
complete data in a more expeditious way. Other fields will be able to use this
application to make information available in an ordered and reliable fashion to
its service providers.