* 0232794
* SBIR Phase I:  Application of a Novel, Non-Thermal Plasma Technology for Surface Modification of Polymeric Objects
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Pascal Ricatto, PLASMASOL CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop non-
thermal, plasma technology to achieve uniform surface modification of plastic
materials at atmospheric pressure in air, without need of significant amounts of
a carrier gas. This uniform surface treatment can be achieved flexibly and
economically on three-dimensional objects of practical size to a multitude of
industries. In the program, well-characterized flat surfaces of polypropylene
will be subjected to plasma treatment using a matrix of experimental conditions
to determine surface modification and damage effects as a function of
voltage/current characteristics, plasma source configuration and processing
speed. Surface analytical tools such as Scanning Probe Microscopy, Scanning
Electron Microscopy, XPS and FTIR will be employed to evaluate changes in
surface morphology and surface chemistry. Changes in surface energy will be
gaged by standard wetting tests. The program will then examine performance with
three-dimensional objects of various size and shape and TPO blends of industrial
significance. The proposed program is compelling because the technology offers a
major leap forward in surface treatment across a spectrum of major markets.
Typically the surface preparation for finishing involves chemical treatment with
highly caustic or acidic agents or with organics, imposing concomitant safety
and environmental problems. The plasma technology of this proposal can be
applied in place of many of these processes. Markets include, for example,
sterilization or biological activation in the biomedical field and fiber
conditioning in optical and composite-fiber technologies. However, the greatest
commercial impact will be to promote better adhesion, whether it be for inks
used in labeling, for thin films in electronics or for paints or other coatings
to provide color, texture and/or corrosion protection.

