* 0233356
* Support for Proposed 'State of the Arc' (SOTA) Conference: Energy and Mass Fluxes in Volcanic Arcs
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2002,01/31/2004
* William Leeman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 01/31/2004
* USD 48,583.00

Under this award, the PI will convene the third in a series of State of the Arc
(SOTA) conferences aimed at understanding physical-chemical processes operating
at subduction zones. The conference will have as its theme, Energy and Mass
Fluxes in Volcanic Arcs. The meeting will be held in August 2003 at Timberline
Lodge (Mt. Hood). Rice University will act as the lead institution, and the
conference will be hosted locally by Portland State University. The meeting will
bring together approximately 84 international researchers whose work bears on
the conference theme. Specific focus areas will include: (1) the thermal
structure of subduction zones, (2) the influence of this structure on release of
volatiles and possibly melts from subducted slabs, (3) influence of this
structure on the production and differentiation of magmas at various levels in
the mantle and crust, (4) geologic, petrologic, geochemical, and geophysical
constraints on the reservoirs that store and release those magmas and their
associated fluids, and (5) heat and mass transfer processes and rates in arc
volcanoes at different spatial and temporal scales, and how these influence
volcano evolution and behavior. The conference will include a series of pre-,
mid-, and post-conference field trips to view important aspects of arc volcanism
as exposed in the Cascades province (Mt. St. Helens, Mt. Hood, and central
Oregon). These trips will integrate aspects of field geology with the conference
themes and allow contrast between different styles of arc volcanism.

