* 0233299
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  International - Tuning Phase Behavior for Optimizing Heterogeneous Catalyzed Reactions in Supercritical Carbon Dioxide
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Charles Eckert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2005
* USD 16,000.00

0233299&lt;br/&gt;Eckert&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI, a junior faculty
member, and a graduate student from Georgia Tech in a collaboration with Roger
Glaeser of the Institute for Chemical Technology at the University of Stuttgart,
Germany. The combined efforts of the German and US groups will focus on making
better predictions of phase behavior of gases, supercritical fluids, and
liquids. They will apply the new understanding of phase behavior to the
improvement of rates and selectivities in heterogeneous catalyzed reactions at
elevated pressures, especially those involving supercritical fluids. Many
current experiments on catalyzed reactions lack information on the number of
phases present, which phase is present during the reaction, and whether
reactions are rate or mass-transfer limited. The present work will delineate
both phase boundaries and reaction conditions to enable meaningful studies of
heterogeneous catalyzed reactions at elevated
pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has an educational objective.
The project will allow the graduate students and junior faculty involved to
benefit from performing research in another country. They will develop a
heightened appreciation of the world around them while also learning important
new technical skills.&lt;br/&gt;