* 0233643
* WCR:  Vegetation Control of Ecohydrologic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Guido Salvucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/29/2008
* USD 338,412.00

0233643 Phillips

As a major currency in the economy of terrestrial ecosystems, water is acquired,
saved, and spent much like money in human economies. Like human use of financial
resources, vegetation does not generally take up and release water at the same
instantaneous rate, but rather buffers supply of and demand for water by banking
this critical resource in internal storage organs. Understanding how and when
vegetation captures, stores, and transports water from roots to and out of
foliage is critical to quantifying diverse eco-hydrologic functions such as
watershed buffering of rainfall-runoff relationships and flood responses, and
ecosystem uptake of atmospheric carbon dioxide. This study examines the
physiological controls exerted by vegetation on forest-atmosphere water
transport, at Harvard Forest, Massachusetts. The specific objective of this
proposal is to quantify, using a novel diagnostic method, how forest vegetation
responds hydraulically to variation in environmental stimuli. The methodology
used here imposes short-lived disturbances of humidity, light and rainfall on
canopies and root systems, and then traces the propagation of these
perturbations through trees and soil. This .ripple. effect contains the
integrated signature of key hydraulic properties and processes within
vegetation, that govern the overall control that vegetation exerts on ecosystem
hydrology. This novel methodology is highly manipulative and produces large
signal to noise ratios for analysis, but does not cause irreversible ecological
disturbances, such as damage or destruction of plant roots, stems, and branches.
Most importantly, this methodology will yield fundamental insights into the
dynamic relationships and feedbacks among vegetation properties and physiology,
atmospheric forcing, and evaporative fluxes from forests. Finally, this project
provides broad educational impacts by integrating research with focused
educational activities in three existing programs: