* 0233261
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Interaction Forces in Nanoindentation of Composite Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Joseph BelBruno, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 15,800.00

0233261&lt;br/&gt;BelBruno&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI and graduate
students from Dartmouth College in a collaboration with Asta Richter of the
Institute for Engineering Physics at the University of Applied Sciences-Wildau,
Germany. The German expertise in experimental techniques will be combined with
the US expertise in computational modeling will combine to enhance understanding
of the nanoindentation process. The proposed research focuses on the indenter
tip-crystal interaction, with particular emphasis on deformation of atomic
layers and the creation of defects and cracks at the nanoscale level. The
computational effort, including simulations, will explore the effect of
nanoindentation on the surface layers at an atomistic level, looking at
correlations between experimental parameters and displacement/elastic processes
at the surface. The experiments will measure mechanical properties of very thin
films and composite materials, which will yield quality measures for mechanical
properties, like hardness and Young's modulus, to classify thin film structures
on micro-and nanoscales. The new quality measures are needed to characterize
nonomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has an educational
objective. The project will allow the graduate students involved to benefit from
performing research in another country. They will develop a heightened
appreciation of the world around them while also learning important new
technical skills.&lt;br/&gt;