* 0233337
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Systems and Biophysical Processing of Afferent Input by Vestibular Nucleus Neurons
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Larry Hoffman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2008
* USD 15,000.00

0233337&lt;br/&gt;Hoffman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
US-France collaboration in neuroscience and sensory systems between Larry F.
Hoffman at the School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles
(UCLA) and Lee Moore at the Laboratory of the Neurobiology of Network Sensors at
the University of Paris VI. The investigators propose to develop a new approach
to investigate central processing mechanisms into the central nervous system of
afferent neurons from individual vestibular end organs. They will conduct
experiments and modeling studies designed to reveal the biophysical bases of
processing and neural computation in second order vestibular neurons. The
investigations focus on the convergence of dynamically diverse afferents
projecting from the horizontal semicircular canal in the ear. The experimental
component will be conducted by the US group, taking advantage of instrumental
and experimental expertise in natural vestibular stimuli and electrophysiologic
recordings. The French investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in
neuron biophysics. He will integrate his methods into the preparation of in situ
electrophysiology performed by the UCLA lab. The vestibular nucleus neurons will
be characterized and subsequently imaged by confocal microscopy. The images will
then be utilized in the modeling component conducted by the French group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of joint proposals to
the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will
cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator. The CNRS will
support the visits of the French investigator. The proposal will advance
understanding of afferent sensory neuron input in the central nervous system and
biomedical understanding of balance and movement disorders.&lt;br/&gt;