* 0233529
* An Animal-in-the-Loop, Approximate Dynamic Programming Based Robotic Design Paradigm
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jennie Si, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 06/30/2006
* USD 389,999.00

The future development of space solar power systems presents immense challenges
for designers of sophisticated and adaptable robotic systems capable of complex
mission assignments in the difficult environment of space. In an effort to help
address a subset of these problems, this project will conduct an
interdisciplinary investigation integrating the diverse ranges of computer
science, neurophysiology, psychology and bioengineering. It will develop a novel
animal-in-the-loop robotic architecture for the efficient investigation and
optimization of learning algorithms applicable to general cooperative robotic
systems. The plan is to eclipse the current trend for bio-inspired robotics
through the use of an actual bio-based robot. This will be accomplished by
training rats to pilot mobile robots. Rats will be used in place of the
traditional sensing mechanisms of robotic systems. In so doing, the researchers
aim to exploit the proven superiority of embedded processing paradigms provided
by real neural networks. To better understand exactly how and why mammals are
such good processors of sensory input and how we might apply their strategies to
robotic systems, the researchers will equip each rat with multi-electrode arrays
in the sensory regions of their brain. They will collect neural spike data
representing the sensory environment as the rat-robot systems complete a
cooperative task. Task data and neural recordings will be used in the
development and simulation of advanced learning algorithms based on approximate
dynamic programming (ADP). A better understanding of sensory processing coupled
with advances in ADP models will be used to design more intelligent platforms,
namely animal-computer co-adaptation, in cooperative robotic systems. For the
development of space solar power objectives, such robotic systems must provide
the essential traits of robustness and scalability. The new generalized approach
using bio-sensor based, ADP optimized solutins provides a unique high-potential
to develop such powerful systems.&lt;br/&gt;