* 0233888
* Stable isotopes as a tool for investigating changes in Holocene hunter-gatherer strategies along the northern California coast
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Robert Bettinger, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2005
* USD 120,667.00

With NSF support, Dr. Ann Russell, Dr. Robert Bettinger, and Mr. Michael Kennedy
will use stable oxygen and carbon isotopes (d18O and d13C) at the edges of
California sea mussel (Mytilus californianus) shells collected from 14C-dated
archaeological components to determine the season in which prehistoric northern
California hunter-gatherers harvested this marginal marine resource over the
last 8600 years. In addition, they will evaluate the relationship between
seasonality of the mussel harvest and changes in marine conditions reconstructed
from annual records of d18O and d13C. In recent years, there has been increased
focus on the emergence of hunter-gatherer maritime adaptations and the role of
climate change as a selective force in shaping cultural responses. Major
cultural changes in southern and central California, such as the use of marginal
resources as well as increasing economic and sociopolitical complexity, may have
developed from resource stress related to changes in sea-surface temperature
(SST) and marine productivity. Little is known about these aspects of hunter-
gatherer evolution along the coast of northern California. Reconstruction of
seasonal foraging patterns, as well as upwelling intensity and marine nutrient
levels along the coast of northern California will provide critical information
for understanding the emergence of marine resource intensification in this
region. Previous research has shown that the record of stable isotopes (d18O and
d13C) in shell calcite of mollusk shells provides important information on
marine environmental conditions (SST, nutrient levels, and inferred marine
productivity). Preliminary results confirm this and suggest that the approach of
using both d18O and d13C of the terminal margin (growing edge) of Mytilus
californianus (California sea mussel) shells is a valuable tool for determining
the season of harvest. How intensively did hunter-gatherers utilize marginal
marine resources (shellfish) throughout the year in northern California, and
what role did marine climate play in the development of intensified marine
foraging strategies? To address these questions, the research team will generate
three seasonal records of d18O and d13C in mussel shell calcite from five
14C-dated archaeological components near Bodega Bay, California. These profiles
will provide information on average marine environmental conditions, as well as
the typical range of seasonal variation of SST and d13C at the time of
occupation. In addition to these long-term records, the researchers will obtain
isotopic data from the terminal margins of at least 20 additional shells per
component to determine the season of harvest. An important aspect of the
research will be to continue a modern calibration/verification of the use of
coupled d18O and d13C from shell terminal margins to establish the season of
harvest. Using the results of these studies in conjunction with other
archaeological data, the research team will reconstruct changes in environmental
conditions and in the adaptive strategies of maritime hunter-gatherers of
northern California since 8600 BP. This research will permit a regional
evaluation of annual foraging intensity over the last ~8600 years, and will
provide a far more sophisticated examination of marine resource intensification
along the northern California coast than previous research has offered.