* 0233653
* Direct Measurements of Dissipation Rate and Determination of the Velocity/pressure-gradient Correlation in Complex High Reynolds Number Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Roger Simpson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 09/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0233653&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR
INITIATED&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: ROGER L.
SIMPSON&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: VIRGINIA POLYTECHNIC INST.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIRECT MEASUREMENTS OF DISSIPATION RATE AND CORRELATIONS
IN COMPLEX TURBULENT FLOWS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a clear need to greatly
improve turbulent flow models for practical three-dimensional high Reynolds
number turbulent flows in order to facilitate development of robust and accurate
computational tools. Improvements will have a great impact on the design
calculations of all fluid machinery, including aircraft, submarines, jet
engines, etc. as well as the prediction of atmospheric and ocean flows. Some
terms in the governing Reynolds-averaged equations used in many models have
never been directly measured and the underlying theoretical ideas are highly
uncertain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will provide a major experimental
breakthrough. A newly designed type of laser-Doppler velocimeter is being used
and further developed that can determine instantaneously the three components of
position, velocity, and acceleration of multiple particles that follow the flow
within a 200 micron measurement volume. Not only will the instantaneous position
of the particles be determined to within 1 micron (0.00004 inches) uncertainty,
but the instantaneous rate-of-deformation and angular velocity of the flow will
be obtained, leading to the determination of the instantaneous values of
important terms in the fundamental equations. The information is important for
improved turbulence modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental technique
will be used to obtain data for three fundamental building block flows: 2-D flat
plate zero mean pressure gradient boundary layers (momentum thickness Reynolds
number in the range 7,000 to 23,000), two-dimensional turbulent boundary layers
with isolated roughness, and three-dimensional rough-wall boundary layers. The
experimental results from this proposed research will be the first available
data sets with complete measurements of all turbulent quantities in the
Reynolds-averaged modeling equations at relatively high Reynolds numbers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a number of broad impacts.
Significant interaction and collaboration with turbulence modelers is planned,
which will broadly disseminate the results for enhanced scientific and technical
understanding. Other broad impacts are the education of US undergraduate and
graduate students in the use of this cutting-edge research technique,
significant contributions to research infrastructure by developing a new
instrument, and benefits to society through advancements in turbulence modeling
for practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;