* 0233901
* SGER:  Evolutionary Algorithms for Pathogen Defense
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Lori Stevens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 106,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary computation uses principles from biological evolution to
find optimal solutions to problems in engineering and computer science.
Evolutionary algorithms are ideal for studying natural selection and
optimization of the myriad of physiological processes that occur in organisms.
In contrast, many other current modeling methods are limited in their ability to
include dynamic, multi-objective optimization processes and results may be
biased by initial parameter settings. Parameters in evolutionary algorithms can
self-adapt, mimicking the evolution of processes such as mating system,
migration, recombination and mutation. This research will use evolutionary
algorithms to study multi-objective evolution of pathogen defense and local
adaptation. An experiment using Tribolium flour beetles will validate the model
and demonstrate the synergy between the computational efforts and empirical
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader impacts including
stimulating an emerging research area through the novel application of recent
developments in computer science and engineering to evolutionary physiology.
Undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students will be trained in
computational biology and the evolutionary physiology of host-pathogen
interactions. The models will demonstrate the utility of evolutionary algorithms
for modeling multiple defenses, self-adaptation, and spatial and temporal
variation in pathogen prevalence. The topic of pathogen defense is a timely
problem in both basic and applied biology, medicine and agriculture. These
studies are relevant to genetically modified foods, and changes in pathogen
abundance caused by global warming, as well as emerging infectious disease and
drug resistance.&lt;br/&gt;