* 0233850
* Molecular Phylogenetics and the Evolution of Rattlesnakes [Crotalus and Sistrurus]
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Harry Greene, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 02/28/2007
* USD 309,801.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kelly R. Zamudio and Dr. Harry W. Greene at
Cornell University to study rattlesnake evolution. The 28 species comprise a
group of ecologically diverse New World pitvipers with unique tail shaker
muscles and noise-making segments on their modified tail tips. Despite
widespread interest by scientists and the public, previous inferences about
their origin and diversification were made prior to recent innovations in
molecular systematics. No evidence exists for a widespread belief that rattles
evolved in response to bison herds, for example, and new statistical approaches
for studying biogeography and character evolution have not previously been
applied to this topic. Zamudio and Greene will sequence the DNA in several
nuclear and mitochondrial genes of rattlesnakes and their relatives, with the
immediate goals of reconstructing their relationships and biogeographic history,
then testing five alternative scenarios of rattle origin.&lt;br/&gt;
Rattlesnakes play increasingly prominent roles in anthropology, ecology,
evolutionary biology, conservation, and biomedical research, topics on which
Zamudio and Greene's findings will provide important comparative perspectives.
Rattlesnakes are important predators and knowledge of evolutionary relationships
will elucidate the roles of speciation and other historical factors in
structuring natural communities. As examples of implications for understanding
and eventually treating human diseases, because they exhibit parental care that
is not complicated by the feeding of young, female rattlesnakes offer a simple
model system for studying hormonal control of that behavior. Likewise, the
shaker muscle anatomically and physiologically resembles heart tissue, and in
recent years the tails of restrained, live rattlesnakes have proved extremely
useful for studying muscle biochemistry in intact organisms with NMR and other
in vivo techniques. Understanding rattlesnake evolutionary relationships will
enable researchers to strategically choose species that have or lack particular
characteristics, and thereby untangle the molecular mechanisms underlying the
development of normal and abnormal functions.&lt;br/&gt;