* 0233570
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Engineering Shape Calculation for Surgery, Biology and Anthropology
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Gautam Dasgupta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2007
* USD 16,920.00

0233570&lt;br/&gt;Dasgupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration involves researchers and students at Columbia University
and the University of Bordeaux. Gautum Dasgupta in the US and Jose Braga in
France lead this interdisciplinary team of mechanical engineers and computer
scientists. This research project addresses development of optimized
computational codes, which can be employed in morphometric research in biology
and anthropology. The US investigator has been developing growth calculation
computer programs to yield quantitative descriptions of volume and shape change
distributions. He proposes to apply these codes in morphometric research in
biology and anthropology. The French team brings to this collaboration a focus
on fundamental biological and anthropological issues and expertise in clinical
implications in cranio-facial surgery and orthodontic treatments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF
and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US
investigators and graduate students. CNRS will support visits by French
researchers and graduate students to the United States. The project will
stimulate more accurate evaluation and efficient design of cranio-facial surgery
and orthodontic treatments related to maxillo-facial structure.&lt;br/&gt;