* 0233127
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Exchange on Adaptive Telecommunication Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* C. Richard Johnson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2006
* USD 36,102.00

0233127&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration in wireless telecommunications involves students and
researchers at Cornell University and the French National Institute for
Telecommunications. C. Richard Johnson in the US and Phillip Regalia in France
lead this cooperative project on the theory, design, and pedagogy of broadband
telecommunications receivers. As communication systems become sophisticated and
hardware advances allow for more complex algorithms in telecommunications
receivers, these systems will become more critical to emerging applications. The
investigators will address four topics: (1) adaptive multi-carrier equalization;
(2) ultra wideband receivers; (3) turbo equalization; and (4) equalizer
initialization strategies. The investigators have complementary expertise in
adaptive system theory for control, signal processing and communications
applications. Their expertise will be used in studies of the interplay of
broadband receiver subsystems such as synchronization, equalization and coding.
The French expertise in joint coding and equalization has potential for
adaptation to wireless personal area networks under development in the US.
Similarly, US expertise in multi-carrier and ultra wideband could be applied to
problems of inefficient spectral band in local wireless links in
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of joint
proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator
and graduate student. CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers and
graduate students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;