* 0233255
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Fluid and Particulate Transport in Self-affine Fractures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Joel Koplik, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2007
* USD 17,955.00

0233255&lt;br/&gt;Koplik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration involves Joel Koplik of City College, City University
of New York and Jean-Pierre Hulin of the University Marie and Pierre Curie in
Paris, France. The investigators propose to study several interrelated problems
centered on the relationship between the fractal characteristics of the geometry
of rough fractures and the transport properties of fluids within them. The key
geometrical feature of this work is the self-affine nature of fracture surfaces
and the resulting correlations in the velocity field when fluid flows through
such a fracture. The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration theoretical
and numerical expertise. This will be complemented by the experimental studies
on reconstructed fractures conducted by the French group. The joint program will
entail laboratory experiments on transparent rough surfaces copied from natural
rock samples with theoretical and computational studies in corresponding model
fractally-rough geometries. In addition, field experiments in a granite quarry
will be conducted in collaboration with the French Institute for Physics of the
Earth. The project will advance understanding of the motions of fluids and
particles in geological formations, with application to water supply,
hydrocarbon production, and waste disposal. The work is motivated by
environmental concerns about groundwater contamination and safe disposal of
nuclear waste in fractured rocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents
the U.S. side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the U.S. investigator, a postdoctoral researcher and/or graduate student. The
CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers to the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;