* 0233303
* Melting and Calving of Antarctic Ice Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Stanley Jacobs, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2007
* USD 249,994.00

Major portions of the Antarctic Ice Sheet float in the surrounding ocean, at the
physical and intellectual boundaries of oceanography and glaciology. These ice
shelves lose mass continuously by melting into the sea, and periodically by the
calving of icebergs. Those losses are compensated by the outflow of grounded
ice, and by surface accumulation and basal freezing. Ice shelf sources and sinks
vary on several time scales, but their wastage terms are not yet well known.
Reports of substantial ice shelf retreat, regional ocean freshening and
increased ice velocity and thinning are of particular concern at a time of
warming ocean temperatures in waters that have access to deep glacier grounding
lines. This award supports a study of the attrition of Antarctic ice shelves,
using recent ocean geochemical measurements and drawing on numerical modeling
and remote sensing resources. In cooperation with associates at Columbia
University and the British Antarctic Survey, measurements of chlorofluorocarbon,
helium, neon and oxygen isotopes will be used to infer basal melting beneath the
Ross Ice Shelf, and a combination of oceanographic and altimeter data will be
used to investigate the mass balance of George VI Ice Shelf. Ocean and remote
sensing observations will also be used to help refine numerical models of ice
cavity circulations. The objectives are to reduce uncertainties between
different estimates of basal melting and freezing, evaluate regional
variability, and provide an update of an earlier assessment of circumpolar net
melting. A better knowledge of ice shelf attrition is essential to an improved
understanding of ice shelf response to climate change. Large ice shelf calving
events can alter the ocean circulation and sea ice formation, and can lead to
logistics problems such as those recently experienced in the Ross Sea. Broader
impacts include the role of ice shelf meltwater in freshening and stabilizing
the upper ocean, and in the formation of Antarctic Bottom Water, which can be
traced far into the North Atlantic. To the extent that ice shelf attrition
influences the flow of grounded ice, this work also has implications for ice
sheet stability and sea level rise.

