* 0233292
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Coherent Radiative Transport in Atomic Vapors
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Mark Havey, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 18,260.00

0233292&lt;br/&gt;Havey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in atomic physics involves Mark D. Havey and students
at Old Dominion University and Robin Kaiser at the Nonlinear Research Institute
of Nice. The investigators propose to examine coherent radiative transport, with
specific attention to dynamical effects of atomic motion. A wide range of
phenomena associated with coherent radiative transport has already been observed
in solids and liquids. But studies in atomic gases have been limited. In this
project the investigators will study the influence of coherent transport in
thermal atomic gas samples and the coherent backscattering effect in a sample of
ultracold atoms. These experiments together will explore these regimes for
practical applications and for fundamental experiments directed toward strong
localization of light in atomic vapors. The project takes advantage of French
expertise in ultracold atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the
U.S. side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the U.S. investigator and graduate student. The CNRS will support the visits of
the French researchers to the United States. U.S. students will benefit from the
exchange of scientific techniques and experience with an international research
team.&lt;br/&gt;