* 0233661
* WCR:   Linkages Between the Chemical Weathering of Black Shales and Metal Contamination in Aquatic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Robyn Hannigan, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rachael G. Craig
* 11/30/2004
* USD 80,991.00

HANNIGAN &lt;br/&gt;0233661&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;Despite
large-scale explorations of connections between water quality and bedrock
weathering, large gaps in our understanding of these relationships remain.
Contaminants, such as metals extracted from soft sedimentary rocks such as black
shales, are released to rivers and groundwaters and subsequently are transported
to water supplies. While it is clear that black shales contribute to the metal
budgets we lack the basic information necessary to gauge the impact of black
shale weathering on water and sediment quality. This study will explore the
geochemical behavior of metals during black shale weathering in several
catchments (three underlain by black shales, one underlain by limestone and the
fifth impacted by agricultural activity). Data collection will integrate several
disciplines including geochemistry, mineralogy, hydrology and ecotoxicology.
Physical and chemical hydrologic data, metal chemistry of environmental media
(precipitation, surface water, groundwater, soil, stream sediments etc.) and
bioassay and sediment-water quality testing will be integrated over an 18 month
collection period. These data, when considered in concert, are critical to
assessing metal loading in black shale regions and the impact of metal release
on aquatic ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;