* 0233684
* SGER Award:  Assessment of Proterozoic, Post-Orogenic Structures Within Basement Massifs in the Southeastern United States
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Margaret Streepey, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2004
* USD 28,452.00

Post-orogenic extension occurs in most of the major mountain belts on Earth,
regardless of&lt;br/&gt;age or tectonic setting. Efforts have been made to both
quantify the driving mechanisms and also to correlate them from young to old
mountain belts, but the fundamental physics behind the transition from
contractional orogenesis to extension remain unclear. Studies that seek to
explain not only the kinematics of mountain evolution but also the dynamics can
give insights into crustal architecture and possibly deeper mantle involvement
in lithospheric dynamics. This project proposes to address these issues by
initially studying the temporal differences in post-orogenic extension across
the strike length of a major orogenic belt, the ca.1.1 billion year-old
Grenville Province. These results will be used in a larger context to assist in
creating an accurate three-dimensional model of the post-orogenic evolution of
an orogen. This project is exploratory in nature, as the effects of Paleozoic
mountain-building events on some of the rocks are not fully known, and a record
of activity related to Proterozoic orogenic events may be difficult or
impossible to find. However, if successful, important insights will be gained
about the nature of post-orogenic extension down the length of the ancient
Laurentian margin. The Grenville Province is exposed as a laterally continuous
belt from Labrador, Canada to Ontario, Canada and New York state. It is exposed
in a series of small inliers and basement massifs down the eastern United
States, with one of the southernmost outcrops within the Pine Mountain window of
Alabama and Georgia, as well as westerly massifs in Tennessee, North Carolina,
and Virginia. The structures and age relationships are well documented in the
Canadian Grenville but are not well known in the southern exposures. Detailed
information about Grenville structures in this region can provide important
insights and correlations to the northern, well-studied Grenville exposures.
This project requests funds to conduct an initial study of deformed basement
rocks within the Pine Mountain window to determine their suitability for
comparison with other Grenville-aged structures. It is possible that the
Paleozoic Appalachian orogenic events have overprinted these rocks to such an
extent that Grenville structures can no longer be documented. However, with the
advent of the technique of electron microprobe dating of monazites, it is
possible to quickly and accurately determine the age of minerals within shear
zones and therefore to determine the effects of metamorphic overprinting. In
this study, the PI will collect and analyze sheared basement rocks from the Pine
Mountain window as well as analyze the PI 's existing collection of sheared
rocks from the Canadian/New York Grenville Province. This will be done using
electron microprobe analysis of monazites in thin sections at the University of
Massachusetts. This technique, while not as precise as traditional methods of
geochronology, is rapid, efficient, and allows the investigator to retain all
structural information of a sample, which is essential when studying shear zones
that may have had multiple episodes of deformation. This will allow the PI to
determine the nature of the Paleozoic metamorphic overprint of these rocks. In
addition, analysis of the rocks in Ontario and New York provides a check on the
technique of monazite dating by the electron microprobe, a relatively new
procedure. Since there is an extensive database of ages, collected by the PI
using standard U/Pb and 40 Ar-39 Ar isotopic techniques, all monazite ages can
be framed within a very detailed temperature-time path.