* 0233837
* Freshwater Bivalve Morphometrics as a Means of Investigating Hydrological Conditions During the Hypsithermal Climatic Interval
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Evan Peacock, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 28,464.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Evan Peacock will undertake a
pilot study aimed at developing a new method for reconstructing past river
conditions. The method involves measuring changes in the size and shape of
freshwater mussel shells over time. Freshwater mussels display a considerable
amount of variation in shell characteristics. Upstream forms are typically small
and have pronounced shell sculpture in the form of ridges, knobs, pustules, and
other traits. The same species become larger and less sculptured with downstream
distance. This is a direct response to environmental conditions, as larger size
and a smoother shell allow better anchoring in stronger currents. Presumably,
significant changes in climate should have altered stream conditions in the
past. Those changed conditions should be reflected in changes in mussel shells
from archaeological sites. The Hypsithermal climatic interval was a warm, dry
period that lasted from approximately 7,000 to 5,000 years ago. Its effects on
prehistoric cultures in the southeastern United States are currently poorly
understood. Some researchers believe that streams were lower due to decreased
precipitation, meaning that riverine resources such as mussel beds became more
available for exploitation. Other researchers believe that dryness led to
decreased vegetation on uplands, leading to increased erosion that smothered
mussel beds and covered gravel beds from which rock for stone tools had been
taken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the effect of the Hypsithermal on
Southeastern rivers, Dr. Peacock will examine mussel shells from the Vaughn
Mound, a prehistoric site on the Tombigbee River in eastern Mississippi. A
Middle Archaic stratum has yielded shell from the Hypsithermal period, while a
Late Woodland stratum provided shell from about 1,200 years ago. Valves from the
two distinct cultural layers will be compared in terms of size and sculpture. If
the river was significantly lower during the Hypsithermal, the shells should be
smaller and more sculptured than during the Late Woodland period when
essentially modern climatic conditions prevailed. As an additional test of past
hydrological conditions, shell chemical analysis will be conducted using an
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer. With increased stream flow,
elements such as calcium and strontium become diluted in waterways: such changes
are discernible in shells, as mussels uptake elements in proportion to what is
in the waterways. If this pilot study is successful, it will establish a method
that can be used worldwide to investigate past climatic effects on the
landscape. Many collections exist that could be analyzed in the manner
described. More accurate assessments of past climatic effects will have direct
implications for better understanding past settlement patterns, subsistence
strategies, raw material procurement, and a host of other issues. New methods
such this will help in mapping out the long-term effects of climate change on
culture.&lt;br/&gt;