* 0233728
* Molecular Design and 3-D Assembly for Coupled Electro-Optical Functionalities
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Bradley Chmelka, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2009
* USD 900,000.00

This project targets nanoscale control of molecular assembly to create
integrated, functional systems such that "every atom counts", i.e. the active
volume and function is maximized relative to the atomic density. The approach
makes use of organized interfaces with high surface areas and amplification of
response. The research is synthesis and processing focused to determine the
molecular synthesis and 3 dimensional organization needed to structurally
integrate hierarchical assembly with interacting electro-optic functionalities.
Because of the ease of simultaneous synthesis and processing and the huge
chemical diversity that is accessible through composition, inorganic
modification, organic incorporation, and multidomain assembly, the potential
significant technological applications are great. In order to realize these
possibilities, it is essential to be able to predictively design and control the
multivariable kinetic and thermodynamic parameters that lead to the desired
multiscale structure and functional properties. The educational emphasis for
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers working on this project
will include 1) the promotion of professional careers for female students and
postdoctoral associates, 2) providing cutting edge collaborative
interdisciplinary interactions and resources within the University of California
scientific community, 3) personal exposure to leading research and educational
programs in world-wide institutions, and 4) provision of summer "hands-on"
training opportunities for K-12 and community college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enable, by controlled
molecular assembly, the creation of multi-functional devices made up of thin
films, coatings or fibers that have thickness' which are the diameter of a human
hair or smaller. The thin films, coatings and fibers will contain self-
assembled, 3-d patterned and interfaced functional components that are
dimensioned on the molecular and nanoscale. Synthesis and processing are carried
out simultaneously to greatly reduce the expense and time normally associated
with multi-step assembly. Commercial interest includes low-dielectric coatings,
optical limiters, photovoltaics, photocatalysts, chemical and bio sensors,
displays, microcavity lasers and laser arrays, battery electrolytes, and optical
data storage. The educational emphasis for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral researchers working on this project includes the promotion of
professional careers for female students and postdoctoral associates, providing
cutting edge collaborative interdisciplinary interactions and resources within
the University of California scientific community, personal exposure to leading
research and educational programs in world-wide institutions, and provision of
summer "hands-on" training opportunities for K-12 and community college
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;