* 0233780
* The Role of Land Atmosphere Interactions on Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts and Convective Initiation over the Southern Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2008
* USD 405,636.00

Improving the understanding of warm-season precipitation processes in the U.S.
Southern Great Plains (SGP) is a research priority of the U.S. Weather Research
Program. Using observations from the International H2O Project (IHOP), the
Principal Investigators will study the multi-scale land-surface/atmosphere
interactions and their impacts on the initiation and intensification of deep
convection in the SGP and improve the diagnosis and prediction of warm season
rain.

The investigators will use stomatal resistance / biophysical measurements to
characterize the temporal and spatial variations of stomatal resistance,
transpiration and hence water vapor exchange over typical landscapes in the SGP.
A broad outline of the research activities includes: (1) modifications to land
surface model (LSM) physics relating to soil moisture / soil temperature
assimilation, photosynthesis-based land surface model enhancements, and
consideration of diffuse radiation and explicit terrain effects, in order to
understand the effects of soil moisture and vegetation representation on
convection and convective precipitation; (2) testing of the LSM using episodic
convective storm analyses, as well as month long simulations using a high
resolution coupled mesoscale numerical model ; and (3) diagnosing the nature of
the coupled / interactive pathways between the soil, vegetation and atmospheric
convection leading to the convective potential and the convective precipitation
using ensemble and statistical-dynamical factor separation analyses.

The study will address the need to investigate the complex interactions between
land surface, planetary boundary layer, and cloud-radiation processes, and their
effects on the development of deep convection and improve model quantitative
precipitation forecast skills.

As a broader impact, the study involves participation in a collaborative program
and integrating undergraduate and graduate student research theses within the
research activities. Successful completion of the research may have a positive
impact on the forecasting of convective initiation.