* 0233294
* Collaborative Project: The Role of Counterfactual Mind-Sets in Debiasing Group Decisions with Adam Galinsky
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Laura Kray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2005
* USD 99,994.00

Many consequential decisions are made by groups, from jury decisions over the
guilt and innocence of defendants (Pennington & Hastie, 1992) to medical
decisions made by pooling information from different expert physicians (Larson,
Christensen, Franz, & Abbott; 1998). An unfortunate reality of group decision
making is that collective decisions are often beset by flaws, leading innocent
people to be incarcerated and those in poor health to become sicker rather than
healthier. One category of factors that leads groups to make faulty decisions is
the manner in which information is sought, shared, and processed in a social
context (Janis, 1982). Given the magnitude of the consequences of group
decisions, it is important to consider how groups can seek, share, and process
information in a more systematic and less biased manner. The purpose of the
current research is to gain a better theoretical and practical understanding of
the role of counterfactual thinking, or thoughts about what might have been or
what almost happened, in influencing group decision making. Counterfactual mind-
sets are expected to increase the propensity of groups to engage in mental
simulations and consideration of alternatives. We predict that activating a
counterfactual mind-set will improve the decision making accuracy of groups. The
proposed program of research explores the nature, boundary conditions, and range
of applications of activating a counterfactual mind-set in group decision making
and problem solving contexts. The project will involve a series of controlled,
experimental studies that establish the causal relationship between
counterfactual mind-sets and group decision making processes and outcomes.

