* 0233364
* The Assembly, Maintenance, Service for Space Solar Power Systems via Self-Reconfigurable Modules (SSP-SRM)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Behrokh Khoshnevis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 08/31/2005
* USD 420,500.00

This project is to research and develop a self-assembling system (with an option
for human remote control) for deploying, storing, docking, and assembling the
Space Solar Power System (SSPS) in space. The research challenges include the
design for self-assembling components, the control for a self-assembly process,
the autonomous docking among components, and the coordination of components'
actions for precision maneuvers in space. The project will build upon the latest
technologies from self-reconfigurable modular robotics and develop (1) a novel
design for building the Intelligent and Reconfigurable Components (IRC) for
SSPS; (2) the free-flying "intelligent fiber/rope" "match-maker" (FIMER) robots
with self-reconfigurable and self-adjustable tethering for matching, fetching,
and docking among IRCs; and (3) a biologically inspired, totally distributed
control method called the Digital Hormone Model for planning, executing, and
monitoring the self-assembly process. All IRCs and FIMER robots use the same
type of docking connectors, and each FIMER robot is a self-adjustable string
with free-flying heads that can attach to any connectors in the system. Using
these concepts, the sequence of self-assembly can be either pre-programmed in
IRCs or remotely controlled by humans. The project will also investigate
effective and practical solutions for dynamic control in micro-gravity
environments, and new construction techniques for reducing payload for space
transportation. All these new technologies will be validated on earth by free-
flying prototypes generalized from an existing self-reconfigurable robotics
system called CONRO to perform self-assembly in the laboratory, and the results
of these experiments will eventually lead to a flight-qualified system for
testing in space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;