* 0233651
* Collaborative Research:  WCR: Hydrology of Central and Southwest Asia: Connections Between Regional Atmospheric Circulation and Large-scale Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Alexey Kaplan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 56,199.00

Severe drought is a notable feature of the hydrology of Central and Southwest
Asia (CSW) Asia. During the 4-year period from approximately November 1998
through the end of 2002, the region experienced an exceptionally severe drought,
with devastating societal and environmental consequences. The drought comprised
the largest area of persistent precipitation deficits anywhere in the world
during that period and was locally the most severe drought in over 50 years.
Recent research suggests that large-scale, potentially predictable, climate
variability is an important factor in CSW Asia precipitation and played a
primary role in the recent drought. To explore the potential predictability
provided by large-scale climate variability, the key mechanisms for deficits in
the regional water cycle of CSW Asia are analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to
the importance of synoptic storms as a precipitation-generation mechanism in CSW
Asia, regional hydrologic anomalies are related to variations in the upper-level
wind patterns. These regional atmospheric flow patterns, in turn, can be
affected both from the west, by Atlantic variability, and from the east, by
Indo-West Pacific variability. These connections and their potential
predictability are examined through observational analysis of: (1) regional-
scale fluctuations in river flows, (2) the links between these fluctuations and
key features of the regional atmospheric circulation that control moisture
transport into the region, and (3) the influence of large-scale climate
variability on the regional circulation, with particular emphasis on the North
Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), and the
eastern Indian Ocean convective maximum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals
of this research is the development of climate information relevant to regional
relief effort and management and reconstruction of agriculture, water resources,
and health systems.