* 0233463
* SGER:   Detection of Bioterrorism-Linked Microbial Pathogens Using Surface Acoustic Wave Liquid Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Paul Millard, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Kawthar A. Zaki
* 08/31/2003
* USD 79,968.00

0233463&lt;br/&gt;Pereira da Cunha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioterrorism threats and
attacks in civilian environments require sensors that can rapidly and accurately
detect minute quantities of pathological bioagents. Selective and inexpensive
sensors are urgently needed to detect pathogens in liquid environments,
including food and water supplies. Conventional laboratory analyses are time-
consuming, labor-intensive and inconsistent with the expedient response required
in the wake or possibility of a bioterrorist act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities proposed in this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) are
multidisciplinary and involve two faculty members from the University of Maine.
Dr. Mauricio Pereira da Cunha, from the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, will provide expertise in the area of sensor platform development
in general, and acoustic wave sensors in particular. Pereira DaCunha is a 2002
NSF CAREER award recipient, who has worked for more than 16 years in the
acoustics microwave area. Dr. Paul Millard, from the Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering, is a microbiologist with more than 15 years of
experience in microbial detection and analysis. Both Pereira da Cunha and
Millard are affiliated with the University of Maine's Laboratory for Surface
Science and Technology, a multidisciplinary laboratory with appropriate
facilities for the realization of the proposed tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research activities described in this proposal are consistent with the purpose
of the NSF SGER program. The research plan brings together expertise and
research results from two separate but related areas, and moves both areas
forward into a new, exploratory application that is highly relevant to
bioterrorism threats, particularly in liquid and mist
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pereira da Cunha recently fabricated a
successful Shear Horizontal Surface Acoustic Wave (SH) SAW mode device utilizing
the new Langasite family of crystals (LGX). He tested this device in a liquid
environment and has obtained preliminary results for proof-of-concept device
performance. Millard has developed immobilized molecular padlock technology for
nucleic acid recognition and amplification, allowing for the rapid detection of
pathogenic viruses and bacteria in aquaculture. The proposed exploratory
research combines molecular padlock probes for specific nucleic acid
amplification with the SH-SAW sensor platform to produce an inexpensive hybrid
biosensor to detect microbial pathogens in liquid quickly, accurately and
reliably. Successful detection of these agents will justify the generation of
molecular probes for detecting selected waterborne human pathogens that are
likely agents of bioterrorism, i.e. enteropathogenic Escherichia coli,
Salmonella typhi, and Vibrio cholera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted over one year, with the assistance of two M.S. students. Research
results will be integrated with education through an NSF GK-12 program for area
high schools, undergraduate courses, and an NSF REU program that involves
university students from around the U.S. Research results will be disseminated
through peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and international
symposia.&lt;br/&gt;