* 0233453
* JIETSSP: Microwave Wireless Power Transmission with Retrodirective Beam Steering
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Kai Chang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Funding is requested for a three year program that will: 1)
complete&lt;br/&gt;development of a small-scale, portable solid-state
retrodirective wireless&lt;br/&gt;power transmission (WPT) demonstration system;
2) use the solid-state phased&lt;br/&gt;array transmitter and rectenna
(rectifier + antenna) developed in task 1 for&lt;br/&gt;ground testing to
determine the phase control of the transmitter. This&lt;br/&gt;program will
provide a path for the first US non-laboratory demonstration of&lt;br/&gt;beamed
power in which the transmitted beam will be controlled by a pilot
beam&lt;br/&gt;from the receiving antenna (a retrodirective system). The program
will&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate key components of an integrated microwave wireless
power&lt;br/&gt;transmission system: a phased array transmitter, rectifying
receiving antenna&lt;br/&gt;(rectenna) and the retrodirective control system.
The transmitter will&lt;br/&gt;operate at a frequency of 5.8 GHz and will
consist of 4 panels, which will&lt;br/&gt;allow beam steering in two dimensions.
The array will consist of 640&lt;br/&gt;elements, arranged in 10 subarrays with
64 elements in each subarray.&lt;br/&gt;Microstrip patch antenna will be used
for low cost fabrication, lightweight,&lt;br/&gt;planar structure, and good
performance. The patch antennas will be located on&lt;br/&gt;one side of the
ground plane and the microwave and electronic circuits will&lt;br/&gt;be on the
other side. The signals are coupled from the circuits to
antenna&lt;br/&gt;elements through equal-phase microstrips. The distributing
microstrip&lt;br/&gt;circuits and power dividers are fed by a coaxial line
connected to the center&lt;br/&gt;of the subarray. The beam control subsystem
will use photonics to distribute&lt;br/&gt;reference phase information. A
circular polarized rectenna will be&lt;br/&gt;constructed. Since the power
density level at the rectenna array will be&lt;br/&gt;fairly low for the
proposed experiment, techniques using low breakdown&lt;br/&gt;voltage diodes or
multi-antenna rectenna elements per diode will be&lt;br/&gt;investigated. The
ability of the retrodirective phase control system to&lt;br/&gt;maintain tight
beam steering can be measured by the use of simple receivers&lt;br/&gt;located
around the rectenna. The measured performance will be compared
with&lt;br/&gt;theoretical predictions for error sources (phase jitter, phase
bias,&lt;br/&gt;mechanical misalignment, and amplitude variations)
systematically introduced&lt;br/&gt;into the system. Beam patterns including
side lobes and grating lobes will be&lt;br/&gt;measured.&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide a practical demonstration of wireless power&lt;br/&gt;transmission
as an enabling technology for space solar power for both&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial
and extraterrestrial application. The program will be coordinated&lt;br/&gt;and
managed by the Center for Space Power (CSP) at Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;(TAMU) and conducted by a team that includes researchers
from the Department&lt;br/&gt;of Electrical Engineering and the Johnson Space
Center (JSC). NASA support&lt;br/&gt;for this program will include laboratory
and test facilities at NASA Johnson&lt;br/&gt;Space
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;