* 0233242
* RUI:  Control of Branching in Neurospora Crassa
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Michael Watters, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/2007
* USD 117,940.00

0233242&lt;br/&gt;Watters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in most filamentous fungi,
growth of Neurospora crassa begins by highly polarized cell extension that leads
to the formation of a hyphal tube of uniform diameter. The continuously
extending tip sends off periodic branches, which are themselves, capable of
extension and branching. There are few other biological systems that develop in
this manner. New branches normally emerge a short distance behind the apex of
the extending tip and grow at an angle to the main hypha and are referred to as
'lateral' branches. Under normal conditions the majority of branch points form
laterally, but alternate branch morphology is seen at a minority of branch
points. In this minority morphology, the two tips emerge at an angle to the
previous direction of growth forming a forked structure. These are referred to
as 'dichotomous' or 'apical' branch points. In this project, the genetics of
control of branch morphology will be examined. The project will focus on the
lateral/dichotomous dimorphism observed in Neurospora crassa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to advance along two independent
fronts. First, the collection of morphological mutations will be expanded by
screening for suppressors of a select group of known morphological mutations. In
this phase of the project, the focus will be on mutations that cause a shift in
favor of dichotomous branching. This is expected to uncover suppressors which
act on specific branching mutants, and hopefully will also recover those which
are capable of at least partially suppressing the branching effect on a wider
selection of morphological mutations, acting, in effect, as low-branching
mutants. Such mutations are largely unknown in Neurospora. Second, the
morphological effects of cold shock will be further examined. In Neurospora,
temperature shifts (25 to 4) have been shown to cause a dramatic, but temporary
branching effect. One phase of the response is characterized by a switch in
morphology to all dichotomous branching. By screening for mutants with altered
responses to cold shock, genes responsible for the developmental switch between
branch morphologies should be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filamentous fungi
play a large role in human affairs. They are major recyclers of biomass and a
significant source of losses in agriculture and lumber production as pathogens
and agents of spoilage. They affect both producers (loss of product, cost of
antifungal actions) and consumers (increased costs, food spoilage, decomposition
of wood products) and thus have a significant economic impact. An increase in
our understanding of tip growth and branching in fungi would prove useful for
more direct control of the growth of the organism. The project should prove
useful to batch culturing technologies, control of fungi in material subjected
to temperature shifts, and should expand our understanding of the growth of
filamentous fungi in the field.&lt;br/&gt;