* 0233884
* Workshop to Define a Technology Roadmap for the Exploration and Sampling of Lake Vostok
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Stephen Rock, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,040.00

This award is for support of a workshop to define a technology roadmap that will
enable exploration and sampling under the ice of Lake Vostok in East Antarctica.
In particular, the goals will be to identify the technological barriers to
sampling the water and sediment of the lake, and to recommend to NSF a
technology development plan to overcome these barriers. To achieve these goals,
the workshop participants will (1) assess the current state-of-the-art in
underwater exploration capabilities in the context of the science goals for
future exploration activities; (2) identify critical yet feasible technologies
that need to be developed in order to enable the science objectives; and (3)
begin a continuing dialog between the science and technology communities over
issues of importance to the exploration of subglacial lakes. This workshop will
bring together a select group of participants representing the three communities
of science, underwater technology and planetary protection/contamination. The
workshop will be structured to include prepared presentations (by all three
communities), panel discussions and informal discussions. The product of the
workshop will be a report documenting the key findings of the workshop, and in
particular the technology roadmap required to enable future science in Lake
Vostok and other subglacial lakes.