* 0233773
* Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Bertrand Halperin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 480,000.00

0233773&lt;br/&gt;Halperin&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical research carried out under this
grant will improve our understanding of a variety of phenomena in condensed
matter and statistical physics. Some of the work will try to explain puzzling
results from existing experiments. Other work will aim to improve calculational
techniques, to understand the wider consequences of existing theoretical models,
or to suggest new experimental tests of theoretical
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have educational impact through the
training of graduate students, undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows. The
Principal Investigator is also involved in efforts to develop presentations to
the general public, which could benefit from this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large portion of the research will concern
properties of systems where conduction electrons are confined in one or more
directions. As an important example of such a system, the electrons in a field-
effect transistor are trapped at a semiconducting interface, and may be
described as a two-dimensional electron system. A number of surprising
phenomena, known collectively as quantum Hall effects, have been discovered in
two-dimensional electron systems in strong magnetic fields at low temperatures.
Recently, experiments have been carried out on systems with two parallel two-
dimensional electron systems, coupled by the Coulomb interactions between
electrons in different layers. Research under this grant will develop improved
theories of the various states that can occur in such systems, including weakly
and strongly coupled phases, and phases where the electron density may vary
periodically in space on the scale of 100nm. Drag experiments, where current in
one layer produces a voltage in the second layer, show puzzling results in
quantum Hall systems, which this research proposes to explain. The research will
also try to improve the understanding of experiments that measure the
conductance arising from electrons that tunnel through the barrier between the
two layers. Other work will try to understand shot noise measured in single-
layer quantum Hall systems when current passes through a series of narrow
constrictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another research area will be the study of
one-dimensional electron systems, which can occur in carbon nanotubes, or can be
fabricated out of two-dimensional electron systems in semiconductors. Previous
analyses of the effects of electron-electron interactions on tunneling between
parallel one-dimensional wire segments will be extended to more general ranges
of experimental parameters. Other work will try to understand drag experiments
with parallel wires, and will explore phenomena in semiconductor
nanowires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another research topic will explore
generalizations of the Kondo effect, where repeated flips of the spin of a
localized electron produce peculiar effects in electrical transport at low
temperatures. Generalizations include situations where changes in the position
of a localized electron, rather than its spin, give rise to anomalous transport
effects: and situations where the coupled motion of several interacting
electrons is crucial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other theoretical work will explore
aspects of sound propagation and of NMR measurements in fluid-containing rock
formations, which could have significance for oil well management.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical research carried out under this grant will improve our
understanding of a variety of phenomena in condensed matter and statistical
physics. Some of the work will try to explain puzzling results from existing
experiments. Other work will aim to improve calculational techniques, to
understand the wider consequences of existing theoretical models, or to suggest
new experimental tests of theoretical ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have educational impact through the training of graduate students,
undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows. The Principal Investigator is also
involved in efforts to develop presentations to the general public, which could
benefit from this research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;