* 0233203
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Study of Quantum Hydrogen Fluids and Solids
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 12/31/2007
* USD 48,000.00

0233203&lt;br/&gt;Vilesov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project. The principal investigator for the project is
Professor Andrey Vilesov at the University of Southern California. Professor
Birgitta Whaley of the University of California in Berkeley will also be
participating. The Japanese collaborator is Professor Takamasa Momose at Kyoto
University in Japan. They will be undertaking research on the study of quantum
hydrogen fluids and crystals. They will combine several experimental and
theoretical approaches to study the dynamics of pure and doped hydrogen clusters
and crystals. Theoretical calculations will provide detailed insights into the
nature of the quantum statistical effects and the effect of the interaction with
molecular chromophore core. An important component of the project is the
development of the pulsed Raman shifter based on solid para hydrogen crystal,
the medium, which is characterized by large gain and extremely narrow lines.
This development may give a real break through in the field of pulsed far
infrared laser technology (5-10 um), where there are no commercial lasers at
present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of three
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
U.S. researchers provide expertise of the growth and spectroscopy of pure and
molecular doped hydrogen clusters inside ultracold helium droplets and
theoretical interpretation of the results, whereas the Japanese group has a
unique high resolution (10 MHz) difference frequency generation laser
spectrometer and is proficient in infrared spectroscopy (3-10 um) of pure and
molecular doped para hydrogen crystals. The collaboration will offer great
mutual benefits. The project advances international human resources through the
participation of a number of postdocs and graduate students. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Results of
the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;