* 0233138
* US-France Cooperative Research:  An Integrated Optics Beam Combiner for the CHARA Array
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Harold McAlister, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 18,810.00

0233138&lt;br/&gt;McAlister&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
U.S.-France collaboration in optical long baseline interferometry for astronomy
at Georgia State University and the Observatory of Grenoble. Harold A. McAlister
leads the US group, which includes Stephen T. Ridgway of the National Optical
Astronomy Observatories, Theo A. Ten Brummelaar of Georgia State and several
graduate students. Jean-Philippe Berger, an astronomer at the Grenoble
Observatory's Astrophysics Laboratory, leads the French group. The purpose of
this US-France joint project is to develop and validate a new generation
instrument capable of combining light from six telescopes at the Center for High
Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) located in Mount Wilson, California. The new
instrument will be based on technology developed by the Grenoble Observatory.
This technology can replace dozens of precision fabricated and aligned optical
components with a single optical "chip." The US group will develop the
subsystems necessary to operate six telescopes simultaneously (including pair-
wise fringe stabilization), will lead the design of the beam-combiner
laboratory, and will develop optical and electronic interfaces. This is
complemented by the Grenoble group's work on a combination system using
integrated optics technologies. The goal is to obtain the first on-sky
demonstration of an integrated optics beam combination at the CHARA array within
the first year, and to obtain the first images with the full array at the
conclusion of the grant period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the
US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the US investigators and students. The CNRS will support the visits of the
French researchers. &lt;br/&gt;