* 0233328
* US-France Cooperative Research: Development of a Reliable Solid Precursor Delivery System
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Wayne Gladfelter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 12,921.00

0233328&lt;br/&gt;Gladfelter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-
France collaboration in chemistry involves researchers and students at the
University of Minnesota and the Ecole Nationale Superieure d'Ingenieurs en Arts
Chimiques. Wayne Gladfelter in the US, and Constantin Vahlas in France lead this
collaboration. They will investigate chemical vapor deposition (CVD) processes,
including metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). These are widely used
in industry to form films of metals, semiconductors and dielectrics. For
example, optoelectronic devices such as lasers are produced from
trimethylgallium and arsine in an MOCVD process. Recent attempts to improve CVD
processes by designing new precursors have encountered processing problems. As
the size and complexity of the precursor increases, the precursor solidifies at
standard temperature and pressure. The investigators propose to use fluidized-
bed technology to solve this problem and will design and construct a fluidized-
bed solid delivery systems for the chemical vapor deposition of metallic
molybdenum and zirconium dioxide films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The French
investigator and his team are expert in fluidized-bed technology and have
recently used fluidized-bed CVD to coat powders with metals. This is
complemented by the US research group's experience in synthesizing of molecular
precursors for CVD of thin films. They also have completed investigations of the
relationship between deposition chemistry and film composition and
microstructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of
parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and
living expenses for the US investigator and his students. The CNRS will support
visits by French researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;