* 0233842
* Infrastructure for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Richard Hooper, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2005
* USD 608,441.00

0127884&lt;br/&gt;Bales&lt;br/&gt;A number of recent studies by the National
Academy of Sciences and other groups have articulated critical needs for
vigorous new interdisciplinary programs of research and education in hydrologic
science to provide the basis for sound, infonned decisions at local, regional,
national, and international levels. It has become apparent that the science
infrastructure in hydrology and related sciences is currently inadequate to meet
many of the enumerated priority science questions and societal needs.
Specifically, coordinated investments in instrumentation, field measurement
strategies and analytical tools are critically needed to gain greater
understanding of hydrologic processes and the linkages between hydrologic and
related biogeochemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;In response to this need for
infrastructure in hydrologic sciences, the Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) has been created to facilitate
such research. During its first two years, the Consortium will undertake science
and implementation planning aimed at establishing research infrastructure in
three main areas: i) Long Term Hydrologic Observatories to provide the
consistent, integrated, long-term information from point to continental scales;
ii) a Hydrologic Infon-nation System program to support the data, information,
and analysis requirements of the community; and iii) a Hydrologic Measurement
Technology program to develop and operate state-of-the-art systems and provide
support services for hydrologic research.&lt;br/&gt;In year two, the formulation
of plans and proposals for programs in education and technology transfer also
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;This infrastructure initiative will be driven by
the hydrologic community's desire and society's need to develop new
understanding about priority questions in hydrology and related sciences that
will have significant implications for the health and sustainability of regional
and national economies as well as for the ecosystems in which they may
flourish.&lt;br/&gt;