* 0233051
* SBIR Phase I: Nanofluidic Reference Electrode with an Invariant Liquid Junction Potential
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Scott Broadley, Broadley-James Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,896.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the technical feasibility of a nanofluidic flowing liquid junction (NFLJ)
reference electrode. These electrodes, because of their low flow and stable
potential, can operate for years without human attention. The objective is to
develop a reference electrode with an invariant potential, a flow rate of <100
nanoliters per hour, and a reservoir of 5 ml sufficient for 5 years of
continuous operation. I. This nanofluidic device will operate at two orders of
magnitude lower flow rate than the microfluidic liquid junction reference
electrodes currently under development. The reduced size, and extraordinary long
lifetimes due to exceedingly small electrolyte consumption, will make possible
handheld pH and potentiometric sensors with a combined shelf life and operating
life of up to five years without recalibration or refilling. These miniature
reference electrodes are being developed for use with existing portable,
handheld, commercial instruments. They will find application in laboratory
research, environmental monitoring, and detection of chemical and biological
agents.

Commercially, a pH sensor with an NFLJ reference electrode offers significantly
greater measurement precision over a longer time than any other pH sensor on the
market. The precision pH sensor market is involved in measurements for
regulatory compliance and for matters of process validation. This market segment
pays a premium to obtain the most precise pH sensors available for applications
that must withstand the scrutiny of Federal, State, and local regulatory
agencies. The annual market for precision pH sensors is 200,000 units and $45
million in sales. This market segment will readily respond to any new sensor
technology that results in more precise measurements over longer periods. The
NFLJ pH sensor has the potential to become the new standard for such precision
pH measurement applications. In addition, the new sensor will require less
calibration and maintenance, which will significantly lower the cost of
ownership and operation.

