* 0233440
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Adaptation and Migration Among Populations of Spiders (Nephila clavipes)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Linden Higgins, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/2006
* USD 36,950.00

0123578&lt;br/&gt; Higgins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will
support a research collaboration between Dr. Linden E. Higgins of the University
of Massachusetts and Dr. Juan Nunez Farfan of the Instituto de Ecologia of the
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico City. The researchers
intend to study the mechanisms of evolution of local adaptation in organisms
found in diverse habitats. Not all species found in diverse habitats show local
adaptation, and an improved understanding of why species fail to evolve local
specialization will improve our understanding of how and when evolutionary
diversification can proceed. A central question of their project is: Why do some
species remain coherent units over diverse habitats? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
large, orb-weaving spider Nephila clavipes (Araneae: Tetraglathidae) is found
throughout central and southern Mexico, continuously distributed along a cline
from the Gulf Coast to the Pacific coast and in isolated peripheral populations
in mid-altitude mountainous locations. There is little local differentiation
among these populations, and the species exhibits great phenotypic plasticity in
many aspects of its biology. Two alternative models will provide the researchers
with testable predictions concerning the amount of genetic differentiation and
local adaptation among populations. Predictions arising from these two
alternative models of species coherence will be tested using field observations,
molecular genetics, and laboratory experiments. The collaboration will benefit
from bringing together the U.S. PI's expertise on the ecology, development,
behavior, and physiology of the chosen spider species, with the Mexican PI's
work on the phenotypic evolution in different organisms using the framework of
quantitative and population genetics. &lt;br/&gt;