* 0233849
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: High Temperature Wave Speeds of Mantle Minerals and Their Seismological Implications
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Robert Liebermann, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 07/31/2009
* USD 27,426.00

0233849&lt;br/&gt;Liebermann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award facilitates
collaboration in geophysics research between two world class research groups led
by Professor Robert Liebermann of Stony Brook University and Professor Ian
Jackson of the Australian National University in Canberra, Australia. In recent
years the two groups have separately developed novel experimental techniques for
measuring the temperature dependence of elastic wave speeds in laboratory
prepared specimens that accurately represent the minerals of the earth's
transition zone, 400 to 700 km below the surface. They plan to use these to
study the mixed pressure-temperature dependence of wave speeds in fabricated
materials exposed to similar temperature regimes but very different pressure
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interpretation of seismological models for the
earth's interior in terms of chemical composition, mineralogy and temperature
requires laboratory-derived information concerning the elastic wave speeds of
the relevant minerals and also their pressure and temperature dependence. This
collaboration will advance the understanding of these relations through the
parallel use of various complementary techniques. The collaboration will also
provide international experience for several early career/postdoctoral
scientists and graduate students, including one from a historically black
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased knowledge of pressure-temperature
dependence will improve the inference of chemical composition, mineralogical
make-up and temperature variations within the earth's mantle&lt;br/&gt;