* 0233500
* AlGaN/GaN Heterostructure Field-Effect Transistor Free-Space Combining Oscillator:    An Approach for Solar Power Conversion to High RF Power for Wireless Transmission to Earth
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* John Volakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 03/31/2005
* USD 215,000.00

0233500&lt;br/&gt;Pavlidis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predictions of the power needed
in 50 years or so imply commercial power levels usages 3 to 5 times greater than
today's. Meanwhile, power generation cost per kWh need be about 10 times less.
Further, considering the necessity for clean, non-polluting alternative sources
of energy, and a trend to abandon nuclear power generation makes solar power
sources, increasingly more attractive. However, earth-based solar cell power
generation at the predicted level by 2050 implies an unrealistically large earth
surface area (about 1/5 of the entire United States). Thus, alternative means
must be employed to harness solar power, and space-based solar arrays offer this
possibility. This proposal addresses wireless power transmission (WPT) by means
of spatial power-combining oscillator arrays that employ high power widebandgap
semiconductor devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will address the theoretical
and practical aspects of designing very large, low profile, printed, active and
self-oscillating injection locked antenna arrays consisting of thousands of
A1GaN/GaN Heterostructure Field Effect Transistors (HFETs) to generate a
powerful coherent microwave beam. GaN HFETs and their high-frequency, non-linear
and noise characteristics will be optimized for DC to RF conversion in WPTs. The
proposed studies address widebandgap solid-state device issues central to
transmission by microwaves and their implementation in spatial power combining
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs goal are to design a highly stable,
efficient and multimode-free oscillator array that is tolerant to multiple
device failures. Low cost and self-assembly are other attributes. Their design
approach is to start with a fundamental study and analysis of multiple device
injection locked oscillators in close proximity with radiating elements and
devise techniques to design, optimize and construct large, stable and efficient
injection locked spatially combined oscillator arrays. The innovative approaches
proposed under this program will lead in understanding of GaN-based device,
oscillator and spatial power combination in conjunction with power generated by
solar cells. This will open new possibilities in RF power transmission for
satisfying projected needs of 2kW per person in 2050, translating to 20 tera
Watts.&lt;br/&gt;