* 0233206
* US-France/Germany Cooperative Research: Circuit and System Verification using Word-Level Information
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Maciej Ciesielski, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 22,060.00

0233206&lt;br/&gt;Ciesielski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France-Germany cooperative research involves researchers and students at the
University of Massachusetts, University of Montpellier II, University of
Bretagne in France, and the University of Bremen in Germany. Maciej Ciesielski
in the US, Bruno Rouzeyre and Emmanuel Boutillon in France, and Rolf Drechsler
in Germany plan an international project to develop new software computer tools.
The objective is to develop fundamental techniques in design verification and
architectural synthesis based on modern data structures, such as decision
diagrams. They will explore the application of Taylor Expansion Diagrams (TED)
to verification designs at the behavioral and register transfer levels (RTL).
They will also investigate the application of TEDs to architectural synthesis
from algorithmic descriptions. The project takes advantage of complementary
expertise in architectural and high level synthesis, test, and binary/word-level
decision diagrams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of
parallel proposals to the NSF, the CNRS, and the DAAD. NSF will cover travel
funds and living expenses for the US investigator and graduate students. CNRS
and DAAD will support visits by French and German researchers and graduate
students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;