* 0233708
* Reactive Mass Transfer at Dynamic Interfaces: Impact of Micro-Scale Fluid Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Johannes Khinast, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2007
* USD 203,398.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's research during the last years showed
that selectivity and yield of fast gas-liquid reactions strongly depend on the
dynamics of single rising bubbles in a continuous phase, and not on the large-
scale mixing patterns in a chemical reactor. High selectivity and yield are
important for a chemical process, since it reduces byproduct formation, which is
undesired. In order to study the effects of bubble dynamics and bubble swarm
dynamics on chemical reactions, a computational simulation model will be
developed. The model takes into account nonstationary bubble deformation, break-
up, coalescence, heat effects and surfactant adsorption. The multi-fluid model
is based on surface tracking techniques, augmented by an efficient CFD solver
that was developed by the PI's group. Concentration and temperature fields are
computed by solving mass and energy balances simultaneously with the
hydrodynamic code. Variable surface tension is accounted for by a surfactant
adsorption model and an accurate description of surface tension forces. In order
to investigate the impact of bubble swarms dynamics on fast reaction systems,
the PI will study specific reaction systems of industrial importance, i.e., (i)
a simple two-step Bourne reaction (liquid -liquid), (ii) the stereo-selective
iodohydroxylation step for the Merck HIV protease inhibitor Crixivan (liquid-
liquid), and (iii) the liquid-phase oxidation of cyclohexane, which is a complex
free radical reaction with multiple time scales (gas-liquid). All reactions are
known to be fast and mixing-sensitive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of
fundamental and practical interest, for instance in the areas of phase-transfer
catalysis, gas-liquid reactions, reactive absorptions and extractions. Several
national and international research groups study the hydrodynamics of bubbles
and bubble swarms. However, there is no systematic work that addresses reacting
bubble swarms, which will be the ultimate goal of this research. In summary, the
PI will develop realistic two- and three-dimensional simulation models of
reacting bubble swarms, which can be used to create the first micro-scale
closures for fast reactions in multi-phase systems to be incorporated in the
existing coarse-grid CFD packages. In addition, the simulations will provide an
insight into complex processes that are not accessible through experimental
techniques, e.g., for metallurgical reactions or opaque media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will also have
educational impact, including the training of one graduate students in a multi-
disciplinary environment and the development of course modules for various
undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;