* 0233145
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:   Exchange of Viral Vector and Microdialysis Techniques for Studying Neuropeptide Function
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Larry Young, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,312.00

0233145&lt;br/&gt;Young&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI and postdoctoral
students from Emory University in a collaboration with Inga Neumann of the
Institute for Zoology at the University of Regensburg, Germany. The combined
efforts of the German and US groups will focus on their shared interest in the
role of the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin in the regulation of social
behavior and stress coping. The US group at the NSF Center for Behavioral
Neuroscience focuses on the role of oxytocin and vasopressin in social
attachment of the monogamous rodent species the prairie vole. Studies suggest
that oxytocin and vasopressin are released in the nucleus accumbens and ventral
pallidum during mating, which trigger the pair bond formation. There is,
however, no direct evidence of peptide release during mating in the monogamous
voles. This issue will be addressed in the collaboration using in vivo
microdialysis and sensitive radioimmunoassay. The German group is the only one
in the world to have successfully measured oxytocin and vasopressin release in
behaving rodents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has an educational
objective. The project will allow the postdoctoral students involved to benefit
from performing research in another country. They will develop a heightened
appreciation of the world around them while also learning important new
technical skills.&lt;br/&gt;