* 0233517
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Comparative Sources of Self-Potential on Active Volcanoes
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Malcolm Johnston, Geological Survey-Menlo Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2006
* USD 0.00

0233517&lt;br/&gt;Johnston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France cooperative research involves Malcolm J. Johnston and students at the US
Geological Survey in Menlo Park, California and Jacques Zlotnicki of the
Observatory of Earth Physics in Clermont-Ferrand, France. The objective is to
bring together theoretical, laboratory and field measurements of self-potential
(SP) generation on active volcanoes, and in particular, to study sources of
electric and magnetic signals around volcanoes. The investigators will study
existing data for temperature, fluids and gas generation processes. Joint
comparisons will focus on separation of processes that contribute to SP and the
implications for monitoring volcano activities. The investigators will look for
anomalies in laboratory and field data collected in well-known volcanic regions
- Piton de la Fournaise (Reunion Island), Soufriere (Caribbean), Kilauea
(Hawaii), Long Valley Caldera (US) and Miyake-jima (Japan). The US investigator
brings to the project expertise on fluid vaporization and charge transport. This
is complemented by French expertise in electrokinetic effects. The project has
potential to understand signals from volcanoes and could lead to better
prediction methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of a
joint proposal to NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator
and graduate student. The CNRS will support the visits of French researchers to
the United States. &lt;br/&gt;