* 0233268
* Electrification and Lightning of Severe Storms and Mesoscale Convective Systems in STEPS and on the Southern Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* W. David Rust, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 03/31/2010
* USD 877,600.00

This project is devoted to the study of relationships among the wind field, the
electrical structure, the microphysics, and the lightning produced by both
isolated thunderstorms and large systems of convective storms. It is based on
the continuing analysis of data collected during the STEPS project of 2000 and
includes collection of additional data in Oklahoma during the summers of 2003
and 2004. The data consist chiefly of balloon soundings of the electric field,
polarimetric radar observations, and data from a lightning mapping array (LMA).
Specific questions to be answered are: (1) Are lightning flash rates
proportional to the mass of graupel in a storm? (2) Does the inverted electrical
polarity of some storms have a microphusical cause? (3) Do the long horizontal
flashes observed in mesoscale convective systems originate in the region of deep
convection or in areas of lighter precipitation? (4) More generally, what are
the characteristics of lightning flashes in mesoscale convective systems, and
how are they affected by cloud microphysical structure? Answers to the question
require synthesis of data from the different observing systems and analyzing the
data in the light of different theories of charge production, separation, and
lightning initiation. Results will contribute not only to the understanding of
the physics of lightning, but will also be useful in developing techniques for
assimilating lightning in numerical forecasting models and in learning how to
use lightning data to warn of storm hazards. The work is done in collaboration
with other participants in STEPS, in particular New Mexico Institute of Mining
and Technology in the analysis of LMA data and Colorado State University in the
analysis of polarimetric radar data.