* 0233205
* Collaborative Research: Teleautonomy in Networked Robotic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Chaouki Abdallah, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 08/31/2005
* USD 174,995.00

This project will address the interplay among various robotic control and
networking problems focusing on the issue of teleautonomy. The research
addresses both the problems of remote assembly with minimal human intervention
and direct teleoperation. Both (semi-)autonomous and teleoperated systems as
described herein will be important to realize the goal of assembling and
operating Space Solar Power (SSP) systems. For systems in earth orbit and for
human coordination of multiple networked robotic systems, direct teleoperation
is a viable and attractive option, while greater autonomy is crucial for more
remote assembly systems, such as lunar based systems where longer time delays
make direct teleoperation difficult. A significant level of autonomy, i.e. local
intelligence, will also be required due to the possibly unreliable communication
networks over which these systems will be controlled.

The present research seeks to integrate robotic control algorithms with
communication networking research, along with issues associated with projecting
and magnifying human capabilities to facilitate assembly in space structures.
The technical issues include bilateral teleoperation, the reliability of the
communications links, and the coordination of complex assembly tasks. Bilateral
teleoperation will be studied using passivity-based nonlinear control along with
logic-based switching control. The reliability of the communication links will
be studied to mitigate the effects of unknown and time-varying delays and to
incorporate recent ideas from networked control systems (NCS). Finally the issue
of coordination will be studied using concepts from statistical learning theory
that borrow and generalize ideas from Internet protocols.

More broadly, this research will have important applications beyond
teleautonomous robotic systems. We expect to contribute to the growing area of
networked control systems, to incorporate our research in areas such as control
in hazardous and remote environments, surveillance, search and rescue robots,
autonomous vehicles and autonomous locomotion systems, haptic devices, remote
construction, and remote surgery.