* 0233958
* Combinatorial Problems in Algebra, Topology and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,05/31/2004
* John Shareshian, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Grundman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 40,818.00

The investigator studies combinatorial problems which arise in various areas of
mathematics. In joint work with R. Guralnick, the investigator examines branched
coverings of Riemann surfaces whose monodromy groups are the symmetric and
alternating groups S_n and A_n acting on subsets of a fixed size from the n-set.
The main goals of this project are 1) to show that with a small and known list
of exceptions, the genus of the covering surface must grow with both the number
of sheets of the covering and the number of branch points, and 2) to determine
all such coverings for which the genus of the covering space is at most one.
This project is one of the final steps in a program initiated by Guralnick and
J. Thompson. In addition, the investigator continues his study of monotone graph
and hypergraph properties which arise in V. Vassiliev's theory of finite type
invariants of knots and ornaments. Finally, the investigator continues his
examination of order complexes of subgroup lattices of finite groups. He
attempts to use topological methods to distinguish intervals in subgroup
lattices of finite groups from arbitrary finite lattices. With V. Welker, he
investigates the topology of the order complexes of subgroup lattices of finite
simple groups.

The investigator's main interests are in combinatorics, which is the study of
discrete, usually finite mathematical objects. Combinatorial objects arise in
various areas of applied mathematics and computer science, including
communications and the theory of algorithmic complexity. Also, there are
complicated nondiscrete mathematical objects which can be better understood by
examining associated combinatorial objects. The investigator studies
combinatorial objects which arise in this manner.