* 0233238
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Genetics and Chemical Ecology of Reticulitermes Termites
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Edward Vargo, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2006
* USD 22,500.00

0233238 Vargo

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperation in population ecology involves
the research groups of Edward Vargo at North Carolina State University and Anne-
Genevieve Bagneres at the University of Tours' Institute for Insect Biology.
They will investigate the genetics and chemical ecology of social insects, in
particular, Reticulitermes termites. This species plays an important role in
decomposition of cellulose in natural ecosystems. They are serious structural
pests throughout the temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere, including
France and the United States. The investigators address two important aspects:
colony social organization and taxonomy. They will use molecular genetic markers
and analytical chemical techniques to investigate colonies and population of R.
santonensis, a subterranean termite found in France. Comparisons to R. flavipes
and general utility of chemical characters will also be studied. The US
investigator brings to this collaboration the technique of molecular marker
genotyping using microsatellite loci. This is complemented by the French
investigator's research on chemical analysis of cuticular hydrocarbons and
soldier defensive secretions in social insects. The collaboration will advance
understanding of how colonies and populations of these social insects are
organized and the extent to which differences in biochemical signatures among
colonies reflect genetic variation. This award represents the US side of a joint
proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of the US investigator,
postdoctoral researcher and graduate student. The CNRS will support visits to US
of the French participants.