* 0233800
* GLOBEC-01: Integration and Synthesis of the George's Bank Broad-Scale Survey Results
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 585,733.00

The GLOBEC NW Atlantic/Georges Bank study identified the pelagic early life
stages of cod (Gadus morhua) and haddock (Melanogrammus aegleftus) and the
copepod zooplankton, Calanusfinmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. as target
organisms (GLOBEC, 1992) for an extensive and intensive effort to understand the
underlying physical and biological processes that control the population
dynamics of key populations of marine animals in space and time. Over a six?year
period, broad-scale surveys of the Georges Bank and adjacent waters were
conducted to collect samples for cohort and survivorship analysis of the target
fish and zooplankton populations. These surveys included the collection of data
on hydrography, acoustics, phytoplankton chlorophyll, competitors, and
predators, as well as the target species, in order to provide a description of
the biological and physical environment in which the target species resided.
Phase IV of the US GLOBEC Georges Bank program is designed to synthesize the
results from the program's earlier phases to provide an integrated understanding
of the population dynamics of key, target species and evaluate how a varying
climate may influence these populations. The intent in this project is to
capitalize on the survey data sets to address two overarching questions: 1) What
controls inter?annual variability in the abundance of the target species on
Georges Bank (e.g., bottom up or top down biological processes, or physical,
advective processes)? 2) How are these processes likely to be influenced by
climate variability? These activities and results will provide a fundamental
foundation for a complete interdisciplinary synthesis involving all components
of the GLOBEC Georges Bank program.