* 0233005
* SBIR Phase I: Work-Centered Application Development through Patterns
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Terrance Goan, Stottler Henke Associates
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the skill
gap that exists within the software development community in the production of
work-centered software. To this end, Stottler Henke will develop a novel
software development environment that reduces the complexity of interaction
design &#8211; bridging the gap between the analysis of the work domain and the
development of well-designed supporting software. The proposed WorkWell system
will provide for an enhanced Contextual Design process with tools that enable
software developers to draw on the aggregate experience of other work-centered
application designers. This will be achieved through the application of proven
design/interaction patterns that will, for instance, enable software developers
to resolve the conflicts between the desire for automation and user&#8217;s need
for a feeling of control. Further, WorkWell will support an incremental process
for mapping the semantics of user goals to underlying software functionality and
the user interface design. Phase I will result in a limited prototype that will
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed approach. The results of these
efforts will have a great impact on society &#8211; furthering the understanding
of work-centered design and enabling corporations to produce software that will
enjoy higher user adoption rates and improve efficiency. There is a large market
for tools that can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of software
development efforts. The WorkWell system offers corporations the means to
produce intuitive and effective software under the time and resource limitations
that exist in the commercial world and thereby achieve much higher user adoption
rates for their products.