* 0233679
* Workshop: New Departures in Structural Geology and Tectonics, September 2002, Denver
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2004
* David Pollard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2004
* USD 25,925.00

Recognition of new opportunities for research in structural geology and
tectonics, brought into focus by recent technological developments, new
quantitative data sets, and both conceptual and theoretical advances, motivate a
workshop to consider the future directions of science in this field. These new
opportunities also bring into focus long standing questions in this area of
research about the relative merits of descriptive versus quantitative methods,
case studies of particular regions versus experimental studies of particular
mechanisms, kinematic versus mechanical modeling, and historical versus process-
oriented objectives. Funding is requested to organize and carry out the
workshop, and to prepare and distribute a white paper summarizing new departures
for research in structural geology and tectonics. Participants in the workshop,
who will prepare the white paper, represent the community of scholars in this
field in the broadest disciplinary sense. They will solicit input and comments
from peers and colleagues to seek balanced and representative statements about
future scientific directions in this field. It is anticipated that the white
paper will help to set the course of research in structural geology and
tectonics in the next decade, that it will provide criteria to help evaluate the
intellectual merits of proposed research in this area, that it will help
identify areas of investigation and methodologies ripe for the most rapid
advances and scientific breakthroughs, and that it will provide guidance to
instructors for the selection of topics and the discussion of methodologies in
the classroom. The white paper will be distributed in hard copy form to the NSF
EAR Division professional personnel, and to appropriate professional personnel
in charge of research grants at the USGS and the DoE. The white paper will be
made available to members of the Structural Geology and Tectonics Division of
the GSA, and to members of appropriate divisions of the AGU through a website.