* 0233979
* Collaborative Research (NSF-CNPq): Application Level Adaptation and Control for Retrieval and Delivery of Continuous Media over the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Leana Golubchik, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2004
* USD 221,796.00

Future networked multimedia information systems will carry a wide variety of
applications including digital libraries, video, audio and image services,
distance learning and collaboration, networked virtual environments, and
entertainment. The main characteristics of multimedia applications that lead to
difficulties in end-to-end systems design are that they have very large
bandwidth and storage requirements, with vastly different performance and
reliability requirements, often coupled with real-time constraints. Along with
these characteristics, the highly interreliability requirements, often coupled
with real-time constraints. Along with these characteristics, the highly
interactive nature of a variety of multimedia applications, resulting in fairly
unpredictable workloads, makes the design and evaluation of networked multimedia
information systems an exceptionally challenging problem. In this proposal, we
outline research on three aspects of this problem: (1) the design and evaluation
of server resource allocation algorithms for CM servers in order to retrieve
information efficiently and according to the QoS demanded by the application;
(2) the development of performance evaluation techniques for evaluating new
server designs. (3) the participants of this project bring expertise from a wide
variety of areas: databases, distance learning, multi-media, networking, and
performance evaluation to bear on problems in these areas. Another important
feature of this proposal is that the participants have available four prototypes
of state of the art multimedia systems: the Virtual World Data Server (VWDS)
developed at UCLA: the prototype of a Video-on-Demand server developed in Brazil
as part cooperative research project among Brazilian institutions; and the
Multimedia Asynchronous Networked Individualized Courseware (MANIC) and the
Internet Multimedia Proxy (IMP) both developed at UMass. These applications will
be used to motivate the development of new algorithms for retrieving information
and for maintaining the desired quality of service after sending the data over a
wide area network. They will also form the basis of the many experimental and
analytical studies that will be performed to evaluate these new algorithms. To
aid in this evaluation, our group also developed three performance evaluation
and modeling tools: a state-of-the-art tool for constructing performance and
reliability models (Tangram-II) developed in Brazil jointly with UCLA; a
symbolic model checking tool (VERUS): and a tool which facilitates design,
development, and subsequent performance evaluation of designs of multimedia
storage hierarchies (ViPEr-HiSS) under development at UMD. Thus, the environment
of our labs as well the long distance among them will provide a unique testbed
for this type of an evaluation due to the drastically different connectivities
available to our applications, from gigabit low utilized links to
intercontinental congested links. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research represents a
fundamentally important step in the design and performance evaluation of next
generation information servers and the networked applications that will operate
on top of them. As a result of our research we expect to have a better
understanding of how storage server resource management policies, channel
allocation policies, and network adaptation policies interact to satisfy the
required QoS of CM applications, despite the fairly unpredictable network
delays.&lt;br/&gt;