* 0233696
* GOALI: Tandem Computational and Experimental Combinatorics for Controlled Crystallization of Polymorphs
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Michael Ward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 03/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: GOALI: Tandem
Computational and Experimental Combinatorics for Controlled Crystallization of
Polymorphs&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0233696&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Michael Ward&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
develop techniques for polymorph selection and control using appropriate
epitaxial substrates. Computational and experimental combinatorial techniques
for polymorph discovery will be developed. The different crystal forms that
molecules adopt can affect their stability and function. In the pharmaceutical
industry considerable effort is expended to discover and characterize
polymorphs, largely because of their impact on bioavailability and stability.
These university and industrial investigators will develop a strategy for
controlling polymorphism that combines geometric lattice modeling of two-
dimensional epitaxy and experimental combinatorics, with the aim of identifying
substrates that are effective for selective crystallization of polymorphs. A key
element of this work involves the use of lattice modeling to build substrate
libraries of experimentally manageable size, based on crystalline organic and
inorganic materials, expected to produce specific polymorphs. Using X-ray
diffraction and spectroscopic methods, these libraries will be screened for
polymorph selectivity and their overall ability to improve crystallization
yields. These studies will be accompanied by real-time in situ atomic force
microscopy, performed directly in crystallization media on selected substrates,
which will provide direct visualization of nucleation and crystal growth and
confirm the role of epitaxy. The project will lead to rational and systematic
control of polymorphism, elucidation of the fundamental principles governing
this phenomenon, discovery of new polymorphs, new protocols for crystallization,
and improved crystallization processes. The ultimate implementation of this work
will provide an important tool to aid in the design and scale-up of selected
crystal forms for pharmaceutical compounds. Training students in this area is
vital to keeping the competitive advantage of US industry. The PIs will also
provide computation tools to the community in the form of
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;