* 0233961
* The Impact of Scientific Knowledge on Water Management: A Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Maria Carmen Lemos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/2005
* USD 135,470.00

This project investigates the use of technical information in water management
in Brazil:&lt;br/&gt;To illuminate the opportunities and constraints for the use
of technical information in policymaking, especially water management, and
&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how the use of such knowledge affects decision making
in the context of the recently implemented water management reform in Brazil.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This example of science/society interaction illustrates
how institutional settings where technical knowledge is applied play a role in
the effectiveness of this information as a policy tool, and how institutions
respond and adapt to new policy tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1997 Brazil
enacted new national water law that introduced an integrated, decentralized,
participatory, and environmentally sustainable water management system. This
resulted in several instances of public participation in water resources
management at the watershed level, such as users' commissions, watershed
committees, and water policy councils that are open to the public. Within such
organizations, technical information can play many policy-related roles,
including providing support information for different kinds of decision-making,
planning, and enforcement. However, such information can critically affect
decision-making in different, sometimes unwarranted, ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key argument this study seeks to advance is that the use
of technical information is context-dependent. The distribution of costs and
benefits of information use in policymaking depends on the social, political,
and cultural context in which information producers and users work. Better
information may lead to better decisions, and better-informed decision-making
might encourage stakeholders' perception of effectiveness, which in turn, might
encourage stakeholder participation. Or, the use of technical information can
alienate participation by insulating decision-making from the public. Because
technical information requires technical expertise for its use, it can shield
policymakers from political meddling and efforts from outsiders to influence
policy implementation and outcome. In this case, technocrats' use technical
information can make decisionmaking unaccountable and less democratic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study involves detailed case studies in three
watersheds using a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods. In-
depth, semi-structured interviews and focus groups will be carried out with
policymakers, information producers, and stakeholders. Participatory observation
of public meetings and policymaking at the state level are used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings can inform policymakers and stakeholders of
the possibilities and constraints for application of science-based information
in policymaking, as well as to provide data producers with information on data
needs from users. By examining political and cultural aspects of the application
technical knowledge in distinct policy environments, this study contributes to
analytical frameworks within the policy sciences, such as social constructivism,
policy analysis, and the sociology of science. Results will include scholarly
and policy-oriented presentations and publications in English and Portuguese.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0135497 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;