* 0233402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rural Livelihoods and Contested Spaces: An Examination of the Gender Dimensions of Human-Wildlife Conflicts in Uttaranchal, India
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Rachel Silvey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2005
* USD 11,860.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project analyzes the gender-
based dimensions of human-wildlife conflict in agricultural communities located
near Corbett National Park, in the north Indian state of Uttaranchal. The
research examines the gender differentiated impacts of conflict with wildlife in
terms of: (i) livestock predation, crop raiding, property damage, and attacks on
humans, and (ii) the spatial and temporal patterns of these incidents. The
research emerges from a growing awareness among scientists that human-wildlife
conflicts threaten both conservation objectives and human well-being. Recent
studies indicate that vulnerability to conflict with wildlife in North India may
be directly influenced by such factors as gender, age, and relative poverty.
While it is clear that vulnerability is strongly shaped by socioeconomic and
political factors, the implications for individuals within the household -
particularly women - are often eclipsed by the focus on `the household as the
primary unit of analysis. The project addresses this gap in understanding by
examining the inter-household consequences of human-wildlife conflict. Data will
be collected through a combination of in-depth qualitative field techniques and
quantitative survey interviews. The field research will be supplemented by an
analysis of governmental wildlife conflict data logs from 1998-2001. Fieldwork
in India will be conducted in 2 stages over a period of 24 months, beginning in
June 2002. Qualitative data will be subject to cluster and text analysis, and
quantitative data will be spatially and statistically analyzed using Geographic
Information System (GIS) and standard statistical computer software. The study
will reveal the extent to which women, compared with men, in the study area are
at increased risk of negative encounters with wildlife, the ways in which
conflict with wildlife is defined by different members of the household, and the
degree to which such conflicts impact the ability of various members of the
household to maintain their livelihoods. The research will also identify factors
that exacerbate the frequency and intensity of human-wildlife conflict in the
study area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to a deeper
understanding of human-nature relationships by describing the interaction
between humans and wildlife in both forest and agricultural contexts, the role
of women in securing household subsistence needs, and the importance of women's
work in maintaining child health and overall family well-being. The research
will also have implications for the study of rural livelihoods through its
investigation of women's access to resources and contributions to household-
level poverty alleviation. The research has relevance for endangered species
protection initiatives, park design and management models, and sustainable
economic development planning efforts for communities living in and around
protected areas in India and elsewhere. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;