* 0233788
* Landscape Transformation and Sociopolitical Organization in Marajoara Phase, Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* James Richardson, III, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,925.00

Marajo Island is famous for its unusual geography and remarkable archaeological
sites. On a landscape characterized by seasonal flooding and severe droughts,
Marajoara people built earthen mounds and canals, and produced one of the most
elaborate ritual ceramics of the New World. Marajoara culture influenced further
developments of social complexity on the Amazon Basin, during the millennium
that anteceded the Europeans arrival.&lt;br/&gt;Located at the mouth of the
Amazon River, Marajo Island was in the center of the dispute between the
European nations for the control of the Amazon River during the early stages of
the conquest. Although its indigenous occupation dates back to 3,500 years ago,
it was only around A.D. 400 that complex societies emerged on the Island,
predating the development of regional, politically centralized societies on the
Brazilian Amazon. From A. D. 400 to A. D. 1,400, Marajoara Phase mounds
multiplied on the Island flooded grasslands, representing the height of cultural
development in Brazil. Interpretations by archaeologists who have excavated at
some of these ceremonial sites, has led to a debate on the nature of the rise of
chiefdom level society in the Amazon. Some researchers have characterized the
moundbuilders as hierarchically organized, with chiefs holding political control
over a large region. Under this senario, this development took place outside the
Basin,. Others believe that social complexity developed locally but that there
is little difference between the mound groups in terms of architecture and
material culture. Accordingly, the mounds would have hosted independent villages
within a more egalitarian type of society.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
test these two opposing hypotheses at the Camutins site, a group of 37 mounds
located along the Camutins River, on the center of Marajo Island. That site
represents the first regional aggregation of population under some kind of
sociopolitical rule. In order to investigate whether the Camutins society was
hierarchically organized under a single chief or simply represents population
aggregation on a more egaliatarian basis, a major systematic settlement pattern
survey will be accomplished on the area, followed by excavations in selected
mounds. The research will construct a chronological sequence of the rise of the
Marojoara chiefdomship at the Camutins site, based upon the radiocarbon dating
and the analysis of the pottery recovered from the excavations. This detailed
study will provide the critical foundation for future regional studies on Marajo
Island, and permit more sophisticated hypotheses to be formulated on the socio-
political organization, not only on Marajo Island, but throughout the Amazon
Basin. Although it has become widely recognized that complex societies were
present in many areas in prehistoric Amazonia, the region has lacked significant
archaeological investigation as compared to other areas in the Americas. This
project aims to place Marajoara societies and Amazonia more broadly on current
debates on ancient complex societies. The project will also assist in training a
very promising graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;