* 0234320
* HIGH RISK RESEARCH: Paleoanthropological Survey and Exploration of North and Central Afar Rift, Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Yohannes Ambaye, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2004
* USD 16,946.00

The Afar region of Ethiopia is widely known for the information it has yielded
that bears on the early history of humans. Many of the fossil remains of our
earliest relatives, some dating back dating back to six million years ago, were
found in the region. While a number of areas of the Afar Rift have been
investigated for evidence of our evolutionary past, uncovering further sites is
an exciting proposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ethiopian government's
Authority for Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage has provided
Yohannes Haile-Selassie and colleagues with a one year survey and exploration
permit to locate new paleoanthropological sites with high potential for further
research in the future. Under this permit the researchers will be able to
explore previously unsurveyed regions in order to locate new Plio-Pleistocene
and late Miocene sites in the North and Central Afar Rift. While this time
period is the chief interest of the investigators, more recent sites that are
discovered will be made available to the broader scientific community. Satellite
imagery and aerial reconnaissance using remote sensing will be employed, as well
as foot and vehicle surveys, to assist in locating promising sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the intellectual excitement and public
appeal of uncovering our species' ancestry, this High Risk Research in
Anthropology award will enable a truly international collaboration with
Ethiopian scientists based in both the United States and Ethiopia. &lt;br/&gt;