* 0234860
* Mechanistic Studies Employing In Situ Infrared Spectroscopy of Reactions Pertinent to Metal-Catalyzed Carbon Dioxide/Epoxide Coupling Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Donald Darensbourg, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 09/30/2006
* USD 534,500.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Prof. Donald J. Darensbourg of Texas A&amp;M University to
address the utilization of carbon dioxide in the development of improved
synthetic routes for the production of polycarbonates. The current industrial
production of these materials is both hazardous and expensive and involves the
interfacial polycondensation of phosgene and diols. This research will examine
in detail the mechanistic aspects of metal catalyzed carbon dioxide/epoxide
coupling reactions employing in situ spectroscopy methods utilizing Fourier-
transform infrared attenuated total reflectance (FTIR/ATR) spectroscopy.
Selected processes will be investigated both in carbon dioxide swollen organic
solvents and in the absence of added solvents where phase behavior is of
importance. Experiments are designed to understand the various factors
controlling carbon dioxide /epoxide coupling processes involving alicyclic vs
aliphatic epoxides with particular emphasis on copolymer vs cyclic carbonate
formation. Selected catalyst systems to be examined include those with adjacent
nucleophile/epoxide binding sites and those with trans related binding sites
(e.g., (salen)Cr(III)Cl). Other studies will explore the development of
structural and reactivity models for the industrially prevalent double metal
cyanide catalysts (DMC) used in polyether and polycarbonate synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The very important fields of organometallic chemistry,
catalyst design, polymer catalysis and characterization provide valuable
training for graduate and undergraduate students entering either the academic or
industrial work force. Furthermore, these studies heighten students'
sensitivities to the roles chemists play in issues of environmental concern.
Outreach programs involve high school students in research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to find new, more
environmentally benign ways of producing polycarbonate plastics utilizing carbon
dioxide as a synthetic component. &lt;br/&gt;