* 0234032
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Spin Fluid Flow Dynamics in Polarized Superfluid
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Haruo Kojima, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2007
* USD 21,600.00

0234032&lt;br/&gt;Kojima&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Haruo Kojima at Rutgers
University in New Brunswick and Professor Hidehiko Ishimoto at the Institute of
Solid State Physics (ISSP) of the University of Tokyo in Japan. They will be
undertaking research on spin fluid flow dynamics in polarized superfluid. A
novel mechanical spin density detector technique has been developed for probing
the nature of spin transport and relaxation effects. The technique will be
applied to study the unusual spin transport and diffusion across two material
states with different magnetic properties of their model system. Earlier
experiments and analysis indicated that the presence of "interface" between the
magnetic superfluid and either another superfluid or normal fluid exhibits very
different mechanisms of spin relaxation. It is proposed to provide a direct test
on the importance of the interface by measuring the spin relaxation in an
arrangement which eliminates the interface altogether. The new spin filter
experiment will increase spin polarization to much greater degree than possible
in the past. A fluid state with large non-equilibrium polarization will be
created and its dynamics will be studied. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise and research capabilities. The U.S. researchers provide expertise in
the spin fluid flow dynamics experiments and the Japanese researchers provide
expertise in ultra low temperature with a high magnetic field. Studies on spin
dependent transport are important in advancing towards spintronics devices. The
studies also have advantages in simpler structures because of the ease of
changing material conditions and longer time scale involved. This would also
contribute towards a better understanding of spintronics. The project advances
international human resources through the participation of a number of graduate
students who will gain experience in the state of art technology in ultra low
temperature physics and materials physics. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. Results of the research will be
disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;