* 0234584
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Inca Conquest in the Colca Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Christine Hastorf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2004
* USD 10,822.00

Ms. Miriam Doutriaux's doctoral dissertation project will investigate the Inca
occupation of the Collagua province, located in modern-day southern Peru. The
variability of Inca rule is a theme that has long fascinated Andean scholars.
After conquest, the Inca state generally sought to effect a balance between its
own economic and political ambitions and the sociocultural and environmental
conditions of different regions. In each case, the political and economic
aspects of imperial rule were mutually dependent and closely intertwined, but
not inextricably so. Indeed, similar economic interests or conditions could be
accommodated with different political configurations to ensure the smooth
operation of many different Inca provinces. Under the direction of Dr. Christine
Hastorf, Ms. Doutriaux will compare two areas of the Collagua province located
at different altitudes and inhabited by distinct cultural groups, to understand
the way in which Inca political dynamics were articulated with economic
strategies in the valley, and how both were tailored to preexisting social and
political arrangements in this province. &lt;br/&gt;Historical documents reveal
that the Collagua province was inhabited by two distinct "ethnic" groups, the
Collaguas and the Cabanas, apparently since pre-Inca times. The Collaguas were
Aymara speakers with a pastoral orientation, while the Quechua-speaking Cabanas
focused on agriculture. According to historical accounts, the Collaguas
established good relations with the conquering Incas, thereby securing their
political dominance over the rest of the valley until Spanish colonial times. On
the other hand, archaeological studies of the valley's economy suggest that Inca
influence was greater in the Cabana area of the province, possibly as a result
of the warmer climate and better agricultural conditions. Until now, the
different focus of archaeological and historical studies has impeded a full
consideration of the variable nature and impact of Inca strategies in the
province as a whole. As part of her dissertation work, Ms. Doutriaux will do an
archaeological survey of 25 sq. km. around the historical capital of the
Cabanas. She will analyze the settlement pattern, site organization,
architectural canons, ceramic styles and artifact distributions to characterize
the nature of the pre-Inca and Inca occupation there. A comparison of this data
with the results of an archaeological survey she recently completed around the
Collagua capital will enable her to draw conclusions about the regional-scale
dynamics of Inca imperialism.&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to shed
light not only on Inca empire-building, but also on the resulting symbiotic
relationship between differently empowered self-interested groups in the
imperial context. It also contributes a much-needed scholarly focus on the
south-central Andes, home to the Andes' two main culturo-linguistic traditions.
The Colca Valley's unique combination of these Aymara and Quechua traditions in
the heartland of a single province offers the possibility of new insights on the
distribution of power and resources and the relationship between Aymara and
Quechua groups in late prehistory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve
a valuable infrastructural function through the training of a promising graduate
student&lt;br/&gt;