* 0234461
* CAREER: Untangling the Energetics and Dynamics of Atom-Radical and Radical-Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2008
* USD 599,400.00

In this project, funded within the NSF-wide CAREER program by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Kaiser will investigate
the collision-energy dependent reaction dynamics of bimolecular atom-radical
reactions of ground state atomic carbon and silicon with propargyl and allyl
radicals, and the radical-radical reactions propargyl-propargyl, propargyl-
allyl, and allyl-allyl. The principal objective of this research is to unravel
the reaction mechanisms that underlie these processes. The experiments will be
performed using crossed supersonic beam technology. Both reactant beams will be
prepared in well-defined quantum states before they cross with a specific
collision energy under single collision conditions. The research will be
conducted with a number of international collaborators spanning a variety of
expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will actively participate in the
development of a cross-disciplinary curriculum in reaction dynamics, linking his
Department of Chemistry with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, the
university's Institute for Astronomy and the Hawai'ian Institute of Geophysics
and Planetology. Through these interactions the PI will relate chemical dynamics
to astrochemistry, planetary sciences, laboratory astrophysics, astrobiology,
and combustion chemistry. The PI's research project will involve the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as the further scientific
development of postdoctoral researchers. Undergraduate students involved in
research, training and mentoring and will primarily be drawn from the
underrepresented minority students at the University of Hawai'i. The PI will
further engage in an outreach program to science teachers and students at local
schools involving visits, presentation of popular scientific lectures, and
visits by high school students and teachers to the research
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;