* 0234043
* Evolution and Diversification of Azaleas and Rhododendrons (Rhododendron, Rhodoreae, Ericoideae, Ericaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Kathleen Kron, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 359,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kathleen Kron at Wake Forest University to study
the evolutionary relationships of azaleas and rhododendrons. Azaleas and
rhododendrons belong to the genus Rhododendron which contains more than 900 spp.
These plants are among the showiest shrubs in the world, are of enormous
importance horticulturally and form the dominant vegetation in many habitats
throughout the temperate zone and in the Asian tropics. Despite their high
visibility, azaleas and rhododendrons have been difficult to study because of
their tremendous morphological diversity and variability. This study
investigates the geneological relationships of major groups within Rhododendron
using DNA sequence data from six genes and morphological characteristics to
establish the evolutionary history of major lineages of azaleas and
rhododendrons. Morphological data will be recorded using digital image capture
and storage on a public accessible website. The broader impacts of this study
include the development of a framework for future studies in a group of plants
that are ecologically, economically, and evolutionarily important. Because these
plants have a nearly worldwide distribution, this study will also significantly
contribute to a better understanding of the history of the earth. At least one
female graduate student will be trained as a result of this project. The
information gained will be disseminated in electronic and print form, in both
scholarly and lay texts. The newly obtained results will be incorporated into
Dr. Kron's teaching and curriculum development at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.