* 0234193
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Postcranial Proportional Variation in Australopithecus
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Carol Ward, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 03/31/2005
* USD 9,000.00

The specific objective of the proposed research is to evaluate species
boundaries in the hominid genus Australopithecus using a novel method. This will
be achieved by evaluating variation in postcranial skeletal proportions of
unassociated individuals from the fossil assemblages recovered at Hadar,
Sterkfontein, and Makapansgat, and comparing it to that seen in all extant large
hominoid taxa. Because the species is the most fundamental unit in biological
and phylogenetic studies, determining species boundaries in the early hominid
fossil record is imperative to all other analyses involving hominid biology,
evolution, and behavior. Recent discoveries and analyses have increased the
perceived amount of variation in hominids, some of which has been interpreted as
indicating divergent locomotor behaviors among species. Accurate assessment of
species boundaries is more important than ever in order to critically evaluate
these claims, to trace the trajectory of morphological and behavioral change
among early hominids, and to accurately estimate the variability upon which
selection acted to produce our genus, Homo. &lt;br/&gt;Previous attempts to
determine species boundaries have relied primarily on the assessment of
craniodental remains and have often produced conflicting results. Recently,
however, it has been demonstrated that postcranial data validly reflect the
molecular phylogeny of extant primates. Unfortunately, the early hominid fossil
record is composed primarily of isolated skeletal elements from numerous
individuals. By combining pairs of these elements from presumably different
individuals, variation in body proportions can be assessed using nonparametric
density estimation. This method is well established in other fields, but has
never been applied to paleoanthropological problems. It will allow the thorough
exploitation of the postcranial fossil assemblages and will shed significant
light on questions of taxonomy and phylogeny in Australopithecus. Additionally,
not only is this research expected to help clarify species boundaries in these
early hominids, it will also significantly contribute to the understanding of
both human and ape postcranial proportional skeletal variation.&lt;br/&gt;This
research will have several broad impacts. First, it will advance the graduate
training of the student. It will also develop a novel approach to studying
variability. Third, it will establish a method that holds great promise for
other areas of anthropology in which the recognition of individual skeletons
from commingled skeletal assemblages is desired, such as in forensics and
bioarchaeology.&lt;br/&gt;