* 0234727
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Nanoparticulate Detoxification Agents and Their Effects on Myocyte Biosensors
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Timothy Morey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2005
* USD 49,000.00

0234727&lt;br/&gt;Duran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grants for Exploratory
Research (SGER) award supports Randy Duran, Anne Donnelly, Timothy Morey, and a
student from University of Florida in a collaboration with Wolfgang Knoll,
Stefan Schiller, and Christiane Thielemann of the Max Planck Institute for
Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany. Together, the two groups will perform
experiments in support of eventual drug detoxification applications. The
experiments will involve the ability of engineered core/shell nanoparticles to
detoxify ex vivo cardiac myocyte cells cultured on microelectrode array
supports. The nanoparticles will be used to reduce drug concentrations in
cardiac cells. The collaboration will also attempt to form model membranes
containing the drug-active ion channels themselves as they perform
electrochemical experiments with drug detoxification systems. The collaboration
establishes a connection between the NSF-funded Engineering Research Center at
the University of Florida and the Max Planck Insititute in Germany. The
experiments have the potential to provide the first example of detoxification
applications with cell-based biosensors and will facilitate a broad range of
related studies involving core/shell nonoparticle research. As part of the
collaboration, a University of Florida graduate student will spend six months
doing research in the lab in Mainz.&lt;br/&gt;