* 0234102
* NIH-NSF BBSI:    Summer Institute in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology - Iowa State University
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Karin Dorman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2007
* USD 645,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0234102&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Volker
Brendel&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: A
NIH-NSF BBSI Summer Institute in Bioformatics and Computional - Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A NIH-NSF BBSI
Summer Institute in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (SIBCB) is planned
at Iowa State University (ISU). The faculty are 10 principal scientists with
diverse areas of expertise, from computer science, mathematics, statistics,
genomics, informatics, biophysics and structural biology. Summaries of recent
accomplishments in genomics, methods in bioinformatics and computational
biology, and applications to genetics and molecular biology will be presented in
a two week intensive instructional course, including programming instruction and
computer laboratory sessions. The participants will be 15 students supported by
this grant and an additional group of 11 students from industrial laboratories
plus two high school teachers, who will broaden the experience for the core
students and provide additional funds to enhance the course. Following the
course, the 15 NIH-NSF supported students will select among research projects
and spend eight weeks developing their own research projects; thus the SIBCB
will last 10 weeks. These projects will span the range from sequence analysis to
comparative genomics to protein homology modeling to simulations of organism
growth. An organized "job fair" will include presentations by the faculty.
Immediately before embarking on their research projects, the students will
receive an introduction to Bioethics. The research period will present the
students with tools to comprehend&lt;br/&gt;and begin significant research
projects with a broad, integrated approach to complex
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;