* 0234751
* RUI: Gene-Specific Importin Alpha Functions in Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Robert Fleming, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 12/31/2006
* USD 169,067.00

0234751&lt;br/&gt;Fleming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotic cells, cytoplasmic
and nuclear compartments are separated by the nuclear envelope. This double
membrane structure contains numerous nuclear pores that regulate the flow of
molecular information into and out of the nucleus. Proper functioning of this
transport process is essential for normal cellular metabolic regulation as well
as the transmission of developmental signals from the extracellular and
cytoplasmic compartments to the nucleus so that gene transcription can be
regulated and modified during cellular differentiation processes.&lt;br/&gt;Many
specific transporter molecules have been identified in this process. In
particular, Dr. Fleming will focus on the importin a (imp a) genes act as
adapter proteins for cargo molecules containing classical nuclear localization
signals. The imp a gene family contains three distinct members (clades): imp a1,
a2 and a3. Metazoan animals generally have representatives of each of the three
clades. The evolutionary conservation of all three clades from Drosophila
through human suggests that each clade is constrained in its ability to diverge
from or converge on the others, suggesting that each clade has evolved
specialized functions. He has chosen to examine the imp a gene family in
Drosophila since there are only single genes representing each of the clades,
thus allowing us to assess any specific functions of individual clade
members.&lt;br/&gt;The merit of these studies resides in the definitive
demonstration of unique roles for specific imp a genes in nuclear transport and
perhaps roles for these genes in other cellular processes. The elucidation of
these functions is critical for the understanding of cellular signaling and
homeostasis. It is expected that these roles will be conserved in other metazoan
animals having representative members of the different imp a clades. His studies
will reveal evolutionary conservation of specific functions by comparisons with
other species. &lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the experimentation within this proposal
will provide undergraduate students with direct exposure to current biological
methodologies while demonstrating the extent to which conclusions can be drawn
from available data. This exposure will allow students to design additional
experiments based on their findings and explore the true nature of scientific
thought and experimentation. It is further anticipated that students will
experience the opportunity to present their findings at local and national
meetings and also in publications to experience the totality of the scientific
community and the interactions fostered by it. &lt;br/&gt;