* 0234103
* SGER:  Failure of Teton Dam:  A New Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Balasingam Muhunthan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2004
* USD 62,136.00

0234103, Balasingam Muhunthan, Washington State University "Failure of the Teton
Dam: A New Theory"

The objective of this research is to verify a new theory regarding the failure
of the Teton Dam. The Teton Dam, in Idaho, failed during its first filling on 5
June 1976. It resulted in 14 fatalities and a very large economic loss. Its
failure was one of the most publicized events involving a large earth fill dam
in recent times. The dam was designed and built using modern standards;
therefore its failure received considerable attention from engineering experts.
However the failure assessment and prognosis by experts, including the
Independent Panel (IP) and the Interior Review Group (IRG), failed to arrive at
a consensus. Failure mechanisms suggested, included hydraulic fracture, internal
erosion, the wet-seam theory, and defects in the abutment rock. None of the
investigations, however, was able to explain satisfactorily why the dam breached
when the reservoir reached El. 5301.7 ft and only in the vicinity of Sta. 15+00
on the right abutment.

This investigation is based on a preliminary work using fundamental "state based
soil mechanics". It indicates that a deep open transverse vertical crack(s)
existed in the core (Zone-1) to EL.5300 ft and the deepest crack(s) occurred
only in the right abutment and in the vicinity of Sta. 14+00 to Sta.15+00. When
the reservoir rose above El. 5300 ft in the early hours of 5 June 1976, water
flowed through the open transverse vertical crack(s) into the pervious
downstream Zone-2, which was seated on bedrock at El. 5200 ft. The water flow
slowly eroded the crack into a large tunnel leading to the major breach of the
dam hours later. This preliminary work is based on the critical state soil
mechanics framework. It assumes that the mechanical behavior of soils, such as
the compressibility, pore pressure response, shear behavior with respect to
yield, rupture and fracture, is dependent on the "state of soil" in q-p-e (shear
stress-mean stress-void ratio) space or equivalently the LI - p (Liquidity Index
- mean stress) space.

A one-day workshop will be held at the conclusion of the program, at which a
panel of experts will meet with the investigators to examine the research
results and provide a critique in light of past investigations of the Teton
failure. The expert committee will include professionals from the US Bureau of
Reclamation, the US Army Corps of Engineers, and academics. The proceedings of
the workshop, along with a detailed analysis of the Teton Dam failure and
recommendations, will be disseminated via the worldwide web.