* 0234203
* RUI: Circadian Rhythms in NPY and Y5 Receptor Deficient Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Mary Harrington, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2006
* USD 200,137.00

Mary E. Harrington, 0234203, RUI: Circadian rhythms in NPY and Y5 receptor
deficient mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Biological rhythms are reset each day by
external signals to maintain a 24 hour internal cycle. The light:dark cycle is
one very important cue for synchronizing these circadian rhythms. Responses to
light are mediated through a direct retinal input to the circadian clock, an
input that can be modified by other neural inputs. One important modulating
neurochemical is neuropeptide Y (NPY). Interactions between NPY and light
resetting provide a point of flexibility for adjustments of light entrainment
relative to ecological or internal factors.&lt;br/&gt;The present research will
examine the role of NPY in circadian clock phase resetting by light, making use
of mice with deletion of either the NPY gene or the gene for an important NPY
receptor, the NPY Y5 receptor. Wheel-running activity rhythms of these mice will
be studied and it is expected that NPY- and NPY Y5 receptor-deficient mice will
show decreased stability and reliability of entrainment to a light:dark cycle.
Mice studied under constant darkness will reveal effects these neurochemicals
have on circadian rhythm generation and expression. &lt;br/&gt;The mammalian
circadian pacemaker is located in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN).
Suprachiasmatic nucleus cells maintain a self-sustained oscillation in culture,
allowing measures of phase-shifting behavior from an isolated clock. To
determine if the Y5 receptor mediates the effects of NPY on light phase shifts,
mice with gene deletions will be compared with controls for the effect of NPY
applied to the circadian clock in the SCN after a phase shift. It is expected
that the Y5 receptor deficient mouse will not show evidence for NPY blocking
light-induced phase shifts, providing definitive proof of the importance of this
receptor in mediating the effect of NPY on circadian clock
resetting.&lt;br/&gt;This work relates to the everyday situation of maintaining
synchronization with the external 24 h light:dark cycle. Expanding our
understanding of the role of NPY in the circadian system will allow better
knowledge of the neural basis of flexibility as we adapt to changing
environmental cycles. This research will be conducted at an undergraduate
college for women, with promising undergraduate women and minorities taking
leadership roles in conducting the studies.&lt;br/&gt;