* 0234522
* RUI:   Early Influences on the Outcome of Chemical Reactions - the Importance of Intermolecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Helen Leung, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 281,912.00

In this RUI project funded by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Helen Leung of Mt. Holyoke College will pursue a program of research
using Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) spectroscopic techniques to study
intermolecular interactions in weakly bound complexes. The high-resolution
spectra obtained will be used to determine the structure, quadrupole coupling
constants, effects of nuclear electric field gradients, and information about
the potential energy surfaces of complexes involving imidazole or the hydroxyl
radical. The nitrogen quadrupole coupling constants will provide a measure of
the pertubations to the electron distributions arising from intermolecular
interactions in the complexes.

The distortion of electron clouds in weakly bound complexes, such as those
examined in this project, may affect such diverse phenomena as regulatory
processes in biochemical systems or the initiation of a chemical reaction. The
structures of the imidazole complexes being examined reflect an interplay of
several forces, and they can provide a sensitive test of current computational
methods. The studies of the various OH complexes can have a large impact on
understanding the reaction dynamics of the OH radical, and thus they can aid in
understanding how to make combustion reactions more efficient. Results from this
project will also provide information useful in other areas, such as atmospheric
science.