* 0234664
* SGER: Monetary Credibility in a Transforming Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Neven Valev, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2004
* USD 20,000.00

The objective of this project is to contribute to knowledge on the process of
financial stabilization in transition economies. This Small Grant for
Exploratory Research (SGER) generates data from national surveys conducted in
Bulgaria, a transition country in South East Europe, which implemented a
currency board in1997 to combat years of high inflation. The surveys are large
in scope and include questions on expected devaluation, expected inflation,
attitudes toward the monetary regime, beliefs about the operation of the
currency board, and preferences over alternative monetary regimes. Combined with
a rich set of demographic characteristics, the data are used to study the
evolution of credibility over time, the various influences on agents' beliefs
and expectations, the process of learning about the regime, and the political
outcomes of stabilization for the population at large and for different social
groups defined on the basis of age, political affiliation, gender, income,
education, and employment status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four surveys have
already been completed in the first four years of the currency board. This SGER
would make it possible to build on that work by conducting one more survey and
by continuing the analysis of the economic effects of credibility. With an
application for additional financing at that point, the final objective is to
generate a data series that span the lifetime of the currency board from its
inception to Bulgaria's entry into the European Monetary Union. Survey data are
needed because transition economies do not have financial markets, which are
developed enough to provide a menu of interest rate and other financial data
required for such research. In addition, the surveys make it possible to examine
not only macro level but also deeper disaggregated social dynamics and effects,
which are difficult to observe otherwise. Financial stabilization is studied in
a broad political economy and institution-building framework, which is
appropriate in the context of a nation in transition. So far, the surveys have
revealed a number of unique insights. &lt;br/&gt;The analysis informs three
important policy issues. First, the project helps understand the process of
monetary institution building in transition economies. Second, it informs the
choice of monetary regimes in countries, which are in membership negotiations
with the European Union. Third, it generates predictions important for
countries, which consider implementing a currency board.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its research and policy relevance, the
project also contributes to education and training through the activities of the
Principal Investigator (PI) and the Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
(AYSPS) at Georgia State University. The AYSPS conducts training programs for
government officials and collaborates on curriculum development with university
faculty from several developing countries. The project generates useful
knowledge for these activities. The PI advises several graduate students who
work on development issues similar to those studied in the project. Finally, the
project enhances knowledge about Bulgaria, a country that has not received much
research attention despite its interesting transition dynamics its important
geographic position on the Balkans. &lt;br/&gt;