* 0234064
* Systematics of  Maxillariinae(ORCHIDACEAE): Generic Delimitation, Pollinator Rewards, and Pollination
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* William Whitten, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 12/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

0234064 Williams and Whitten The purpose of this project is to collect, study,
and classify the species of Maxillaria, one of the largest and most poorly known
orchid genera. New species of Maxillaria are discovered frequently in the
tropics, and the total number of currently described species exceeds 650.
Orchids are one of the showiest and most species-rich families of plants, yet
are very poorly studied. As tropical forests are destroyed at an increasing
rate, the most basic questions we need to answer are 1) How many species exist?
2) Where do they grow? 3) How are they related to each other and to other
plants? Maxillaria species are often large, conspicuous, and numerically
important components of the epiphytic vegetation in the Neotropics, but species
are difficult to identify. The classification of Maxillaria and its relatives
has been chaotic for more than a century, and current taxonomic treatments offer
little hope of stability unless the revisions are based on modern DNA- and
morphology-based phylogenies (hypotheses of evolution). In this project,
researchers at the University of Florida will coordinate studies of Maxillaria
with collaborators in Mexico and Central and South America. DNA sequencing of
nuclear and plastid genes will be used to acquire new data in order to classify
and to estimate phylogenetic relationships within this large genus. Specimen
images, identification keys, publications, and on-line databases will be
produced to help botanists and the public identify these orchids. The
pollinators of Maxillaria flowers and the type and composition of the floral
rewards (nectar, oil, resin, etc.) will also be studied. By plotting these
pollination data onto evolutionary "trees", one can gain insight into how
pollinators have influenced speciation and diversity within this genus and in
other plants. This project will provide basic information on the biodiversity of
a major group of tropical plants. This information is fundamental to broader
biodiversity studies such as regional inventories (floras), choosing areas of
high diversity for conservation priorities, and documenting rates of species
extinction. Specimens, photographs, and DNA samples will be archived and will
serve as a record of orchid species that may become extinct within the near
future. This grant will train PhD level students in modern plant systematics.
Because orchids are beautiful and charismatic "poster child" plants, information
on their diversity and biology can be used to raise public awareness and support
for conserving tropical ecosystems. Women graduate students from Brazil and
Ecuador and male students from Mexico and Costa Rica will broaden the
representation of scientists from Central and South America and bring gender,
ethnic and geographical diversity to this collaborative project. Collaboration
with Mexican, Ecuadorian, and Brazilian scientists will enhance the network of
partnerships which have been developed with other groups.

