* 0234268
* VERITAS Phase I: A Cherenkov Telescope Array For Gamma-Ray Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Trevor Weekes, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vernon Pankonin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 6,643,056.00

AST 0234268&lt;br/&gt;Weekes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory will manage the construction of the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), an array of four 12m aperture telescopes for
gamma-ray astronomy in the 50 GeV to 50 TeV energy range. These atmospheric
Cherenkov&lt;br/&gt;telescopes will use the imaging concept developed by the
Whipple Observatory Gamma-Ray Collaboration and used to detect the first
galactic and extragalactic sources of TeV gamma-rays. VERITAS will achieve an
order of magnitude better flux sensitivity than existing telescopes. It will be
the only gamma-ray telescope array in the northern hemisphere and will
complement the HESS and CANGAROO observatories in the southern
hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each VERITAS telescope will have an effective
mirror area of 100 sq m (equivalent to a telescope of aperture ~12m) and a long
focal length (12 m) with the optical design optimized for good angular
resolution, a large field of view, and minimum wavefront distortion. Each
telescope camera will have 499 pixels covering a 3.5 degree field of view with
0.15 degree resolution. VERITAS will have appreciable sensitivity at 80 GeV
(where it will overlap with the next generation space telescopes) and at 10 TeV
(where it will overlap with particle air shower detectors). With stereoscopic
imaging, the array will achieve unprecedented angular resolution, energy
resolution and background rejection over three decades of energy. The minimum
detectable flux sensitivity will be 1% of the Crab Nebula at 200 GeV, a factor
of 20 improvement over the most sensitive telescopes currently operating in this
energy range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific objectives of VERITAS
will be the study of active galactic nuclei, supernova remnants, pulsars, the
galactic plane, and gamma-ray bursts; in addition a sky survey will be made to
search for new astrophysical sources. VERITAS will also explore new physics in
areas such as neutralino annihilation, quantum gravity and primordial black hole
evaporation. VERITAS will effectively complement GLAST, the next major high
energy gamma-ray telescope in space; they will overlap in the 50 GeV to 300 GeV
energy range allowing important cross correlations. Together, VERITAS and GLAST
may solve the problem of the origin of the cosmic radiation as well as probing
fundamental questions in physics and cosmology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
VERITAS Collaboration consists of groups from ten institutions: Iowa State
University, McGill University, National University of Ireland, Purdue
University, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, University of California at
Los Angeles, University of Chicago, University of Leeds, University of Utah, and
Washington University. The array will be built at a dark site on Kitt Peak in
southern Arizona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS is a unique scientific endeavor
which offers unusual opportunities for education and outreach. Because the
project falls in the interface between high energy physics and astronomy,
between particle astrophysics and high energy astrophysics, it is inherently
multi-disciplinary. The VERITAS Outreach program will capitalize on the
experience of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, as well as that of the
university groups involved in VERITAS. The project is funded by the Department
of Energy and the National Science Foundation, in approximately equal shares.
Within NSF, the funding partners are Division of Astronomical Sciences, Division
of Physics, and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;