* 0234806
* Novel Tools for the Vertical Analysis of Genomic Data
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Michael Tainsky, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2008
* USD 1,222,334.00

Due to the scarcity of good bioinformatics professionals, many
expensive&lt;br/&gt;genomics experiments remain under-analyzed. The goal of this
proposal is to provide a suite of turnkey bioinformatics tools that: i) can
process extremely large amounts of data as those coming from current high-
throughput technologies such as microarrays, and ii) allow vertical inferences
assembling system level information from component level data. The work proposed
here will provide a novel database and associated data mining tools allowing:
(1)Translation of gene expression profiles into functional profiles showing how
various cellular functions are changed in the given condition and assessing
their statistical significance, (2) Discovering those biological processes whose
interaction in a given condition is significantly different their normal
interaction. (3)Identifying those pathways that are most likely to be
biologically relevant in agiven experiment and quantitatively assessing their
impact. (4)Validating high-throughput experiments, such as microarrays, by
checking the consistency of their results against existing biological knowledge
(5) In-silico whole-body data mining techniques able to provide in a short time
an expression profile of any given gene across all tissues of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact aspects of this proposal
include the following:&lt;br/&gt;1. Enhance the research infrastructure by
constructing and maintaining a public database with advanced data mining
capabilities. 2. Cross-train researchers in computer science and biology.3.
Broaden the participation of under-represented groups by: i) recruiting Ph.D.
students ii) undertaking two annual recruitment visits to specific minority-
serving institutions; iii) organizing an open house for disadvantaged K-12
students; and iv) targeted advertising of the positions funded through this
project. 4. Broadly disseminating scientific knowledge by: i) providing a web
interface to the tools developed during this project allowing the scientific
community to access them easily ; and ii)organizing an annual multidisciplinary
conference bringing together computer scientists and
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;