* 0234328
* SOFTWARE:  Automatic Resource Selection in Dynamic Networked Computation Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Jaspal Subhlok, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2006
* USD 150,000.00

This project will perform fundamental research in middleware for resource
selection&lt;br/&gt;in dynamically shared network environments such as
computation grids.&lt;br/&gt;The distinguishing feature of our approach is that
it matches the application resource&lt;br/&gt;requirements to the resources
available on a network rather than selecting the "best"&lt;br/&gt;nodes based on
a fixed criterion. &lt;br/&gt;The key challenge is to estimate how a given
application will perform on a given set of nodes under given network conditions.
The project will investigate two different approaches to address this challenge.
The first one is based on a "heterogeneous performance model", which is a model
to predict application execution time under different resource availability
scenarios, such as&lt;br/&gt;different speed processing nodes and network links
and different competing loads and&lt;br/&gt;traffic. The second is based on the
concept of a "performance skeleton program",&lt;br/&gt;which is a synthetically
generated short running program that has the same fundamental execution
characteristics as a given application. Under the same network conditions, the
execution time of a performance skeleton program is expected to be a fixed small
fraction of the expected execution time of the application it represents. The
implementation of both these approaches is based on experimental measurement of
the resources that an application uses during execution. The procedure is based
on monitoring the processor, network and memory activity generated by an
application during execution on a controlled testbed. &lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to develop a complete resource selection framework for grid computing
environments based on matching these application information models to the
network status information obtained from publicly available network measurement
and prediction tools like the Network Weather Service.&lt;br/&gt;