* 0234011
* Multi-Community Polity Formation in the Lake Titicaca Basin, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Christine Hastorf, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2007
* USD 294,269.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christine Hastorf and her
colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological research on the
Taraco Peninsula along the southwestern shore of Lake Titicaca in modern day
Bolivia, studying the Taraco Peninsula Polity. The international team brings
together specialists in archaeology, geoarchaeology, botanicarchaeology, and
zooarchaeology to conduct a coordinated investigation into the origins and
development of the early and longest lived Andean state, the urban city
Tiwanaku. This large city held dominion over the southcentral Andean region for
over 600 years, consolidating around ACE 500. To investigate the foundations of
this state and their developments the researhers will test three models. One
model proposes that this development was funded by large scale intensive raised
field agricultural systems controlled by an elite class. This strategy would
have gathered in a sizable surplus of staple products, used to underwrite
monumental construction and public ceremonialism. The second model posits that
Tiwanaku's power was built upon control of long distance trade in wealth and
staple goods across the greater southern Andean region, which financed the
centralization of power over labor that built the ceremonial center. The third
model privileges local social experimentation and strategies by which people
were enticed into joining larger communities. This will be studied by pursuing
evidence for the development of nested supra-communities through local rituals
and lineage development. The Taraco Peninsula Polity was one of the first
generation of multi-community groups to arise in the Titicaca Basin, emerging
fully by 250 BCE. The beginning of this sequence seems to be at 1000 BCE.
Building on their previous work at a site on the Peninsula, this field project
will concentrate excavation at three additional sites. These sites span the time
phases of this political development, beginning with the earliest settlements on
up to when the nearby Tiwanaku drew the populace into its urban sprawl. From the
excavations, the team will complete a series of analyses using macro, micro, and
chemical analyses to provide concrete data that addresses these three models.
These analyses include: 1) identification of crops and associated wild plant
taxa to record the agricultural land use changes, 2) charting camelid pack
animal use and evidence for the extent of long distance caravans, 3) sourcing
and identifying highland stone, Amazonian wood, drug and medicinal plants to
track the exchange patterns, and 4) uncovering and mapping ceremonial
architecture and associated ritual artifacts to describe the elaboration of
communal rituals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team consists of US, Canadian and
Bolivian students and archaeologists, providing an important source for
professional training in Bolivia while promoting international collaboration.
They also work closely with indigenous communities in building and maintaining
small regional museums about their past. There has been a recent surge of
archaeological and ethnographic work in the Basin which will place the results
within a larger cultural trajectory and clarify the rise and fall of large
political entities in the high Andes, perhaps explaining more about long-term
sustainability in such environments. &lt;br/&gt;