* 0234365
* SGER:   Air Entrapment for Liquefaction Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Akram Alshawabkeh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

0234365, Mishac Yegian, Northeastern University&lt;br/&gt;"Air Entrapment for
Liquefaction Mitigation"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action is to support a study
of the scientific and technical feasibility of an innovative approach for
mitigating soil liquefaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquefaction-induced damage
to the built environment can be catastrophic. During the past four decades,
intensive efforts have been made to understand the mechanism of liquefaction,
and to develop procedures for analyzing the liquefaction potential at a site
during a given seismic event. While research on liquefaction continues,
geotechnical engineering practice has developed various techniques for site
improvement that can mitigate the potential effects of liquefaction. Such
mitigation measures are expensive, and often can only be utilized for a new
project. Mitigating the liquefaction-induced damage to an existing structure in
an urban community remains a major challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept
is to introduce air in a saturated sand deposit to increase its resistance
against liquefaction. Laboratory and field experiences suggest that only slight
amounts of air in the voids of otherwise fully saturated sands (enough to reduce
the degree of saturation by 1 to 2%) can significantly increase the liquefaction
strength, and decrease the shear wave velocity. Hence, through air entrapment, a
new or an existing site can potentially be improved to resist liquefaction, and
through shear wave velocity measurements, its adequacy can be
verified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a number of specific objectives
that are aimed at providing a preliminary understanding of the behavior of air-
entrapped sands, and of identifying important areas for future research that
would be needed to advance the concept to a fully developed and practical
measure for liquefaction mitigation. The objectives of the research can be
stated in the form of questions as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. How can air be
introduced in loose saturated sands?&lt;br/&gt;2. How can samples of varying
degrees of saturation (from 95 to 100%) be prepared?&lt;br/&gt;3. How can the
degree of saturation be measured accurately (up to 0.1%)?&lt;br/&gt;4. How will
air entrapment affect the liquefaction strength?&lt;br/&gt;5. How are other soil
properties influenced by the presence of air?&lt;br/&gt;6. How does the grain
size distribution and angularity of the sand influence the above
results?&lt;br/&gt;7. How long can air stay trapped under different flow
gradients?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be a significant contribution
to the development of cost-effective measures for liquefaction mitigation. It
will also have a broader impact on improving the ability to reduce the expected
losses to a community from an earthquake. The research will draw upon the
expertise in the geo-environmental field that uses air injection for
remediation.&lt;br/&gt;