* 0234568
* Supporting Development of Highly Dependable Software Through Continuous, Automated, In-process, and Individualized Software Measurement Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Daniel Port, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 410,706.00

Highly dependable software is, by nature, predictable. For example, one can
predict with confidence the circumstances under which the software will work and
under which it will fail. Empirically-based &lt;br/&gt;approaches to creating
predictable software are based on two assumptions: (1) historical data can be
used to develop and calibrate models that generate empirical predictions, and
(2) there exists relationships between internal attributes of the software (i.e.
concrete attributes such as size, effort, and defects) and external attributes
of the software (i.e. abstract attributes such as quality or time to failure.).
Software measurement validation is the process of determining a predictive
relationship between available internal &lt;br/&gt;attributes and
correspondingly useful external attributes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
objective of this research is to design, implement, and validate software
measures that support: (1) identification of fault-prone modules, enabling more
efficient and effective allocation of &lt;br/&gt;quality assurance resources,
and (2) an incremental software development method through incremental and
developer-specific notifications and analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical
assessment of these methods and measures during use on the Mission data System
project at Jet Propulsion Laboratory will advance both the theory and practice
of software measurement validation. The &lt;br/&gt;research will also produce an
open source software system for software measurement validation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;