* 0234912
* Acquisition of Powder X-Ray Diffraction Instrumentation at Syracuse University
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Jon Zubieta, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 02/28/2006
* USD 82,877.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Syracuse University will acquire a powder X-ray
diffractometer. This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas such
as the structure and dynamics of molecules and the chemistry of materials,
including species as diverse as metal oxides, metal borides, metal
chalcogenides, cluster-based nanostructures and extended metal-organic pi-
systems. Other projects which will benefit include the characterization of solid
state products of hydrothermal reactions, the characterization of thin film
samples, and the identification of the products from the removal of solvent and
interstitial or interlamellar components from layered and open framework
materials. Specifically, researchers will use the instrument to carry out bulk
analyses of samples, identify temperature-dependent phase changes, identify the
degree of crystallinity in polymers, and explore the preffered orientation of
such materials.&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas, especially materials
chemistry. The instrument will also be used for formal instruction in the
Chemistry and Earth Sciences Departments at Syracuse University. &lt;br/&gt;