* 0234357
* Improving Accuracy and Availability of Productivity Methods for a Keystone Functional Group of Microbes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Steven Newell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R.  Walbridge
* 03/31/2005
* USD 77,782.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: Improving Accuracy and Availability of
Productivity Methods for a Keystone Functional Group of
Microbes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salt marsh plants exceedingly
productive, as also are the ascomycetes (fungi) that are secondary microbial
producers utilizing marsh plant organic matter as an energy source. The
combination of marsh grass-marsh fungal high production is likely to be one of
the basic factors underlying the high output of marine animals from salt marsh
ecosystems. Because fungi in the standing-decaying marsh grass systems grow
almost exclusively within the opaque solid dead plant mass, monitoring their
productivity and biomass accumulation are technically difficult. This problem
has been surmounted by development of biochemical analytical methods that make
use of fungal-proxy molecules. The best of these has proven to be ergosterol, a
cell-membrane component nearly unique to fungal cells. Ergosterol is an
indicator molecule for living fungal mass and is Ergosterol relatively easily
extracted from naturally decaying materials and measured by HPLC (high-
performance liquid chromatography). Rates of fungal synthesis (= fungal
productivity) can be measured as rates of incorporation of C14 into ergosterol,
where the rate of increase in radioactivity in ergosterol parallels the rate at
which the fungus is growing. It is herein proposed to seek two basic
improvements to the fungal-productivity method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acetate-to-ergosterol method has only recently become available and there
remains much to be done regarding refinement of the method. One very basic item
that needs attention is the conversion factor for calculating the rate of fungal
organic-mass production from the rate of acetate incorporation into ergosterol.
There are values available for this factor, but they range widely, and no one of
the five or six investigators currently working in the field of fungal
productivity has concentrated experimental efforts on this specific problem. It
is proposed herein to do so, testing a range of environmental conditions and a
range of target fungal species. Such a method, using the well-known dansyl
fluorophore, has appeared in the drug-testing literature that is directly
analogous to the acetate-to-ergosterol method. It is proposed herein to test
whether this method can be used to measure fungal productivity in naturally
decaying marsh grass leaves. If it can be so used, the ability to measure fungal
productivity in ecosystems would become available in a wider range of
laboratories (as opposed to its current restriction to those licensed for
handling of radioisotopes). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research
proposed would improve the utility of the methods now available for monitoring
fungal production. This would provide better tools for investigators working at
the edges of coastal oceans, marine sites that are currently in urgent need of
attention due to their susceptibility to anthropogenic damage. More importantly,
the new methodological information would also be of considerable value to
forestry scientists, aquatic-ecosystem scientists, agricultural scientists, and
industrial-fermentation scientists, because of the great importance of fungal
activities in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;