* 0234292
* SGER:  Low Temperature Synthesis of Trimetallic Nitride Template (TNT) Endohedral Metallofullerenes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Harry Dorn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2003
* USD 40,000.00

0234292&lt;br/&gt;Dorn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plans to explore a
highly innovative technique for preparing endohedral metallofullerenes. Empty
cage fullerenes, such as C60 and C70, and endohedral metallofullerenes are most
commonly prepared in a Kratschmer-Huffman electric-arc generator by high
temperature vaporization (3000-5000 K) of graphite rods packed with metals
and/or metal oxides. The typical endohedral metallofullerenes, such as Ax@C2y
(x= 1-3, y=30-50) have been reported with encapsulated metal and non-metal
atoms, but are typically formed in low yields (&lt; 0.5 %) with multiple isomers
of low symmetry. The PI's research group has recently reported the first class
of stable endohedral metallofullerenes, A3-xBxN@C2y (x=0-3, A,B=metal, y=34, 39,
40), e.g., Sc3N@C80, formed by a trimetallic nitride template (TNT) process in
significantly improved yields. For example, the archetypal Sc3N@C80 is stable in
air to temperatures of 600-650 K or in nanotube "peapods" in vacuo to
temperatures in excess of 1300 K. The discovery of a more rational synthesis for
the preparation of the trimetallic nitride template (TNT) endohedral
metallofullerenes at lower temperatures would open new vistas for these unique
materials in a wide range of electronic, optoelectronic, magnetic, catalytic,
nanomechanical, and medical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high
stability of the TNT endohedral metallofullerenes suggests new avenues toward a
more rational synthesis of these unique materials. The recent success in
preparing C60 by pyrolysis of precursor hydrocarbons at lower temperatures is an
example of this strategy. This success, coupled with the declining cost of
empty-cage C60, suggests the possibility of using this prominent fullerene, C60
as a precursor for endohedral metallofullerenes. Preliminary chromatographic
retention time and mass spectrometry data clearly identify the TNT endohedral
metallofullerene Sc3N@C80 as a major product of this new lower temperature
synthesis. Several other empty-cages are also produced C70 and C84 as well as
several new endohedral metallofullerenes. These results are extraordinary,
although much fundamental research is critically needed to exploit the potential
for preparing these TNT endohedral metallofullerenes in large-scale quantities.
The specific aims of this study are to: optimize operating parameters of the
quartz tube batch reactor for high yield, lower temperature production of TNT
endohedral metallofullerenes such as Sc3N@C80; isolate and characterize new
endohedral metallofullerenes; elucidate the mechanism(s) and key intermediates
involved in this lower temperature reaction utilizing isotopic tracers (15 N and
13 C); and construct a continuous reactor for enhanced production of the TNT
endohedral metallofullerenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;