* 0234638
* Insecticide Design: Insights from Venomous Spiders
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Robert Reenan, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2006
* USD 457,515.00

Arthropod pests destroy 20-30% of the world's food supply and are responsible
for the transmission of many new and reemerging human diseases. These insect
pests are usually controlled with broad-spectrum chemical insecticides. However,
the long-term application of a small armament of insecticides that act on a
handful of invertebrate nervous system targets has inevitably led to the
development of resistance in most arthropod pests. This problem, along with
concerns about the environmental and human health risks associated with certain
agrochemicals, has stimulated the search for new insect control methods. This
project focuses on the recently discovered families of novel invertebrate-
specific neurotoxins in the venom of the lethal Australian funnel-web spider.
These peptides are exciting insecticide leads because they are active against a
broad range of arthropod pests and they do not act on conventional insecticide
targets. In this project, detailed three-dimensional maps of the bioactive
surfaces of these toxins will be constructed and their precise molecular targets
will be identified using a combination of electrophysiological and genetic
methods. Fundamental questions regarding expression and evolution of the toxins
will also be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will uncover new
insecticide targets and enhance the utility of these toxins as leads for
insecticide development. It is anticipated that this work will ultimately lead
to a new generation of "environmentally-friendly" insecticides. The research
will provide a fertile training ground for graduate students in the areas of
biochemistry, structural biology, and insect control. The project will involve
outreach activities such as public lectures, media interviews, demonstrations to
high school students, and presentations at conferences and symposia.