* 0234174
* SGER: Ecophysiological Consequences of Infrequent Massive Flowering of Monocarpic Bamboo Grasses (Chusquea spp.) in Temperate and Tropical South America
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Guillermo Goldstein, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2005
* USD 133,882.00

Bamboo grasses are an important component of understory vegetation in
subtropical and temperate forests in both Asia and the Americas and in many
cases they completely dominate the lower layers of the forest. These bamboo
grasses have important economic and conservation value since they play a key
role in the functioning of the entire forest ecosystem and provide food and
shelter to numerous native populations. Most species flower only once in their
life cycle, which can last up to 120 years, and then die. When bamboo grasses
flower, the flowering is highly synchronous, such that there are massive 'waves'
of flowering and immediate death of the grasses, affecting large patches of
forest vegetation simultaneously. These infrequent and ephemeral events have
consequences in many ways for both plants and animals in the affected forests,
but because these events are so rare, little is known of the consequences on
forest regeneration and maintenance of native biodiversity. In late 2001,
forests in southern South America started to experience massive flowering of the
bamboo grasses occurring over a vast area ranging in latitude from 25 to 45
degrees S, in both subtropical forests and temperate forests. This is an
opportunity to explore the importance of this large-scale and infrequent
phenomenon on the maintenance of native biodiversity and forest regeneration, as
well as effects on carbon and nitrogen stocks in these forests. Observations are
planned in several areas along a latitudinal gradient in South America where
massive flowering is occurring, with the aim of identifying how resource
availability of water, light and nutrients change as a result of this phenomenon
and how these changes influence the regeneration, flowering, and physiology of
native species. The simultaneous change of different variables with potentially
contrasting effects make it difficult to fully understand the consequences of
bamboo flowering. A field experiment, where we will manipulate light and
nutrient availability, will allow us to disentangle the different mechanisms
resulting from this major and infrequent event. A greater understanding of the
mechanisms and consequences of this infrequent flowering in bamboo and its
effect on native plant processes can contribute to our ability to make informed
decisions for the maintenance of native plants and animal life in native
ecosystems around the world.