* 0234175
* US-Egypt Workshop:  Genetic Engineering and Genomics, Alexandria, Egypt, February 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Joseph Semancik, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 32,000.00

0234175 &lt;br/&gt;Semancik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a US-Egypt Workshop on Research in Genomics and Genetic Engineering to
be held in Alexandria, Egypt, in February 2003. The U.S. organizers are Dr.
Joseph Semancik, Department of Plant Pathology, the University of California at
Riverside and Dr. Ahmed Hadidi, Lead Molecular Virologist and Research Plant
Pathologist Emeritus, United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service. The Egyptian organizers are Dr. Sirag Lashin, Director,
Mubarak City for Scientific Research and Technology Applications, Alexandria,
Egypt and Dr. Hasan Moawad, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. The proposed
workshop will bring together US and Egyptian scientists to discuss current
progress in genetic engineering and genomics. Three days of the workshop will be
dedicated to talks on current research in genetic engineering and genomics of
plants, humans and microbes. The fourth day will be reserved for planning
potential collaborations between U.S. and Egyptian scientists. Published
documents will include a book of abstracts and also workshop proceedings. The
long-term goal of the workshop is to establish permanent collaborative
arrangements between Egyptian and US scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
Genomics and genetic engineering are both rapidly advancing areas of research.
The workshop would contribute to maintaining international research
communication. This project enables US and Egyptian scientists to participate in
a workshop to discuss an area scientific importance to scientists and officials
in both countries and to identify potential collaborative research where the two
sides can complement each other's capabilities. This project is being partially
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these joint scientific
activities. Additional funding is provided by the Plant Genomics Research
Program, Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;