* 0234421
* Meiotic Silencing by Unpaired DNA
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Robert Metzenberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2005
* USD 190,383.00

Viruses, retrotransposons, and insertion sequences put the genomic integrity of
all organisms at risk. Fungi are arguably under even greater jeopardy than
plants and animals because they are organized coenocytically: a macroscopic
"individual" may contain millions of nuclei sharing a continuous cytoplasm that
is undivided by septa or cell membranes. Unsurprisingly, fungi have at least
three sophisticated mechanisms for fighting back: quelling, RIP, and meiotic
silencing by unpaired DNA (MSUD). The research that is the subject of this
project is aimed at understanding the mechanism of MSUD and its role in the
overall biology of one experimental organism, Neurospora crassa. Earlier work
showed that during the very brief diploid phase of this organism, presumably
when homologs are paired in the pachytene stage of meiosis, any sizeable stretch
of unpaired DNA is "seen" by the organism as a foreign sequence, one that was
not present in both parents at the same locus, and hence having the capacity for
mischief. A signal in the form of double-stranded RNA is generated. Ultimately,
this silences the expression not only of the unpaired DNA, but also any other
DNA of the same sequence, whether paired or unpaired. Selecting and screening
for suppressor mutations which fail in this silencing process has already been
rewarding in terms of insight gained; one called Sad-1 (suppressor of ascus
dominance) encodes a sexual-phase specific RNA-directed RNA polymerase, and
other Sad mutants will be sought and studied. A major focus of the research will
be on the role of two paralogous genes called dicer-1 and dicer-2 thought to be
involved in quelling. In many organisms, and in the vegetative phase of fungal
growth, these aptly-names genes are thought to dice up long double-stranded RNA
molecules into short, double-stranded pieces which, in turn, give rise to
single-stranded molecules. These then direct the destruction of mRNA homologous
to them, resulting in "silencing". It is not clear that they have a similar role
in MSUD, and a sizeable effort will be expended in trying to illuminate this
issue. Finally, it has become clear that functional Sad genes are necessary for
the completion of meiosis. This suggests that some of the machinery of
silencing, presumably involving double-stranded RNA and its cleavage, is shared
with the machinery of meiosis. A search for the key molecules is an additional
aim of this research.

All organisms are under continuous challenge by "selfish" DNA sequences or
molecular parasites that are able to reproduce themselves at the expense of the
host organism. Often the host has sophisticated machinery for fighting back,
either by attacking and mutating the parasitic DNA to a harmless condition, or
by preventing the parasitic DNA from making molecules necessary for its
multiplication. An understanding of how these silencing mechanisms work would
make it possible to prevent not only the reproduction of viruses, but also to
prevent other cellular genes from making undesired products, or from making
benign products in excessive amounts.

