* 0234186
* RCN:  ARIDnet for the Americas: A Research Network for Testing New Paradigms for Global Desertification
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2010
* James Reynolds, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2010
* USD 458,947.00

There is a great deal of disagreement about the causes and extent of
desertification and about what part of&lt;br/&gt;its impact on human well-being
is manageable, and how. A new synthetic paradigm for&lt;br/&gt;desertification
must be developed, one that is based on the simultaneous roles of the
meteorological and&lt;br/&gt;ecological dimensions of desertification (the
biophysical factors) and the human dimensions of&lt;br/&gt;desertification (the
socio-economic factors). This proposal will establish ARIDnet to provide
the&lt;br/&gt;intellectual leadership for developing and testing this new
paradigm. Planned activities: ARIDnet will (i)&lt;br/&gt;conduct workshops to
debate the Dahlem Desertification Paradigm (DDP)a product of the
2001&lt;br/&gt;Dahlem Conference on desertificationfor critical evaluation and
refinement; (ii) formulate working&lt;br/&gt;groups to develop comparative case
studies to test the DDP; (iii) conduct a quantitative synthesis of
what&lt;br/&gt;matters in desertification, when and where it matters, and why;
(iv) recruit new researchers and&lt;br/&gt;stakeholders into ARIDnet so a broad-
based and useful approach to desertification problems can
be&lt;br/&gt;developed; and (v) maintain a website to support networking
activity. Anticipated impact: Arguments&lt;br/&gt;surrounding the topic of
desertification create confusion in policy and management programs intended
to&lt;br/&gt;help many of the worlds poorest people. Hence, there is an urgent
need for new, interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;approaches for addressing this global
problem. ARIDnet will provide the leadership to support on-
going&lt;br/&gt;international discussions and strengthen recruitment of
researchers, including undergraduate students, to&lt;br/&gt;study the
principles, criteria, and policies related to global desertification, especially
as outlined under the&lt;br/&gt;UN Convention to Combat Desertification.