* 0234252
* Career: Integration of Systems Performance: Tools &amp;         Technologies in Research and Education
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Diane Rover, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 05/31/2003
* USD 12,663.00

This project focuses on instrumentation of parallel and distributed systems,
integrated tool environments, and performance modeling of application-specific
systems from high-level specification. The objects of the research include:
Develop an integrated environment based on an instrumentation system (IS), so
that a user may navigate among multiple performance tools to support analysis
and diagnosis strategies; apply a structured approach for IS design and
evaluation (P'RISM: PaRallel Instrumentation System Management) to develop new
ISs according to system requirements and to provide feedback to other IS
developers; select metrics for evaluating IS performance; develop a software
architecture for scalable ISs and identify requisite technologies. Three primary
activities support these objectives: (1) apply service request outcome analysis
to derive a set of metrics for evaluating IS performance and further qualify
those metrics that may be used for comparing performance of different ISs: (2)
in coordination with the Paradyn project and the Parallel Tools Team at the
Cornell Theory Center, complete a full IS performance evaluation study using
analytical modeling, simulation, and measurement techniques; and (3) using
P'RISM, develop the software architecture of an IS and develop a prototype based
on this specification.