* 0234142
* Conference: Symposium for Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology Meeting
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Jonathan Copeland, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Beecher
* 01/31/2004
* USD 4,875.00

This project will result in the in the organization and presentation of a
symposium called "Flash Communication: Fireflies at Fifty", an overdue
recognition to the more than fifty years that have passed since the modern era
of the study of flash communication began with the initial publications of Dr.
John B. Buck on flash communication and synchronous flashing. This symposium
will be presented at the January 4-8, 2003 Toronto meeting of the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology. The symposium is sponsored by the SICB
Division of Neurobiology and co-presented by the Society's Division of Animal
Behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives. The objectives of the symposium will
be 1) to present new knowledge in flash communication arrived at through diverse
approaches (cellular, neuroethological, behavioral ecological); 2) to integrate
this new knowledge and to facilitate the emergence of new research directions in
flash communication; and 3) to publish the observations and conclusions of the
symposium in a journal like American Zoologist. Methods. To facilitate
discussion at the meeting, a list-server/chat room will be established using the
Georgia Southern WebCT. Participants can "chat" prior to the symposium and after
the symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Impacts. The primary impact of this
project lies in the fact that there has never been a flash communication
symposium presented on the national level in American science. It is important
to have the symposium now. Many of the older generation of firefly workers have
retired or died. This symposium will bring together remaining senior scientists
as well as mid-career scientists and beginning scientists for a mutual sharing
of old and new ideas. The symposium has the potential for setting the directions
of firefly flash communication for the next ten years. A symposium report will
be published in American Zoologist, the journal of the Society for Integrative
and Comparative Biology, or in a university press like Johns Hopkins University
Press, where animal subject specific symposia have been published. This will
help to advance knowledge as well. Additionally, fireflies are insects that the
general public considers "good". Thus, the results of the symposium, when
described by the popular press, may be very accessible to the general public.
Fireflies have been used in the past to teach the general public about
entomology, hypothesis testing, and the process of discovery in science. An
additional impact of the symposium lies in the fact that 31% of the participants
are women and 27% are at the very beginning of their scientific career. Thus,
the demographic structure of the symposium will play a role in increasing the
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;