* 0234272
* Workshop: Microbial Observatories/Life in Extreme Environments Principal Investigator Workshop; September 22-24, 2002, Arlington, Virginia
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Mary Ann Moran, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 07/31/2003
* USD 56,386.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Microbial Observatory (MO) and Life in
Extreme Environments (LExEn) programs have provided critical opportunities for
research into the diversity and activity of microorganisms. Together, these
programs sponsor diverse research efforts on microbial communities from a wide
variety of natural environments, ranging from the extreme and/or unusual (e.g.,
hydrothermal vents and hypersaline lakes) to the typical and/or ubiquitous
(e.g., ocean waters and agricultural soils). The investigators funded through
the MO and LExEn programs have pushed the frontier of microbial diversity and
microbial biogeochemistry research, discovering novel microbial lineages,
describing the complexity of natural microbial communities, and linking
microbial taxa to critical ecosystem functions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
workshop, including principal investigators of MO and LExEn projects, other
outstanding scientists in the field, and Postdoctoral students is proposed as a
mechanism to enhance future research in environmental biology and microbial
life. The purpose of the workshop is two-fold: 1) to provide a platform for
principal investigators, post-doctoral associates, and graduate students to
share ideas and techniques among projects, facilitating communication of
technical advancements and fostering collaborative/interdisciplinary activities;
and 2) to discuss the future of microbial life research programs sponsored by
the National Science Foundation, including identification of funding gaps and
analysis of new research frontiers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
provide an important opportunity for student and postdoctoral training. At least
22 postdoctoral associates and graduate students will take part in the meeting
as representatives of MO or LExEn projects. An additional 24 postdoctoral
associates currently funded through the NSF Microbial Biology postdoctoral
program, including underrepresented minorities in science, have been invited to
attend.