* 0234192
* SYMPOSIUM:  Second International Symposium for Computational Cell Biology to be held on March  23-25, 2003,  in Lenox, MA.
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* J. H. Carson, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/2003
* USD 13,800.00

This award supports student participation in the "Second International Symposium
on Computational Cell Biology" to be held March 23-25, 2003 at the Cranwell
Resort and Golf Club in Lenox, MA. Computational Cell Biology is an emerging
interdisciplinary field that responds to the need for computational methods to
analyze and organize complex experimental data on the structure and function of
the cell. Whereas other meetings in computational biology focus on
bioinformatics and structural biology, this is the only meeting geared
specifically to the use of computational modeling applications in cell biology
and that is primarily targeted to cell biologists. The symposium is being
organized by The National Resource for Cell Analysis and Modeling (NRCAM),
located in the Center for Biomedical Imaging Technology (CBIT) at the University
of Connecticut Health Center. The organizing committee consists of Drs. Leslie
M. Loew, Director of NRCAM and CBIT, John Carson, co-Director of NRCAM, and Ann
Cowan, Deputy Director of CBIT and head of dissemination and training for NRCAM,
who chairs the committee. The first such symposium, held in March 2001, provided
a venue for cell biologists to interact with theoreticians and computer
scientists, and was highly successful both in its scientific content and in its
goal of initiating a new level of communication among different groups of
scientists. A major goal of this second meeting is to solidify the community of
scientists in this young and expanding field. The scientific focus of the
meeting is on areas of cell biology for which modeling approaches are currently
being developed, or that are ripe for computational modeling approaches.
Specific topics at the meetings will include a range of cellular mechanisms such
as regulation of the cytoskeleton and molecular motors, membrane and protein
trafficking, regulation of calcium dynamics, signal transduction pathways, and
cell cycle control. In each of these areas, researcher using highly quantitative
experimental approaches and/or applying mathematical modeling approaches will be
invited to speak. The meeting format includes platform sessions, poster sessions
and small workshops and tutorials. The venue for the meeting is a small resort
in the Berkshire Mountains that is limited to a maximum of 125 on-site
participants. This setting and meeting size is ideal for encouraging individual
interactions, and also encourages active participation by graduate and
postdoctoral students.