* 0234233
* SOFTWARE:  Autonomous Scheduling on Large Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Jeanne Ferrante, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Advances in network and middleware technologies have brought computing with many
widely-distributed and heterogeneous resources to the forefront, both in the
context of Grid Computing and of Internet Computing. These large distributed
platforms allow scientists to solve problems at an unprecedented scale and/or at
greatly reduced cost. The high level goal of this work is to further the
development of software methodologies and algorithms to enable
scientists,&lt;br/&gt;engineers and others to use large heterogeneous
distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application domains that can readily
benefit from such platforms are many; they include computational neuroscience,
factoring large numbers, genomics, volume rendering, protein docking, or even
searching for extra-terrestrial life. Indeed, those applications are
characterized by large numbers of independent tasks, which makes it possible to
deploy them on distributed platforms with high network latencies. More
specifically, in this work we assume that all application data initially resides
in a single repository, and that the time required to transfer that data is a
significant factor. Efficiently managing the resulting computation is a
difficult and challenging problem, given the heterogeneous and typically dynamic
attributes of the underlying components. Such an approach allows for adaptivity
and scalability, since decisions and changes can be made locally.
&lt;br/&gt;This approach is particularly effective for scheduling in
environments that are heterogenous, dynamic, and unstructured, such as global
and peer-to-peer computing platforms consisting mostly of home
PC's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a simple yet general
computation and communication model for Grid and Internet platforms, and
autonomous and decentralized scheduling techniques based on this model. It
analyzes the optimality of these techniques in terms of steady-state and overall
application performance. Further, it encorporates adaptability and fault-
tolerance, and evaluates the resulting techniques by both simulating and running
real applications on actual testbeds. Its overall impact to the scientific
community is to enable scientists to solve important classes of problems faster
and in a more cost-effective fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;