* 0234267
* SGER: Durable Goods, Borrowing Constraints and the Business Cycle
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research supports a quantitative study of how
households borrowing constraints interact with aggregate activity over the
business cycle. In particular it explores how shocks to fundamentals
(technology, wealth distribution or fiscal policy among others) might generate
large and persistent fluctuations through their feedback with borrowing
constraints. The project also evaluates the effects of exogenous changes in the
credit markets structure on the quantitative properties of the business cycle.
The key new element will be the presence of durables goods. These goods will
play a dual role, both delivering direct utility and providing collateral
services to the households that own them. This second role will induce a new and
powerful transmission mechanism from shocks to fundamentals. The importance of
durable goods in this research project is motivated by their high participation
in output and wealth. The project will help answer questions like what are the
effects of borrowing constraints on aggregate activity? And what are the effects
of policy changes that affect these constraints? This project is part of a broad
attempt to explicitly incorporate individual heterogeneity into macroeconomics,
in order to study how the interaction between individual behavior and
macroeconomic aggregates moves in response to changes in economic policy.

