* 0234678
* Polymer Morphology and Crystal Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Phillip Geil, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2006
* USD 324,000.00

The principal investigator (P.I.) proposes research in two areas: 1) continued
exploitation of the researcher's confined thin film melt polymerization (CTFMP)
technique for the simultaneous polymerization/crystallization of single crystals
of condensation polymers suitable for electron diffraction (ED) determination of
crystal structures and 2) a re-examination of two "overlooked problems" in
polymer morphology. Utilization of the CTFMP technique is proposed for a number
of polymers of interest: a) extension of the poly(n-glycol naphthalate) series
to n values above 2; b) utilization of a base substrate treatment technique to
produce phase II poly(p-oxybenzoate) single crystals complemented by attempts to
"catalyze" phase II whisker growth; c) the symmetric poly(2,6-naphthalene
2,6-naphthalate and poly(2,6-naphthalene terephthalate); and d) the kinked
homopolymer and copolymer polyesters of m-oxybenzoate and o-oxybenzoate with
p-oxybenzoate and 2,6-oxynaphthoate. Crystal structures, from ED data aided by
modeling, morphology by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and thermal
properties by DSC will be determined for all of the above. Transition behavior
will also be characterized by TEM hot stage ED as appropriate. X-ray
diffraction, for comparison with the ED, and FTIR, for composition, proof of
polymerization and molecular weight characterization, will complement the ED,
TEM and DSC studies. For several of the systems interest also lies in the origin
of aperiodic meridional spacings. In addition the P.I. proposes to reexamine and
extend prior studies of the effect of simultaneous biaxial deformation of
crystalline polymer films and the morphology of melt-crystallized
poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) Recent studies of PTFE suggest single molecule
single crystals (SMSC), folded and extended chain lamellae and isolated shish-
kebabs can all be grown from dispersed dispersion particles on substrates,
accompanied by large scale molecular mobility.

X-ray diffraction from fibers has long been used for polymer crystal structure
determination. One portion of the research proposed here continues efforts in
demonstrating the desirability of complementing, sometimes replacing, x-ray
studies with electron diffraction; combined with the researcher's unique polymer
single crystal sample preparation technique, the electron diffraction method is
often simpler, with the (reciprocal) lattice being directly visualized. The
polymers chosen for the research include those with both rigid (liquid
crystalline) and flexible backbones, with many being of current and/or potential
commercial interest. This research will continue the collaboration with Prof.
Rybnikar of the new University of Tomas Bata (formerly part of Technical
University of Brno) in Zlin, Czech Republic. International Program funds in the
previous grant were instrumental in aiding in the development of computer and
scanning facilities at the University, with 19 papers being co-authored over the
last decade. Two additional proposed topics involve developing an understanding
of the biaxial deformation involved in the production of many polymer films and
the nano-structure of PTFE (i.e., Teflon). The latter is in collaboration with
Dr. P. Xu of Gore & Assoc., Inc. and is of practical concern relative to both
the use of PTFE as nano-scale coatings and the polymerization process. In
addition to the two graduate students to be supported by this grant, the
incorporation in the research program of two undergraduates from the Polymer
Concentration in the University of Illinois's Materials Science and Engineering
Department is expected to encourage their continuation for advanced degrees. All
recent NSF supported undergraduates conducting research with the P.I. have both
been co-authors of published papers and have continued on for advanced degrees.

