* 0234775
* Conference on Chloride Signaling to be held September 3 -7, 2003 at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* H. Criss Hartzell, Society of General Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2004
* USD 6,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. H. Criss Hartzell of Emory University School of
Medicine to support a symposium on the Biology of Chloride. The symposium will
be held at the Marine Biological Laboratory from September 3 -7, 2003.
Presentations will be given by approximately 30 leaders in the field from around
the world. There will also be sessions featuring young investigators. The
purpose of the meeting is to define new directions in the physiology of
chloride. Only recently have we begun to appreciate that chloride ions play
fundamental roles in cell have recently been identified at a molecular level and
the structures of a few are now known at atomic resolution. The impact of their
disruption has been, in several cases, completely surprising. Disruption of
chloride channels produces a wide range of diseases affecting muscle, bone,
kidney, and the nervous system. This meeting will bring together the leaders in
chloride physiology to formulate the directions this field will take in the
immediate future. With scientific progress progressing so rapidly, a meeting
such as this is invaluable in identifying the areas that require the most
attention and are most likely to provide high payoff in terms of new insights.
Poster sessions where people present their newest, as yet unpublished, data will
serve as a forum for discussion of general directions and identification of the
highest priority issues. Certainly it is now clear that chloride ions are
important in human disease, but chloride has other functions that we have only
glimpsed. Proteins that regulate chloride are present in other organisms,
including worms, flies, and plants, but their functions remain poorly
elucidated. These proteins may have potential as targets that can be manipulated
genetically or chemically to enhance food production or control pests. This
meeting of experts in the field and their students will provide a fertile ground
for exploring these ideas.