* 0234018
* SGER: Effects of Avalanches on Local Carbon Budgets and Regional Forest Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* George Malanson, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2003
* USD 29,512.00

Avalanche paths are ubiquitous features in many parts of the western cordillera
of North America and many other high mountain ranges. Evidence has mounted
recently that avalanches may play more significant roles in the functioning of
mountain ecosystems that previously had been anticipated. Because massive
amounts of vegetation may be carried from higher slopes to valleys, avalanches
can have profound impacts on changing patterns of net primary productivity in
different locales, and they can dramatically alter carbon and nitrogen budgets
within alpine settings. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support
preliminary work during the summer and early fall of 2002 to examine the role
that snow avalanches play in the functioning of mountain ecosystems. The
investigators will assess the contribution of avalanches and avalanche paths to
mountain functions in terms of their impacts on the distribution and movements
of carbon, nitrogen, sediments, and woody debris. Working in the southern part
of Glacier National Park in Montana, the investigators will conduct preliminary
field work to estimate the amounts of carbon and woody debris moved by snow
avalanches. These data and data collected from IKONIS satellite imagery at
1-meter and 4-meter scales will be used to develop and test landscape-scale flux
models for carbon and woody debris. The results of this project are expected to
include the first systematic assessment of the general scale and magnitude of
material flux in areas affected by avalanches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and
insights produced by this project should form a baseline that these and other
investigators can use to broader the general scope of inquiry to include other
materials and other locations. Major outcomes of the project expected to result
from this project are a quantification of the potential significance of
avalanche paths to the movement and storage of carbon and wood and a test of the
potential to combine field-based and remotely sensed data to extend quantitative
analyses to landscape or regional scales. The project should help develop
techniques to characterize landscape structure, function, and change within a
scale-dependent context that offers insights into biogeographic, geomorphic, and
hydrologic studies of alpine dynamics. The project also will provide
opportunities for expanded graduate student education and training.&lt;br/&gt;