* 0234346
* SOFTWARE:"Cluster-based Runtime Support for Data-Intensive Online Applications"
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Tao Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2008
* USD 332,827.00

Data-intensive applications such as data mining demand significant compute and
I/O resources. With the ubiquity of World Wide Web and the advances in
clustering technologies, it becomes a reachable goal to bring these data-
intensive applications to a large number of users in real-time. Online
applications such as Internet services differ from their offline counterpart in
the performance sensitivity to highly concurrent workload and the availability
requirement. It is challenging to achieve high performance, reliability, and
efficient resource management for these applications under highly concurrent
workload.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the system and
programming-level issues in building&lt;br/&gt;high performance and reliable
runtime support for highly concurrent&lt;br/&gt;network services and online
applications. There are three main research&lt;br/&gt;thrusts in this project.
First, cluster-based system architectures are studied with a focus on overall
system scalability/availability as well as load balancing and data replication
support. Secondly, this project investigates programming and runtime support to
simplify the development and deployment of online applications that involve
concurrent and parallel data manipulation on clusters. Thirdly, a cluster-based
resource management framework will be developed with the combined goal of
quality-of-service and overall resource&lt;br/&gt;utilization efficiency.
Throughout this project, efforts will be made to&lt;br/&gt;examine data-
intensive applications and validate the effectiveness of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed
work. Additional issues will be investigated as more experience&lt;br/&gt;are
gained through system development and application evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;The
developed software will be released in public for potential use of
other&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since more and more data-
intensive services are being made&lt;br/&gt;available through intranets and the
Internet, it is expected that the&lt;br/&gt;developed results will have broad
impacts. Research described in this proposal will directly benefit instruction
improvement for undergraduate and graduate education at PIs' institutions and
enhance students' experience in cluster-
based&lt;br/&gt;computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;