* 0234100
* The Implmentation of Disaster Assistance in New York in the Aftermath of September 11:  The Dynamics of Multiorganizational Response
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Steven Stehr, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 80,389.00

THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DISASTER ASSISTANCE IN NEW YORK IN THE AFTERMATH OF
SEPTEMBER 11: THE DYNAMICS OF MULTIORGANIZATIONAL RESPONSE

Following the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center Towers in New York
City, a massive mobilization of disaster assistance and relief efforts took
place. These relief efforts raise a number of questions that have both practical
and theoretical importance particularly with regard to the organizational and
administrative processes employed by the governmental agencies, non-profit
charities, and private sector groups involved in delivering disaster assistance.
The principal objective of this research is to develop a more comprehensive and
systematic understanding of the disaster assistance process, particularly as it
relates to programs that benefit individuals and households. Data will be
obtained through a brief questionnaire-type survey that will be administered to
representatives of each of the more than 200 private or non-profit agencies and
the administrators of the more than 50 federal and state run assistance programs
involved in the disaster relief effort in New York. Follow up interviews will be
conducted with selected officials. We will seek to identify and code the types
of assistance offered, the number of victims who sought assistance and the
number of recipients who ultimately received aid, and the costs associated with
providing this assistance, among other information.

We believe that this line of research will provide a more detailed understanding
of the inter-organizational dynamics associated with disaster recovery and will
provide a starting point for more in-depth analysis of the political and
organizational aspects of large-scale victim assistance following a disaster. On
a theoretical level, this research will contribute to our understanding of
patterns of behavior in multi-organizational systems in disaster settings-
questions of long-standing interest in both the sociological and public
administration literatures. In addition, it will provide a foundation for better
understanding of the interplay between those providing and those receiving
disaster assistance. This research will also yield benefits to policy makers
(both inside and outside of government) and disaster assistance program
administrators. The disaster in New York City provides an opportunity to examine
the rationale underpinning the existing disaster relief system and to evaluate
how the system was implemented in this particular case. This information can
then be incorporated into future disaster recovery plans.