* 0234586
* Chemical Pathways Leading to Organic Aerosol Formation from the Atmospheric Oxidation of Alkanes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Roger Atkinson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

The primary objective of this experimental program is to elucidate the detailed
chemical mechanisms leading to the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA)
from atmospheric photooxidation of alkanes. Alkanes comprise the largest class
of volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions from anthropogenic sources, and
appear to be a significant contributor to urban SOA. Alkane-derived compounds
present an ideal system for exploring the basic gas-phase chemical reaction
mechanisms involved in the formation of low-volatility, condensable compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general approach for this project will be to
investigate the gas- and particle-phase products of the hydroxyl (OH) radical-
initiated reactions of selected alkanes and of their first- and potentially
second- (and later) generation products in large-volume environmental chambers.
A combination of demonstrated, state-of-the-art techniques, including thermal
desorption particle beam mass spectrometry (TDPBMS), atmospheric pressure
ionization mass spectrometry, and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with
derivatization, will be used to analyze gas-phase and particle-phase products in
real-time as well as off-line, in order to identify and quantify successive
generations of products and follow the chemical evolution of SOA formation and
growth. The alkanes to be investigated include n-decane and a number of its
isomers. Studies of SOA formation in the presence of seed particles of different
compositions will investigate the potential role of particle-phase
polymerization reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to
determine the importance of alkane photooxidation in atmospheric SOA formation
and the chemical mechanisms by which this occurs. The results will improve
current understanding of the fate of alkanes, which are a major component of the
atmosphere, and aid in the development of more sophisticated atmospheric models
of SOA formation and behavior. These types of models are widely used to evaluate
the potential effects of aerosols on global climate change, air pollution and
visibility, and human health, which are all important problems confronting
society. This project will also make it possible to educate a number of graduate
and undergraduate students, who in turn will have the opportunity to educate
others, in the area of atmospheric chemistry as well as on more general
environmental issues. &lt;br/&gt;