* 0234439
* How Embryos Assess Danger: The Role of Vibrational Cues
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Karen Warkentin, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 01/31/2007
* USD 308,000.00

How Embryos Assess Danger: The Role of Vibrational Cues Karen M. Warkentin (PI)
and J. Gregory McDaniel (co-PI) Eggs often suffer high levels of predation, but
were thought to be incapable of defending themselves. The recent discovery of
amphibian embryos that hatch early to escape predators changed this view, and
evidence for similar responses in fishes and spiders suggests that many embryos
may respond adaptively to changing risks. In any life stage, appropriate
responses to threat depend on the acquisition and processing of information.
This study investigates the sensory world and behavioral decisions of embryos,
using the best-studied case of embryonic anti-predator responses. The arboreal
embryos of red-eyed treefrogs use vibrations in the egg mass to detect predatory
snakes and wasps, and distinguish them from benign disturbances such as wind and
rain. Many other animals, from insects to mammals, use vibrations in
communication and/or predator-prey interactions, but research has been limited
by technical difficulties in reproducing these vibrations. This
interdisciplinary research will develop new methods for the analysis and
reproduction of biologically relevant vibrations, and then apply them to ask how
red-eyed treefrog embryos use vibrations to decide when to hatch. To
characterize the sensory environment of embryos, vibrations caused by important
dangerous and benign natural disturbances, and standardized artificial
disturbances, will be recorded. These recordings will be analyzed to determine
which characteristics of the vibrations carry information that embryos could use
to assess risk, and to inform the design of experimental stimuli. To determine
which characteristics of vibrations embryos actually use to assess danger, a
mechanical shaker will be used to expose embryos to standardized sets of
vibrational stimuli. This study will elucidate the rich sensory world and
information processing abilities of embryos, and improve our knowledge of how
animals use vibrational information. It will facilitate the flow of information
between behavioral biology and mechanical engineering, thus advancing bio-
vibrations research, and provide students with a unique opportunity to
participate in this cross-disciplinary endeavor.