* 0234215
* Theory of Metal-Insulator Transitions in Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems with Disorder
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Vladimir Dobrosavljevic, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

0234215&lt;br/&gt;Dobrosavljevic&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on the metal-insulator transition. Several
different, but equally important, physical process all play a role; these
include the physics of Anderson localization, the effects of strong
correlations, and processes associated with glassy freezing of electrons. Energy
scales associated with each of these processes are all comparable, so a
successful theory must include them all on the same footing. All three basic
physical processes associated with the metal-insulator transition can be
consistently incorporated within extended dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT)
approaches. They are all treated on the same, non-perturbative level allowing a
realistic description of many materials. The PI aims to apply extended DMFT
methods to several specific systems in an effort to explain phenomena that were
beyond the reach of theoretical approaches in the past. Specific topics to be
addressed include: (1) Disorder, magnetic field, and doping dependence of the
critical behavior in doped semiconductors; (2) Localization effects on magnetic
ordering in diluted magnetic semiconductors; (3) The two-dimensional metal-
insulator transition viewed as a transition to a Mott-Anderson glass; (4) Non-
equilibrium glassy dynamics of electron transport close to metal-insulator
transitions; (5) Low temperature spin-glass behavior in electronic Griffiths
phases of disordered heavy fermion compounds. In each of these projects, DMFT
methods used will be technically tractable and will address the main physical
questions. This award supports the integration of research at the forefront of
condensed matter science and education at all academic levels: K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate. This will be accomplished through participation in
various activities, including: Outreach programs - The PI will contribute to
enhancing scientific and technological understanding by communicating the
importance of his research to the general public through various outreach
activities, including lecturing at elementary schools, judging at annual
regional Science Fairs, and participating in the FSU Physics Department Open
House (PDOP) and the NHMFL Annual Open House activities. Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) program - The PI will participate in the REU Site at
the NHMFL and plans to provide an opportunity for at least one intern every year
to spend two summer months working on one of his research projects. FSU graduate
students will be trained - The PI will supervise the research of several physics
graduate students in physics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education on the transition between
metallic and insulating states observed in two-dimensional systems, dilute
magnetic semiconductors, and some heavy fermion materials. This problem is
theoretically challenging in part because it involves different and possibly
competing physical processes. The PI will apply and advance a promising avenue
of inquiry based on the dynamical mean field theory and its extensions. This
award also supports the PI's involvement in a range of education related
activities including outreach, undergraduate involvement in the PI's research,
and the training of the next generation of condensed matter
theorists.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;