* 0234951
* Fluorophore Coordinated Transition Metal Complexes for Sensing Neuronal Nitric Oxide
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Stephen Lippard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* mark clarke-williams
* 12/31/2006
* USD 480,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Stephen J. Lippard at MIT to use carboxylate-
bridged dimetallic complexes, mononuclear analogs and other transition metal
complexes to develop water-soluble sensors for nitric oxide in neurochemical
applications. Nitric oxide (NO) is an important neurotransmitter, the generation
and disposition of which are difficult to track in neuronal cells. Dinuclear
tetracarboxalato bridged complexes containing Fe, Co and other metals ions, and
N-donor ligands bearing fluorescent dansyl or fluorescein-type units, will be
used as NO sensors. The ligands, the bright fluorescence of which is quenched
when bound to the transition metal complexes, afford a sensitive method for NO
detection when released upon NO coordination to the metal. Water-soluble
versions will be prepared for applications in neuroscience. Mono- and dinuclear
iron(II) complexes bearing N-methyliminodiacetate (mida) units tethered to
fluorophores will also be synthesized for monitoring reversible NO binding.
These complexes will be used to study early steps in dioxygen activation, which
NO can imitate. Additional transition metal analogs will be studied in order to
optimize the quenching of the bound fluorophore and to achieve reversibility.
Carboxylates bearing coordinating fluorophores on tethers will help accomplish
the latter goal.

Attaining the scientific goals will facilitate the measurement of a key
signaling molecule in the brain. Graduate and postdoctoral researchers are
mentors to undergraduate research opportunity participants (UROPs) at MIT. The
infrastructure of research and education is enhanced by collaborations with
scientists at other institutions and disciplines. A diverse set of co-workers
will participate and will be trained to communicate their work and assume key
positions in academic or industrial organizations, as indicated by this research
group's web site http://methane.lms.mit.edu:8001/group/.

Sensors for nitric oxide, a key molecule in the brain involved in neuronal
signaling, development and disease, will be designed and synthesized. Workers
will be trained broadly across the fields of inorganic chemistry and
neuroscience