* 0234945
* Collaborative Research:  Reproductive Behavior and Pathogen Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Marlene Zuk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/28/2007
* USD 189,348.00

Lay summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the evolution of
resistance to pathogens in the context of sexual selection and reproductive
behavior. Using crickets as model organisms, the research has two components.
First, the effect on immunity of a unique component of courtship, tibial spur
feeding, will be examined in the ground cricket Allonemobius socius. The female
feeds from a wound she makes on a spur on the male's tibia during mating,
allowing her access to the male's circulatory system and potentially
compromising his immune response. How has sexual selection via this nuptial gift
influenced male and female ability to resist disease? A series of experiments on
virgin and mated males and females will examine the effect of tibial feeding on
encapsulation ability and resistance to pathogens. Second, a comparative study
will investigate sex differences in immune response across several ground
cricket species that differ in life history. Do seasonal species, in which
females must sequester resources for reproduction over a restricted period, show
a different pattern of sex bias in immunity than species in which investment is
spread out over a longer period? Although male vertebrates have generally weaker
immune responses than females, such a difference has rarely been explored in
invertebrates, despite the advantages of performing experimental and field
manipulations in these animals. Furthermore, little research has examined the
relationship between reproductive behavior and disease resistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;