* 0234714
* Competition and the Origins of Diversity:  An Empirical Test of the Ecological Speciation Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* David Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2007
* USD 367,384.00

Ecological mechanisms that lead to speciation (the evolutionary splitting of one
species into multiple new species) are central to general theory synthesizing
ecology and macroevolution. Although competition for resources has long been
viewed as the major mechanism by which natural selection would lead to
divergence of organism traits, there are few conclusive examples of competition
promoting speciation. The proposed research will provide a rare and strong test
of the ecological speciation hypothesis in a system of co-occurring spadefoot
toad species.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, it will test whether competition among
larvae of the spadefoot toads, Spea bombifrons and S. multiplicata, is leading
to ecological speciation. This research will evaluate the general hypothesis
that populations of S. multiplicata that do and do not occur with S. bombifrons
are becoming reproductively isolated from one another because of contrasting
competitive pressures faced by their larvae. The goals will be to test the
following three predictions: (1) hybrids from crosses between populations should
be less fit than offspring from matings within populations because of selection
against hybrids; (2) traits under divergent selection between environments
should influence mate choice and thereby form the basis of reproductive
isolation; and (3) divergence in these traits should evolve in parallel in
different populations that experience similar selective pressures. This project
will form a decisive test of ecological speciation and will enhance our
understanding of how competition promotes adaptive radiation. This study will,
therefore, help explain the origins of diversity, which is one of the most
challenging issues confronting biologists.&lt;br/&gt;