* 0234430
* Collaborative Research - Investigation of an Ancient Industrial Landscape in Western Rough Cilicia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Robert Blanchette, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2006
* USD 30,802.00

The Rough Cilicia Archaeological Project is investigating the role of Rough
Cilicia (south coastal Turkey) as a production center for the ancient Roman
Mediterranean economy. In peripheral areas such as ancient Rough Cilicia,
evidence of native adoption of imported modes of economic production furnish a
unique opportunity to view the development of an imperial world system through
the lens of local societies. Apart from our reliance on post-colonial economic
theory to articulate a likely mode of resource production for the region, our
investigative methods include remote sensing of satellite imagery; surface,
geomorphological, and maritime survey; charcoal analysis of ceramic production
residue for timber identification; and biogeochemical analysis of regional
terrestrial vegetation preserved in sediments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work to
date has identified crucial indicators of economic production activities
associated with the renewable resource of timber from Cilician mountain forests.
To refine this question, the project is examining the basin of the Bckici River
(modern Gazipasha, Turkey) as a zone of ancient industrial development. The
multi-phased archaeological fieldwork includes pedestrian survey along with
detailed architectural documentation, designed to yield information on the
distribution, scale and style of architectural features as well as information
on land-use intensity through time. The geomorphological survey is quantifying
the effects of deforestation on the magnitude, the rates, and the timing of
sediment deposition in the Bickici basin, while at the same time identifying
areas of deposition for palynological, charcoal, and lignin analysis. From
sediment, topographic, and bathymetric data acquired along the river valley, the
team is constructing hydraulic, sedimentation, and soil erosion models capable
of simulating historic changes in this watershed as a result of deforestation
and/or agricultural use and abandonment. Through geological core-sampling,
project collaborators are obtaining microscopic samples of woody and foliar
tissue residues capable of identifying archaeological woods and charcoals.
Tissues residues from grasses, woody angiosperms and gymnosperms found in
sediments, for example, are differentiated using geochemical tests to
distinguish among chemical forms of lignin and the stable carbon isotope
composition of its chemical residues. The team is also obtaining samples of
ancient charcoal residues through magnetometer inspection, auger sampling, and
ceramic collection at the Bickici kiln site. Through laboratory analysis the
team is matching these samples against wood from ship remains and archaeological
sites in Turkey to identify the types of trees used in antiquity and their areas
of origination. Along with palynological, macrobotanical, and Carbon-14
analysis, these strategies are enabling the team to obtain more precise data for
the form, scale, and duration of Cilician deforestation. Simultaneously, the
underwater survey is exploring the potential for ancient Cilician marine
activity by examining the coastal platform and shallow continental shelf for
remains of shipbuilding and maritime facilities. By combining these various
methodologies and technologies, the research program holds the potential to
identify salient modes of production and economic integration employed in
western Rough Cilicia during the Roman era, thereby achieving a greater
understanding of the economic transmutations that occur when native communities
and external empires combine efforts to exploit a regional resource
base.&lt;br/&gt;