* 0234071
* Constraints on the Crystallization of Degassing Magmas:  An Experimental Study of Crystal Nucleation and Growth Kinetics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/20/2002,12/31/2003
* Julia Hammer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2003
* USD 33,071.00

Hammer&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0087463&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The styles of volcanic
eruptions are determined in large part by the ability of volatile components to
exsolve and physically separate from the melt when the ascending magma reaches
shallow levels. Study of the interrelationships between magma supply rate to the
conduit from deep-seated reservoirs, syn-eruptive degassing, and magma discharge
rate at the vent is critical to our understanding of controls on eruptive style.
Degassing causes H2O-saturated silicate melts to crystallize, and the results of
this process may be exploited by volcanologists for greater understanding of
magmatic degassing history. In order to interpret pressure-time paths using the
groundmass crystal textures of natural volcanic products, we need to understand
the kinetics of crystal nucleation and growth under such circumstances, and that
is the focus of this proposal. We propose to focus on the intriguing aspects of
crystallization kinetics in a multicomponent system of geologic and
volcanological significance. We will study nucleation in synthetic and natural
glasses to isolate the effects of different factors (such as seeds of the
crystallizing phase and minor amounts of nonstoichiometric oxides) on
heterogeneous nucleation in natural melts. The relative importance of surface
energy and melt viscosity for nucleation rate will be examined using composition
as a variable in rapid decompression experiments. The goal of this project is to
quantify feldspar nucleation and growth kinetics due to compositional (rather
than thermal) supersaturation, compare the results to available theories, and
develop models of crystal texture development over a range of pressure-time
paths relevant to volcanic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;