* 0234520
* Phylogeny of the Metastrongyloid Nematodes: Inferring Patterns of Infection Site and Life Cycle Evolution Among 'Lungworms'
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Steven Nadler, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 09/30/2006
* USD 216,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ramon Carreno of Ohio Wesleyan
University and Dr. Steven Nadler at the University of California, Davis to to
study the phylogeny of the Metastrongyloid Nematodes. Nematode parasites
occurring in the respiratory tracts of mammals and known collectively as
"lungworms" include many species that can be highly pathogenic to their hosts.
These nematodes show a wide range of variation in morphological features and
life history strategies, and some have established infection sites in their
mammalian hosts that are outside of the respiratory tract. The main objective of
this research is to use DNA sequence data to reconstruct the genealogical
(phylogenetic) relationships of lungworms in the nematode superfamily
Metastrongyloidea, and to use this genealogy to understand the history of
changes in life cycles, morphology, and infection site specificity among members
of this group. Results from DNA sequence data will be complemented by an
independent genealogical analysis of morphological features from museum and
field-collected specimens. In addition to understanding patterns of change in
life cycles and tissue/organ specificity, the origins of a perplexing group,
lungworms parasitizing marine mammals, will also be determined from phylogenetic
analyses. For example, the origin of a group of lungworms that are found almost
exclusively in toothed whales has been widely disputed. Likewise, some species
that parasitize seals and sea lions have striking morphological similarities to
those infecting terrestrial carnivores. Although many different views on the
evolutionary history of the Metastrongyloidea have been proposed during the last
50 years, there have been no attempts to estimate their phylogeny using modern
analytical methods. This research will provide a foundation of knowledge for
understanding patterns of evolution among these nematode parasites, and will
provide an historical framework for the taxonomy of this superfamily. This
investigation will include scientific training opportunities in parasitology and
molecular biology for undergraduate and graduate students , and research
outcomes will lead to increased understanding of the biology of parasitism in
nematodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;