* 0234444
* Multithreading:  A Viable Approach for High Performance Single Chip Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jean-Luc Gaudiot, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Carmen Whitson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 311,682.00

Most modern single processor architectures focus on exploiting instruction-level
parallelism. However, despite continued performance improvements, there is
increasing doubt that aggressive ILP architecture techniques would continue
bringing the desired improvements and that there will come about a diminishing
return in the performance of single-chip
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multithreaded execution models promise to
exploit thread-level parallelism (TLP) beyond a pure ILP approach.
Multithreading can be applied directly at the level of uniprocessor instruction-
set architectures. For example, Simultaneous MultiThreading (SMT) is a promising
approach, which is attracting the attention of a number of academic and
industrial research groups. This technique allows the various pipelines of a
"superscalar" processor to be efficiently utilized by scheduling from several
"coarse-grain" threads of one (or several) program(s). Although exploiting both
ILP and TLP is attractive, the following questions are investigated in the
project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Can an architecture model, which integrates
fine-grain multithreading support with a coarse-grain multithreaded architecture
model such as SMT, be developed?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What are the design
trade-off when mapping these architecture features to single-chip
implementations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What compiling methodology for the
proposed architecture model would exploit thread-level parallelism at both
coarse and fine-grain levels?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;