* 0234997
* RUI: Elucidating the Mechanisms Governing Differential Expression of the Lat Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Timothy Finco, Agnes Scott College
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 03/31/2007
* USD 382,673.00

The mammalian lat gene encodes an adaptor protein (LAT) that is expressed in
only a limited number of cell types, including T cells, mast cells, natural
killer cells, and platelets. Tyrosine phosphorylation of the LAT protein
following receptor engagement results in its interaction with a variety of
downstream signaling molecules, an event essential for proper cellular function.
In addition to its cell-type restricted expression pattern, the level of lat
mRNA is altered during the process by which T cells are activated to elicit an
immune response. Interestingly, it appears that certain signal transduction
pathways in T cells stimulate lat gene expression whereas others have an
inhibitory effect. The objective of this research is to initiate a comprehensive
study into the various molecular processes responsible for differential
expression of the lat gene. This objective will be accomplished by the following
means: (1) identification of the DNA elements comprising the proximal lat
promoter; (2) characterization of the proteins that interact with these defined
DNA elements and a determination of their functional relevance in controlling
lat gene expression; (3) investigation into the role of the proximal lat
promoter in the genes' cell-type specific expression and its differential
expression during T cell activation; and (4) examination of the contribution of
RNA stability and the role of distal control regions to the regulation of lat
gene expression. Studies of the regulation of the lat gene will not only provide
important information concerning the molecular mechanisms controlling its
expression but in addition will contribute to the establishment of general
principles of gene regulation which will be applicable to other genes in a
variety of living organisms. This research will be conducted as a collaboration
between the principal investigator and undergraduate students at Agnes Scott
College, a four-year liberal arts institution for women.