* 0234002
* NIH-NSF BBSI on Simulation and Computer Visualization of Biological Systems at Multiple Scales
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Ivet Bahar, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2006
* USD 701,644.00

&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: 0234002&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bahar,
Ivet&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NIH-
NSF BBSI on Simulation and Computer Visualization of Biological Systems at
Multiple Scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is to develop a Bioengineering &amp; Bioinformatics Summer Institute
(BBSI) entitled NIH-NSF BBSI on Simulation and Computer Visualization of
Biological Systems at &lt;br/&gt;Multiple Scales. for undergraduate and graduate
students with strong analytical and &lt;br/&gt;quantitative skills, and high
potential for careers in Computational Biology, Bioengineering, or
Bioinformatics. The BBSI will be a joint program of the University of Pittsburgh
(lead institution), the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, and Duquesne
University, and will also include faculty from Carnegie Mellon University. A
major strength of this academic community is the breadth and depth of experience
with biological models and simulations, from molecular to multicellular, and
from analytical approaches to massively parallel computing. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are to: (i) provide students with a unique training
and research &lt;br/&gt;experience through a series of cross-disciplinary
lectures, computational laboratory sessions, and independent research
opportunities not available in traditional undergraduate programs; specifically,
to present an integrated view of molecular-to-cellular analytical approaches and
fundamental physicochemical, statistical mechanical, and kinetic principles
needed for predictive theoretical and computational research; (ii) broaden the
student's view of post-genomic computational and mathematical research areas in
molecular, cellular, and systems biology, and (iii) motivate students to pursue
careers in the field(s). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Applicants will be accepted,
from basic life or physical sciences, computer science, mathematics or
engineering, and three first year graduate students. A ten-week program will
encompass six weeks of lecture and computer lab coursework, three weeks of
mentored research activity, and 1 week of student presentations. In addition, a
weekly seminar series will cover a wide variety of related topics with
presentations from local or invited outside experts, as well as discussions of
scientific ethics and career opportunities. Student-organized journal clubs, and
involvement of senior or graduate students in teaching activities will ensure
efficient communication and contribute to professional growth. &lt;br/&gt;