* 0234136
* Geo-Engineering and Rock Mechanics Research at the Proposed U.S. National Underground Science Laboratory; September 19-21, 2002; Washington, DC
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,09/30/2003
* Peter Smeallie, American Rock Mechanics Association Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 09/30/2003
* USD 41,368.00

CMS-0234136 PI: Peter Smeallie Institution: American Rock Mechanics Association
Foundation Title: "Geo-Engineering and Rock Mechanics Research at the Proposed
U.S. National Underground Science Laboratory"

The establishment of a National Underground Science Laboratory (NUSL) is
currently under consideration. A workshop will be conducted by the University of
Maryland on September 19-21, 2002, to identify research areas of value to the
nation that could be conducted at the NUSL. The American Rock Mechanics
Association Foundation (ARMA/F) proposes to develop for presentation a research
agenda for geo-engineering and rock mechanics for consideration at the NUSL
workshop and eventually to be undertaken at the proposed NUSL facility itself.
ARMA/F will identify topics and will select up to four broad areas for
preparation of white papers. Captains will be identified for each area and four
to five team members. The captain will lead the team in writing a white paper
(10-15 pages) on the subject that will detail the nature of the research, how
such work could take advantage of the underground laboratory, and what the
benefits of the results would be. The four papers will be submitted to ARMA/F by
August 15th and examined by a team assembled by ARMA/F to include experts from
the various fields called out in the papers. One day prior to the NUSL workshop,
ARMA/F will host a day-long pre-workshop meeting, inviting the captains and the
teams to view all the presentations, and make improvements and modifications to
the presentations consistent with the allotted time and speakers for the subject
at the NUSL workshop. The final result will be presented at the main workshop.

This project will advance the field of geo-engineering and rock mechanics by
identifying for consideration needed research to be undertaken at the NUSL. This
work will give unprecedented opportunities for educators, students, and
researchers to obtain field experiences and to carry out complex projects under
field conditions. Results of research carried out at the NUSL could potentially
have direct impacts on national security through a better understanding of how
rock behaves and civil infrastructure systems through advances in tunneling and
excavation technologies.