* 0234587
* ECOHAB PNW:  Ecology and Oceanography of Toxic Pseudo-nitzschia in the Pacific Northwest Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2010
* Barbara Hickey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2010
* USD 2,664,974.00

This project is studying the physiology, toxicology, ecology and oceanography of
toxic Pseudo-nitzschia (PN) species off the Pacific Northwest coast, a region in
which both macro-nutrient supply and current patterns are primarily controlled
by seasonal coastal upwelling processes. The long term project goal is to
develop a mechanistic basis for forecasting toxic PN bloom development along the
Pacific Northwest coast and in other similar coastal regions in Eastern Boundary
upwelling systems. The objectives are being met with an integrated suite of
field and laboratory studies on two 21 day cruises per year, moored
bio/chem/physical sensors as well as circulation and biophysical modeling in a
study area that includes both the eddy and also a typical coastal upwelling
region. The key factors responsible for high cell densities of toxigenic PN spp.
and the variable levels of cell toxicity are being investigated with on-deck
incubation studies and comprehensive in situ measurements including
macronutrients, micronutrients (Fe, Cu), bacteria and grazer abundance as well
as photosynthetic radiation, stratification and velocity shear. Aging of blooms
are being studied by following drogued patches of water both from the eddy and
from a nearshore upwelling region. Toxification of coastal shellfish are being
determined using beach sampling sites maintained by the Olympic Region HAB
program. A coupled biophysical model of the region is being used to examine the
potential for bloom generation in offshore eddy and nearshore upwelling regions
(e.g., stratification, nutrient sources, strength and timing) as well as to
assess transport pathways of toxic PN to the coast under a variety of
environmental and physiological conditions.