* 0234168
* ITW: Ties That Blind? The Role of Social Networks in the Underrepresentation of Women in IT
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Barbara Gutek, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Caroline E. Wardle
* 09/30/2004
* USD 118,347.00

Institution: University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: EIA
0089879&lt;br/&gt;PI: Barbara A. Gutek&lt;br/&gt;Title: Ties That Blind? The
Role of Social Networks in the Underrepresentation of Women in
IT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CISE Information Technology Workforce (ITW)
proposal requests funds for a large-scale study of the role of social networks
in the underrepresentation of women in the IT workforce. Multiple cohorts of
undergraduate and master's degree students in a leading MIS program will be
surveyed at five points in time to identify their patterns of communication,
trust, advice, friendship, and voluntary association in organizations. Their
work roles on project teams, in student organizations, and in first jobs after
graduation will be tracked. Background information will also be collected. The
differential positions of women students in the networks, roles, and job
placements will be analyzed using the techniques of network analysis as well as
standard techniques of statistical inference. The influence of background
characteristics, such as work experience and prior organizational affiliations
will also be investigated. This project has the potential to provide significant
insights about the degree to which personal networks contribute to the success
of women in IT education and employment.&lt;br/&gt;