* 0234667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Association and Alignment of French Rises and their Role in Discourse Segmentation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Mary Beckman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2004
* USD 6,490.00

Under the direction of Dr. Mary E. Beckman, Ms. Pauline Welby will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation on intonational rises in French as cues to
identifying where one word ends and another begins. Such cues are necessary
since speech lacks the spaces between words that writing often has. In English,
stress is a good cue to segmentation since content words (nouns, adjectives,
etc.) typically begin with stressed syllables. French lacks such stress cues,
but the timing of intonational rises there has been hypothesized to fill a
similar role. Previous research has shown that French intonation is
characterized by an obligatory rise at the end of a phrase and an optional early
rise near the beginning. Two production experiments will examine influences on
the early rise (e.g., speaking rate) and the timing of both rises. Three
perception experiments will examine the role of the early rise in speech
segmentation. Items will be read by a native speaker and recorded; the timing of
the rises will then be varied using computer resynthesis. Participants will
listen to stimuli and make various types of responses. For example, one
experiment will use invented non-words, whose segmentation reflects that of
unknown but real words. For example, the same sequence of syllables could be
interpreted as the nonsense word "melamondine" or as the phrase "mes lamondines"
('my' plus the nonsense word "lamondine"). According to one hypothesis, an early
rise beginning at the first syllable will bias the listener to the one-word
interpretation ("melamondine"), while an early rise beginning at the second
syllable will bias the listener to the two-word interpretation ("mes
lamondines").

This research is significant both for theoretical linguistics and for the
development of speech technologies. It will increase our understanding of French
intonation and of speech segmentation. In addition, a better understanding of
segmentation strategies can improve automatic speech recognition systems, which
lag far behind humans in segmentation accuracy. A more refined account of the
timing facts might also improve speech synthesis systems, since poor intonation
makes synthesized speech difficult to understand. In turn, improvements in
speech technology provide scientists with better tools for future speech
research.