* 0234101
* NIH-NSF BBSI:  Virginia Commonwealth University
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Gregory Buck, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2006
* USD 700,602.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0234101&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gregory
Buck&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Virginia Commonwealth
University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NIH-NSF BBSI at Virginia Commonwealth
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is recommended for funding. The proposal was rated as Highly
Recommended (FUND) by the panel and the program director agrees with the panel's
judgment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific comments about the proposal in relation
to the review criteria are outlined
below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fields of bioengineering and bioinformatics are
being redefined through technological advances, but it is clear that the most
critical work will take place at the interface between classical disciplines. It
is therefore essential to attract new people to the field who work well in the
gray areas and who can learn to adapt easily to the different languages of
molecular biology, computational and mathematical sciences, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VCU team has developed an integrated
curriculum to provide exposure and experiences in both fields of bioinformatics
and bioengineering. This Institute fits into the overall goals of VCU. They have
developed a new five year Master's in bioinformatics, with three tracks:
computational and engineering, genomics and biology, and quantitative and
statistical. Newly created School of Engineering has a strong focus in
Bioengineering with connection to MCV Hospitals of VCU Health Systems. VCU Life
Sciences creates an umbrella over these entities to enhance the integration of
the two fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to take rising juniors with no necessary
laboratory experience and evoke within them the sense that they are active and
valuable members of a scientific project, the Institute will lead them through a
series of highly integrated intensive research simulations, inspired by actual
problems from each of their host laboratories. Core skill bases such as
computational and mathematical methods will serve to integrate, across
disciplines and research areas, the analytical and methodological skills of the
Institute participants. While the first summer will provide students with a view
of bioengineering and bioinformatics that is focused on the problems addressed
by the laboratories of the institute, the second summer will offer a broader
look at the fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I recommend funding of the
proposal for a total of $660,602 for four years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;