* 0234167
* Collaborative Research:  Thermal Spray of Multiscale Polymer/Ceramic Composite Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Thomas Twardowski, Philadelphia University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 03/31/2005
* USD 132,021.00

This collaborative research project will integrate experimental and modeling
approaches to establish and understand the relationships between processing
conditions, coating microstructure and coating properties thermal spray
processing. Multi-institution, multidisciplinary collaborative research will
expand the application of thermally sprayed polymer/ceramic composite coatings
by incorporating nanoscopic to microscopic scales of reinforcement. The high
velocity oxy-fuel [HVOF] thermal spray process will be used to deposit mixed,
layered and functionally gradient matrix composite coatings. Thermally sprayed
nanoscale silica reinforced Nylon 11 and polycarbonate matrix composites have
previously exhibited significant improvements in scratch and wear resistance,
modulus and barrier properties. Multiple scales of ceramic reinforcement should
produce further improvements in properties, bridging the nano-to-conventional
material interfaces, and providing fundamental understanding of the effect of
the reinforcement size scale on matrix structure and composite
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three graduate students will be cross-trained
through research tasks in thermal spray processing, microstructural and
mechanical characterization and transport phenomena modeling. Integration of the
computational model of particle melting, impact, deformation and solidification
with experimental process and microstructural characterization will guide
development and optimization of the HVOF spraying process.&lt;br/&gt;This
research should stimulate new and improved applications nylon 11/silica
composite materials as protective coatings, and for thermally sprayed composite
protective coatings in general. Industry interest in thermally sprayed coatings
is growing, as indicated, for example, by participation in technical programming
on thermally sprayed polymers. Thermal spray technology is well established for
metals, ceramics and cermets. The current project should support future
commercialization of sprayed polymer/ceramic composites by characterizing the
fundamental process/structure/ property relationships of these materials.