* 0234047
* The Role of Social Organization on Development and Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Andrew King, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/28/2007
* USD 375,560.00

Meredith J. West: The role of social organization on development and
learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
proposed research is to explore the effects of social organization on avian
learning and to find developmental principles to guide research on vocal
communication in other groups, including humans. Of special interest is how
animals, when living in an information-rich environment, selectively attend,
interact, and learn from other members of their species. Given that they do not
or cannot learn equally from all individuals, what rules guide access and
attention to social information? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in the origins
and nature of social organization stems from an interest in expanding the study
of learning and development toward ecological concerns. It is proposed that much
species-typical knowledge is delivered via social networks, social groups in
which older organisms or peers facilitate or constrain exposure to information.
The idea of networks has been bypassed in most laboratory research on learning
because generally the animals are simply exposed to stimulation delivered with
minimal species-typical context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study socially guided
learning, higher-level patterns of social organization are to be investigated.
These are patterns that result from flock dynamics, yielding different
developmental effects for mature and immature males and females. To explore
about such effects, birds are studied throughout the year in large aviaries in
which the composition of groups is periodically altered and the effects
measured. Social and vocal behavior is recorded, mate choice tests employed, and
eggs collected and incubated to measure production, fertility, and viability. In
addition, blood will be taken for DNA analyses. These procedures afford the
chance to explore adaptive effects on communicative competence as a function of
opportunities for social learning. The work is focused on questions regarding
causation and function. First, are there simple rules to guide social
assortment, and how does social organization affect learning? Second, how do
specific behavioral traits, beyond age or sex, affect formation of groups and
how do such groups affect developmental trajectories of individuals?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has far-reaching implications for
understanding complex communication systems, including the human communication
system. In recently completed work with human parents and their infants,
hypotheses were tested by us about prelinguistic vocal plasticity based on avian
models of social learning. It was found that infant babbling could be socially
shaped by parental responses. Parents did not vocally imitate infants' sounds,
thus ruling out vocal matching as a mechanism. These are the first data to show
such a relationship and they challenge long standing but untested ideas about
the innate nature of early speech development. Thus, the proposed avian studies
provide a new set of heuristic principles with which to formulate research
questions on ecological approaches to vocal learning in many animals, as well as
related phenomena such as human prelinguistic development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;