* 0234254
* Functional Analysis of Ammonia Transporters during Development of Dictyostelium
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Charles Singleton, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

0234254&lt;br/&gt;Singleton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dictyostelium discoideum is one
of the simplest studied eukaryotes that possesses true multicellularity.
Depletion of its natural food source results in a cessation of both growth and
cell division of the unicellular amoebae, initiating a developmental program
that leads to the coalescence of the amoebae into a multicellular entity. The
goal of the program is to produce and disperse spores in order that some cells
survive the temporary unfavorable environment. A number of cell differentiation
events and morphological changes must occur to ensure the attainment of this
goal. Efficient cell-to-cell and environment-to-cell communication and signaling
are necessary for the successful implementation of the developmental program.
Endogenously produced ammonia is used by developing Dictyostelium cells as a
self-generated signal for monitoring not only their environment, but also the
morphological changes and the differentiation events they are undergoing, and
thus their progression through the developmental program. .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore a novel approach to
understanding ammonia signaling and will generate new tools that will allow a
more focused study of the functions of ammonia and the molecular mechanisms used
to carry out those functions. There are three known ammonia transporters (AMTs)
in Dictyostelium. Two hypotheses will be addressed: 1) much of the differences
in ammonia levels within various cell types and within the microenvironments of
the developing structures is due to the function of ammonium transporters; and
2) the AMTs play a direct role in ammonia signaling by serving as ammonia
sensors that link ammonia to signal transduction pathways. The spatial
expression of the amt genes and the distribution of the encoded AMT proteins
within the developing cells and structures will be determined. Strains will be
generated in which the amt genes are disrupted, either singly or in various
combinations, so that the specific role of each AMT can be discerned. Based on
the results of the distribution studies and the resulting phenotypes of the
mutant strains, testable models of how ammonia signaling is mediated by each AMT
will be formulated. Genetic, molecular genetic, and biochemical
characterizations will be carried out to test the predictions of the models and
to determine the molecular mechanisms that mediate the function of the AMTs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the pervasive use of ammonia throughout
development of this organism, the work should lead to a significant, new
understanding of the control and regulation of the multicellular developmental
program of Dictyostelium. Although studying ammonia transport in other systems
is an active area of research, the focus is mostly on uptake of ammonia from the
environment to supply the cell's nitrogen needs. A broader role for ammonia as a
signaling molecule used during development has received little attention. In
this regard, Dictyostelium provides a good system for exploring the ways
endogenously produced ammonia can serve as a means of communication during
development. The findings from the proposed experiments may impact thinking on
the role ammonia plays in other organisms and may lead to new models of, and
implications for, the use of ammonia in signaling, particularly during plant and
mammalian development. &lt;br/&gt;