* 0234570
* SGER:  Food Web Structure Across a Large-scale Ocean Productivity Gradient:  Top Predator Assemblages in the Southern Indian Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* George Hunt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/2004
* USD 30,017.00

A pervasive goal of biological oceanography has been to understand the processes
that structure pelagic communities. Past research suggests that oceanic species
distributions are influence by physical and biological variability at a variety
of spatial-temporal scales. The objective of this research is to test the
hypothesis that the dispersion and community of top predators vary in
concordance with large-scale variability in physical structure and ocean
productivity in pelagic ecosystems. To test this hypothesis, an inter-
disciplinary survey of marine bird and mammal use of distinct oceanographic
domains in the Southern Indian Ocean will be conducted. This Small Grant for
Exploratory Research will provide the opportunity to place two U.S. scientists
on board a French research vessel near Reunion Island. The French scientists
will sample the physical environment and estimate oceanic productivity while the
U.S. scientists will survey top predator distributions across a 35 degree
latitudinal gradient in physical and biological properties from subtropical to
sub Antarctic waters. The primary hypothesis to be addressed is that top
predator assemblages are structured by spatial gradients in hydrographic
properties and ocean productivity patterns known to influence the distribution
and patchiness of their zooplankton, fish and squid prey. It is hypothesized
that the overall abundance of marine top predators within a specific oceanic
domain is largely determined by ocean productivity. Also, it is hypothesized
that the energetic costs of foraging determine which types of marine top
predators inhabit specific oceanic domains. Species with high foraging costs are
constrained to exploit dense prey aggregations within highly productive areas.
Conversely, taxa with low foraging costs are able to inhabit low productivity
areas, where they exploit more dispersed prey resources.&lt;br/&gt;To test these
hypotheses, we will quantify the spatial association of top
predator&lt;br/&gt;assemblages with specific water masses and the aggregative
response of top predators at&lt;br/&gt;hydrographic and bathymetric domains.
Because top predators respond to oceanographic&lt;br/&gt;variability at multiple
scales of time and space, we will assess their responses to&lt;br/&gt;habitat
variability at two specific spatial scales. A variety analytical methods will be
used, including compositional analysis of coarse-scale habitat preferences,
generalized additive models, recurrent group analysis, ordination of
hydrographic data and top predator assemblages and the measurement of top
predator aggregation. The research will address spatial variability in pelagic
food webs within the context of large (1000s km) and coarse (10s km) scale
hydrographic and ocean productivity patterns in the subtropical and sub
Antarctic Indian Ocean. This inter-disciplinary perspective will enhance our
understanding of the way physical and biological processes structure pelagic
communities in the southern Indian Ocean and will provide a model that has
broader implications for the oceans as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;