* 0234440
* Nonlinear Model Reduction and Control for Integrated Process Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2007
* USD 227,167.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the development and
evaluation of nonlinear model reduction and control methods for integrated
process systems, specifically, networks of reaction and separation units with
large material and/or energy recycle. Such networks typically exhibit strongly
nonlinear dynamics which is induced by the recycle and evolves in a slower time
scale (longer time horizon) compared to the dynamics of the individual units.
This time scale separation lends itself naturally to a control paradigm
which:&lt;br/&gt;Distinguishes between "distributed" control objectives for
individual process units (fast time scale) and "supervisory" control objectives
for the overall network (slow time scale), and&lt;br/&gt;Dictates compensating
for the nonlinearities induced by recycle at the supervisory control
level.&lt;br/&gt;Within this framework, the main technical tasks will be the
derivation of low-order nonlinear models of the core network dynamics induced by
recycle structures and the design of nonlinear supervisory controllers on the
basis of these models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods to be developed will:
(i) enhance fundamental understanding of the dynamics and control of highly
integrated process systems, (ii) enable improving their operation via the design
of effective supervisory control schemes, and (iii) complement existing plant-
wide control methodologies and facilitate a more efficient integration of real-
time optimization and supervisory
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work could
result in more efficient and hence more commercially viable operation of
chemical plants. Process systems that could benefit from the results of this
work include reaction-separation networks and individual multi-stage processes
with "internal" material recycle and/or heat integration, such as high purity
and reactive distillation columns. The project also involves the development of
software tools and a dedicated web site which should further enhance the
dissemination of the results and the infrastructure for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;