* 0234540
* Spaces of Kleinian Groups and Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Yair Minsky, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

DMS-0234540&lt;br/&gt;Yair N. Minsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer is co-
organizing a workshop at the Newton Institute in&lt;br/&gt;Cambridge, UK, on the
subject of ``Spaces of Kleinian groups and&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-manifolds'',
for the summer of 2003. The 4-week&lt;br/&gt;workshop, including a 1-week
conference, will bring together&lt;br/&gt;researchers active on a number of
foundational topics in the field:&lt;br/&gt;relationships between the analytic,
combinatorial and geometric&lt;br/&gt;structure of hyperbolic 3-manifolds;
topology of deformation spaces&lt;br/&gt;and the arrangement of their
components; classification of hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds by asymptotic
invariants; complex projective structures;&lt;br/&gt;convex hull boundaries;
cone manifolds, orbifolds and knot groups; the&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial structure
of Teichmuller spaces, mapping class groups,&lt;br/&gt;and spaces of curves on
surfaces. Recent years have seen substantial&lt;br/&gt;progress on longstanding
foundational conjectures such as the&lt;br/&gt;Bers/Sullivan/Thurston Density
Conjecture, Ahlfors' Measure&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture, Thurston's Ending Lamination
Conjecture and Marden's&lt;br/&gt;Tameness Conjecture. The time is therefore
ripe for a conference on&lt;br/&gt;these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
study of low-dimensional geometry, topology and dynamics, there&lt;br/&gt;is a
remarkable depth of interconnection between fields of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics.
Henri Poincare, who studied both celestial dynamics and&lt;br/&gt;complex
analysis (among many other things), observed in the 19th&lt;br/&gt;century that
the standard round sphere, the setting of classical&lt;br/&gt;analysis and
geometry, functioned also as a "horizon at infinity" for&lt;br/&gt;an exotic
non-Euclidean geometry that we now call Hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;Space. Dynamical
properties of transformations of the sphere translate&lt;br/&gt;to geometric
properties of rigid motions of this space, and give rise&lt;br/&gt;to families
of symmetric tilings whose structure we can study by&lt;br/&gt;geometric and
topological methods. The properties of these tilings,&lt;br/&gt;and the way in
which they change when the tilings are varied through&lt;br/&gt;families (or
"parameter spaces"), are still linked to some of the&lt;br/&gt;motivating
questions about physical systems of which Poincare was&lt;br/&gt;aware a hundred
years ago. Issues such as classification of systems,&lt;br/&gt;mapping out
regions of stability and instability, deformation and&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation of
families of systems, and probabilistic properties such&lt;br/&gt;as ergodicity,
all have significance in both pure and applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. In the
setting of hyperbolic geometry, recent years have&lt;br/&gt;seen significant
progress on these issues, with both theoretical&lt;br/&gt;advances and
computational approaches playing a role. This conference&lt;br/&gt;will bring
together leading researchers in this area and promising&lt;br/&gt;young
mathematicians, to disseminate recent advances and continue work&lt;br/&gt;on
open problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;