* 0234600
* Obtaining Highly Dependable Communication Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Sandeep Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Communication protocols form an integral part of many complex
&lt;br/&gt;software systems. In many such systems, protocols' impact
on&lt;br/&gt;system dependability far exceeds the fraction of the total
&lt;br/&gt;number of lines of code devoted to their implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, there exists virtually no systematic approach for
&lt;br/&gt;design and evaluation of protocols that considers
dependability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously, we have developed a systematic,
semi-automatic &lt;br/&gt;approach for validation of communication protocols.
Our approach &lt;br/&gt;uses semi-formal representations of protocols and
efficient search &lt;br/&gt;(forward search as well as fault-oriented test
generation) to &lt;br/&gt;analyze protocols over the entire range of scenarios,
including &lt;br/&gt;external events, faults (such as loss of packets,
communication &lt;br/&gt;link failures, loss of state in communication nodes,
and so on), &lt;br/&gt;as well as network topologies. The effectiveness of our
approach &lt;br/&gt;has been demonstrated via its application to a varied range
of &lt;br/&gt;protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will undertake
three main tasks. First, we &lt;br/&gt;will extend our previously developed
framework to compute values &lt;br/&gt;of appropriate dependability metrics for
existing protocols of &lt;br/&gt;interest to the NASA and the HDCCSR community.
Second, we will &lt;br/&gt;develop the first systematic approach to design new
protocols that &lt;br/&gt;satisfy desired dependability criteria. Finally, we
will use &lt;br/&gt;the testbed provided by NASA in conjunction with the
expertise &lt;br/&gt;and software made available by NASA and other HDCCSR
researchers &lt;br/&gt;to fine-tune our approaches and to demonstrate that: (i)
accurate &lt;br/&gt;values of dependability metrics can indeed be computed for
&lt;br/&gt;existing communication protocols using a systematic,
semi-&lt;br/&gt;automatic approach, (ii) new protocols can be designed in a
&lt;br/&gt;systematic, semi-automated manner to meet desired dependability
&lt;br/&gt;criteria, and (iii) enhancements in the dependability of
&lt;br/&gt;communication protocols can indeed significantly enhance the
&lt;br/&gt;dependabilities of many software-hardware systems of interest to
&lt;br/&gt;NASA and the HDCCSR community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
above technical contributions, the proposed &lt;br/&gt;research will have
broader impact on society. First, results of &lt;br/&gt;the proposed research
will enable improvements in dependability &lt;br/&gt;of critical infrastructure,
such as the air-traffic control &lt;br/&gt;system. Second, the research will
develop new approaches and &lt;br/&gt;practical case studies that will provide
us with a unique &lt;br/&gt;opportunity to educate a large and diverse student
body in &lt;br/&gt;techniques for development of dependable protocols and
systems. &lt;br/&gt;