* 0234173
* Community Planning for Ocean Observations, Long Term Time Series and Observatory Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Larry Atkinson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 01/31/2004
* USD 224,024.00

Ocean.US was created by the National Oceanographic Partnership Program in late
2000 as a National Office to promote and facilitate the establishment of an
integrated and sustained ocean observing system. &lt;br/&gt;In March 2002, a
planning workshop was held to create a design and implementation plan for an
integrated and sustained observing system for the United States. Some 110
attendees participated in discussions, the results of which are summarized in
the report titled " An Integrated and Sustained Ocean Observing System (IOOS)
for the United States: Design and Implementation" (Ocean.US, 2002).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has played an important role in coordinating these
community-planning efforts. His continued participation in the Ocean.US
activities will provide the continuity necessary to keep the initiative moving
forward. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main effort in the coming year will be to
provide technical assistance to The National Office for Integrated and Sustained
Ocean Observations (Ocean.US), to ensure that basic research remains an
important element of the integrated ocean observing system implementation
planning process, and to continue and expand research community consensus
building with respect to ocean observatories. Importantly, the PI will
contribute to the continuity of the Ocean.US office as it makes the transition
to a new director during the fall 2002. This transition combined with the
development of the ten-year implementation plan makes the provision for
continuity especially important.&lt;br/&gt;