* 0234129
* NIH-NSF BBSI:    Southern California Bioinformatics Summer Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Sandra Sharp, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2006
* USD 699,708.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0234129&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jamil
Momand&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: California State LA University Aux
Serv&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NIH-NSF BBSI Southern California Bioinformatics Summer
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Summer
Institute is composed of a Host Institution and seven Research Mentor
Institutions. The Host institution is California State University Los Angeles
(Cal State LA). The Research Mentor Institutes are BioDiscovery, Caltech, City
of Hope National Medical Center, Protein Pathways, UCLA, University of Southern
California, ViaLogy all of which are in the greater Los Angeles area. The major
focus of the institute is bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of
the Southern California-Bioinformatics Summer Institute (SoCal-BSI) is to
identify and educate college students for a successful career in bioinformatics.
The SoCal-BSI will offer lectures, workshops, research training, and career
counseling to selected college students in this fast growing field. Students
with a background in molecular life sciences and/or computer sciences and who
have completed their second year of college but have not entered their third
year of graduate school are welcome to apply. Current professional
bioinformaticists generally fall into one of two categories: those that use
existing software programs to address molecular life science issues and those
that develop new software programs. The SoCal-BSI will train students to be
proficient at using existing bioinformatics software programs and at developing
bioinformatics programs on their own. Students will be provided with internships
to perform bioinformatics research at an academic research institute or at a
bioinformatics company in the Southern California area. In this research
environment they will apply the knowledge gained from the didactic training
portion of the course. Students may apply for a second year at the SoCal-BSI in
which they will receive more advanced training in bioinformatics. It is the
overall goal of the SoCal-BSI to provide students with the motivation and
intellectual tools to pursue a successful career in bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;