* 0234432
* Improvement of the Fish, Amphibian, and Reptile Collections at the Bell Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Andrew Simons, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 03/31/2007
* USD 214,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Bell Museum of Natural History at
the University of Minnesota under the direction of Dr. Andrew Simons to recurate
the holdings of the Fish, Amphibian, and Reptile collections. These collections
contain valuable specimens documenting the historical diversity of fishes,
amphibians, and reptiles of the upper Midwest. The collections date from the
1890's and thus represent an irreplaceable historical archive. The collection is
actively used and a valuable resource to researchers as well as state and
federal agencies. The improvements will safeguard the collection from
deterioration and loss of specimens, and enhance access of researchers to data
and collection records. Currently the specimens are preserved in 40% isopropyl
alcohol, considered inappropriate for long term preservation. Several containers
are inadequate and some are deteriorating. Old specimen labels are deteriorating
and need immediate replacement. The electronic database is incomplete and
contains several errors that will be corrected. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
improvements to the collection include transfer from 40% isopropyl alcohol to
70% ethanol; transfer of specimens from old deteriorating containers to new jars
and stainless steel tanks; relabeling of the entire collection using archival
quality materials; and standardization and update of the database. The updated
database will be available and searchable on the Web. &lt;br/&gt;The activities
described in the proposal will train graduate and undergraduate students in
collection management procedures. The fish, amphibian, and reptile collections,
although primarily research collections, are used regularly in public programs
at the Bell Museum. These uses include tours of the collection, loan of
specimens for exhibits, and inclusion of high school teachers and students into
activities in the collections. The funded activities will also make valuable
information regarding specimens in the Bell collections available to the public,
researchers, and state and federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;