* 0234693
* CAREER:  Coalition Formation Among Self-Interested Computationally Limited Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2003
* USD 177,502.00

The award supports research into the development of efficient automated
coalition formation methods that are targeted to operate in inherently
distributed situations with combinatorial characteristics---e.g. task and
resource allocation and multi- agent planning and scheduling. Of specific
interest are situations in which agents have different goals and each agent is
trying to maximize its own good without concern for the global good. The first
part of the research extends prior work on coalition formation under bounded
rationality to new models of computation and communication limitations. More
general settings will also be studied in which a coalition's value is affected
by nonmembers actions. For this, powerful new strategic solution concepts will
be used. A paradox of bounded rationality in multi- agent systems also will be
further studied and resolved. A second part of the work will explore coalition
formation, using protocols that incorporate constructive multi-agent search,
iterative refinement via renegotiation, backtracking via decommitting, and
avoiding local optima via specific more powerful agreement types. A broad set of
protocols will be explored. Collusion will also be analyzed among agents that
have probabilistic, conditional performance profiles for their local
deliberation algorithms, as well as agents that can gain by explicitly
coordinating their computations with others. Algorithms will be designed and
tested, and applied to two real- world problems: distributed vehicle routing and
multi-enterprise manufacturing.