* 0235141
* A Comparative Study of Manakins at Leks: Consequences for Variance in Mating Success and Population Genetics
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Bette Loiselle, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/28/2007
* USD 392,344.00

A Comparative Study of Manakins at Leks: &lt;br/&gt;Consequences for Variance in
Mating Success and Population Genetics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bette A. Loiselle,
John G. Blake, and Patricia G.
Parker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
investigates the relationship between spatial structure, genetic relatedness and
reproductive skew in a set of closely related species of manakins (Aves:
Pipridae) that exhibit lekking behavior in Neotropical wet forests. Lekking
behavior, which occurs in many animal taxa, is characterized by a aggregation of
males displaying for females in traditional locations and a lack of association
between males and females after copulation. Females visit leks only to breed and
rear their young elsewhere without assistance from the male. Lekking behavior
often results in large reproductive variance (skew) among males because usually
only one or a few males at the lek sites successfully copulate with females.
Manakins represent a model system to investigate reproductive skew because (1)
birds are common inhabitants of understory of tropical wet forests, (2) six
closely related species occur in the same geographic location and thus
experience similar environments, and (3) species differ in lek organization
(e.g., number of males and distance among males at leks) and lekking behavior,
characters key for predicting reproductive skew and analyzing population genetic
consequences of lek mating systems. Considerable theory regarding reproductive
skew has emerged, but there yet exist few empirical tests. Understanding the
factors that influence reproductive skew is essential to understand the
evolution of lekking behavior, a mating system that has evolved in a number of
taxa and that has received a great deal of attention in theoretical and
empirical literature. Measures of reproductive skew in lekking species are often
based on observations of copulations at the lek. Yet, paternity analyses using
molecular genetic data have revealed that for a number of bird species
observations may provide misleading results about paternity. In the proposed
study, observational data at leks are combined with direct measures of
individual male success and reproductive skew through paternity analyses of
offspring found at nests. This research will be the first to compare lekking
behavior and its genetic consequences among a set of closely related species
that occur in the same forest but that vary in lek organization and spatial
structure. Such an approach should contribute substantially to our understanding
of the evolution of lek mating system. The proposed research also effectively
combines the ecological, behavioral, and molecular genetic expertise of the
principal investigators and provides an avenue for new collaborative research
that will enhance research programs of each senior investigator. Field and
laboratory components of the research program will provide key opportunities for
students from both the home institution and from Ecuadorean universities to gain
research experience. Several Ecuadorean and UM-St. Louis students are expected
to expand on aspects of the proposed project as part of their thesis or
dissertation research. Travel expenses in Ecuador incurred by UM-St. Louis
students and faculty will be supported by the NSF OFfice of International
Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;