* 0235167
* Gene Silencing and Catabolite Repression in the Archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Paul Blum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 08/31/2007
* USD 413,380.00

Prokaryotes consist of bacteria and archaea. Sulfolobus solfataricus is a member
of the crenarchaeal subdivision of the archaea which like eukaryotes catalyze
basal transcription using a Pol II-type RNA polymerase, TATA-box promoters and
promoter binding proteins. Whether this evolutionary overlap includes regulatory
(accessory) transcription components is unknown. This project will focus on gene
regulatory mechanisms in archaea and their relationship if any to eukaryotes and
bacteria. The Catabolite Repression (CR) system of S. solfataricus will be used
as a model of archaeal gene regulation. The CR system exerts coordinate control
over the expression of glycosyl hydrolase (GH) genes. Altered GH expression
occurs in response to changes in the type of carbon source (catabolite
responsiveness), or by mutation at a locus called car. car mutants exhibit
reduced GH mRNA levels and an attenuation of catabolite responsiveness
suggesting car mediates CR. Since GH mRNA stability is unaffected by CR,
regulation must occur at the level of transcript synthesis. Widespread genomic
distribution of the affected genes indicates their coordinate expression employs
a trans-acting factor possibly encoded or regulated by car. New directed
recombination (gene replacement) methods reveal CR exhibits two characteristics
of gene silencing, positional repression and action-at-a-distance. Relocation of
an affected GH gene to a different chromosomal locus disrupts catabolite
responsiveness, while a car-insensitive promoter inserted at a car-regulated
locus becomes sensitive (repressed) by car. The main hypothesis of this project
is that CR in S. solfataricus employs an ancestral version of eukaryotic
transcriptional silencing to control gene expression. This hypothesis will be
tested using gene replacement and in vitro transcription methods to identify and
characterize sequences used by the CR regulatory mechanism. The project will
broaden inclusion of under represented groups and broaden dissemination to
enhance scientific and technological understanding by expanding use of a web-
based internet site on hyperthermophilic archaea. The anticipated project
results will provide insight into basic aspects of archaeal metabolism and the
evolutionary origin of gene expression.