* 0235656
* Analysis of Gibberellin Signal Transduction Pathway in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Tai-ping Sun, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2007
* USD 490,000.00

Bioactive gibberellins (GAs) are important plant growth hormones that promote
seed germination, leaf expansion, stem elongation and flower development in
higher plants. The dwarf cultivars of wheat and rice developed during the 'Green
Revolution' in the 60s and 70s remarkably increased grain yields. Recent studies
revealed that these cultivars are modified in their GA production or GA
response, illustrating the important role of GA in regulating plant development
relevant to agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The GA signaling pathway is
inhibited by repressor proteins. Growth and development occur through
inactivation of these repressor proteins by the GA signal. Two such repressors,
RGA and GAI, have been identified in the model plant Arabidopsis. Similar
proteins (homologs of RGA/GAI) with conserved function have also been isolated
in crops, including rice, wheat, corn, barley and grape. In fact, the dwarf
wheat cultivars (part of the Green Revolution) carry specific mutations in the
RGA/GAI homolog in wheat (Rht). Therefore, studies on RGA/GAI proteins and GA
signaling in Arabidopsis may have a broad impact in improving the quality of
agricultural crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The amino acid sequences of RGA and
GAI are over 80% identical, and they have partially redundant function in
repressing GA signaling in Arabidopsis. The major role of RGA and GAI is to
inhibit GA-stimulated stem growth, leaf expansion and floral induction. However,
they do not control seed germination and flower development, suggesting that
additional repressors must modulate these processes. Three candidate Arabidopsis
genes RGL1, RGL2 and RGL3 (for RGA-LIKE) were identified by DNA sequence
comparison. To determine which RGL gene(s) play a major role in modulating
flower development, the phenotypes of mutants that are defective in these genes
will be characterized. GA de-represses its signaling pathway by causing
degradation of the RGA protein. Expression patterns of RGL genes and the RGL
protein stability in response to GA will be examined to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which RGLs modulates GA signaling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; RGA/GAI
proteins are thought to repress expression of downstream genes in the GA
response pathway. To identify the target genes of RGA and GAI, the new GeneChip
technique will be employed to survey alterations in expression profiles of the
whole Arabidopsis genome after GA treatment and by mutations in RGA and/or GAI
genes. Identification of GA-response genes and RGA/GAI targets will help to
dissect GA signal transduction pathway. Because the homologs of RGA/GAI are
highly conserved in plants, the knowledge gained from this project will also
facilitate strategies in future manipulation of crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;