* 0235440
* Calculation of Protein-ligand Binding Affinity
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Kim Sharp, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

The goal of this research is to understand the basis of molecular recognition in
biology. The overall objective is to calculate the binding constant from the
structure and chemical properties of the molecules taking part in a reaction to
understand the biochemical basis for high affinity binding. The research will
use recent theoretical advances in the statistical mechanical treatment of
binding, developments in methods for computer simulation of biomolecules, and
recent experimental data on protein-ligand complexes. The basic method is to
evaluate, using computer simulations, the appropriately weighted interaction
free energy between protein and ligand by integrating over all the relevant
degrees of freedom of the system: translational, rotational, internal and
solvent, leading directly to evaluation of the binding constant. Molecular
mechanics methods will be used for the first three components. Implicit solvent
methods will be used to render the latter, most expensive integration,
tractable. Recent algorithms for implicit solvation are, for the first time,
accurate and fast enough to be used within the molecular mechanics integration
step, so that the entire calculation can be done in a self-consistent way in a
practical amount of computer time.

Biological recognition is a fundamental property of proteins and other
macromolecules. All living things contain proteins and many life processes rely
on the right protein 'recognizing' the right molecule at the right time. A
protein may be said to recognize another molecule when it attracts that molecule
more strongly, and binds to it more tightly, than the many other molecules
present. Strong attraction or binding depends on the protein being complementary
in its shape and chemical properties to its binding partner. However, even if
the detailed structures of the protein and its target are known, it is not
enough to determine how tightly they will bind. To determine this, one would
need to know all the different forces that act to attract or repel the two
molecules, and sum them up accurately. Since thousands of atoms are involved,
this is a formidable task. The approach is to construct a simulation of the
protein and its binding partner in their environment on the computer, encoding
the laws of physics and chemistry to describe how all the atoms interact, then
'run' computer simulation to determine how tightly the two bind, test the
results against experiment, improve the description and repeat, iteratively
making the simulation more realistic. This software for simulating protein
recognition will be made available to the wider research and teaching community.
Software to realistically simulate protein recognition would help researchers
understand at a molecular level basic processes in living organisms, such as how
cells communicate, and help train students in the principles of molecular
recognition & simulation of molecules with computers. Specifically, this
software will be used in the yearly course for graduates and undergraduates at
the University of Pennsylvania, developed and taught by the PI entitled
"Molecular modeling."