* 0235077
* SGER: Dynamic Economic Models: Calibration, Simulation, and Testing
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Manuel Santos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research addresses a central problem in
quantitative economics: the estimation of parameter values in non-linear
optimization models, where there seems to be a shortage of general, reliable
estimation procedures. This research project is made up of two projects. The
first develops a general framework for the estimation and evaluation of dynamic
economic models. The second is concerned with the simulation of a dynamic
principal-agent model to address some important issues in top executive
compensation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growth theory can provide an appropriate
framework to study a wide variety of problems in macroeconomics and asset
pricing. But an unsatisfactory aspect of this research endeavor is that model
predictions are usually confronted with data in a rather casual way. The purpose
of this project is to develop a general framework that allows for a rigorous
application of statistical analysis for the evaluation, calibration and
estimation of dynamic optimization models. Part of this analysis builds on
important contributions by Lee and Ingram (1991) and Duffie and Singleton
(1993). As these authors acknowledge, however, the conditions leading to their
proofs of strong consistency and asymptotic normality of their simulated moments
estimators are quite restrictive. The investigator's goal is to offer a general
proof of strong consistency and to explore the properties of the stochastic
solution in order to establish asymptotic normality of the estimator. This work
is based on some approximation results, which are also useful to evaluate
numerical simulations. Further progress in quantitative policy research requires
the development of a general framework, as proposed here, for reliable
estimation and evaluation procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of
this research project focuses on the simulation of a dynamic principal- agent
model to address several issues on executive compensation. Even though the
seminal papers by Abreu, Pierce and Stacchetti (1986, 1990) and Spear and
Srivastava (1987) seem to have laid the foundations for dynamic contracting, it
is widely agreed that the empirical implications of this theory have not been
explored in a systematic way. Because of some stringent assumptions in some of
these models, the evolution of the distribution of consumption and earnings
becomes degenerate, which seems counterfactual. Moreover, relatively little work
has been devoted to the calibration and simulation of dynamic principal-agent
models and to the evaluation of their predictions regarding the structure of
compensation, the sensitivity of pay to performance, and the costs and benefits
of stock option contracts. The ultimate objective of this research is then to
enhance our understanding of the workings and performance of some compensation
schemes for the provision of insurance and incentives&lt;br/&gt;