* 0235302
* Efficient Gene Silencing by Intrinsic Direct Repeats: Mechanism and Utilization
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Amitava Mitra, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ming Lei
* 02/28/2007
* USD 390,000.00

The recent discovery that transgenes with intrinsic direct repeats can induce
gene silencing at a very high frequency (80-100%) has significance for
dissecting the gene silencing mechanism and for efficient generation of silenced
mutants useful for research and agricultural biotechnology products. The goal of
this research is to conduct detailed genetic and molecular analyses of the
mechanism of direct repeat-induced gene silencing (DRIGS) and to use this
phenomenon in functional genomics approaches. Experiments in this project will
determine minimal length of repeats needed to activate gene silencing, use
silencing suppressors and mutagenesis to identify mutants with impaired
silencing, and develop universal cassettes utilizing DRIGS for gene-knock out/
gene inactivation for functional analysis of plant genes. Successful completion
of this project will achieve efficient and consistent gene inactivation; allow
expeditious gene function analysis, and develop novel strategies for plant
genetic engineering. The DRIGS would be invaluable for analyzing genes in the
post gene sequencing era. In addition, research described in this project will
advance plant biotechnology and may promote general understanding and awareness
of biotechnology. The project will also entail training undergraduate students,
career advancement and training of postdoctoral scientists and exposure of
minority students to plant biotechnology research.