* 0235929
* Functional Analysis of Tocopherols in Plants and their Integration within the Plastid Antioxidant Network
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Dean DellaPenna, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 03/31/2007
* USD 585,000.00

During its lifecycle, a plant is exposed to a wide range of abiotic and biotic
stresses that can cause production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in excess of
that normally generated by metabolism and for signaling in the absence of
stress. Although all subcellular compartments produce ROS, chloroplasts are the
major ROS source in photosynthetic tissues. In order to avoid oxidative damage
and death, plants have evolved an interconnected, complementary network of
compounds (e.g., ascorbate, tocopherols, carotenoids, glutathione), enzymes
(e.g., superoxide dismutases, peroxidases, catalases) and biochemical responses
(e.g., non-photochemical quenching) that serve to minimize plastid ROS
production under stressful conditions or rapidly detoxify excess ROS species or
byproducts that are produced. &lt;br/&gt; Tocopherols, more commonly known as
Vitamin E, are the major lipid soluble antioxidant in plastids and are proposed
to be an essential component of the plastid antioxidant network. Studies in
mammals and artificial membranes indicate tocopherols are important for membrane
structure, quenching of singlet oxygen and other ROS, scavenging of chain-
propagating lipid peroxy radicals and other "non-antioxidant" functions related
to signaling and transcriptional regulation. In plants, tocopherols are assumed
to function similarly though experimental evidence for this is lacking. During
the past five years, the DellaPenna laboratory has cloned all enzymes of the
tocopherol biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis and developed mutant/transgenic
lines whose leaves are completely deficient in tocopherols or accumulate
tocopherols at 4-5 times wild type levels. These tocopherol-modified lines will
be used:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To define the role(s) of tocopherols in
scavenging specific ROS species and control of lipid peroxidation. &lt;br/&gt;2.
In genetic combinations with mutations that affect other components of the
antioxidant network to assess functional compensation and redundancy of
antioxidant network components.&lt;br/&gt;3. To study a novel germination
phenotype in tocopherol deficient lines.&lt;br/&gt;4. In whole genome expression
analysis to assess the response of individual antioxidant network genes and
other cellular components to tocopherol modifications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tocopherols, more commonly known as Vitamin E, are the
major lipid soluble antioxidant in chloroplasts of all plants and are proposed
to be an essential component of the plastid antioxidant network. The research
being undertaken will provide a comprehensive understanding of tocopherol
function(s) in photosynthetic tissues of Arabidopsis. This work will also define
and characterize the integration and complementation of tocopherols with and by
other components of the plastid antioxidant network (Vitamim C, carotenoids and
enzymes that scavenge reactive oxygen). Because of the evolutionary conservation
of the antioxidant network in chloroplasts, the data obtained will be of direct
relevance to a wide range of plant species and crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;