* 0235938
* RUI:  Ret Signaling in Pronephric Duct Morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Julie Drawbridge, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 05/31/2007
* USD 364,669.00

0235938&lt;br/&gt;Drawbridge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the PI's
undergraduate-based research program is to identify, characterize and elucidate
the specific function of cell-surface and guidance molecules involved in
pronephric duct (PND) migration in amphibian embryos, with emphasis on the
axolotl, a urodele amphibian. PND extension is a morphogenetic event critical to
the establishment of the urogenital system in all vertebrates. In the axolotl
embryo, PND migration occurs with impressive precision: cells of the PND
primordium coalesce from intermediate mesoderm immediately ventral to somites
3-7 and actively migrate caudally as a cohesive stream until they reach and fuse
with the cloaca. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In mammals, it has been demonstrated
that GDNF activation of the transmembrane tyrosine kinase Ret and its ligand-
binding partner, GFRa1, is required for proper development of the metanephros -
the adult kidney of amniote vertebrates. Asking whether Ret signaling might
function in more primitive excretory systems, the PIs lab has recently shown
that the activation of Ret is sufficient to explain PND pathfinding in the
axolotl. These data have led to the hypothesis that axolotl PND migration occurs
via migration of the Ret/GFRa1-expressing PND cells up an endogenous gradient of
GDNF. During the course of the project proposed here, this model will be tested
by (1) determination of the expression pattern of axolotl GDNF via in situ
hybridization and whole mount immunocytochemistry; (2) inactivation of Ret,
GFRa1 and GDNF in axolotl embryos to determine whether these proteins are
necessary for PND migration. These data will provide a rigorous test of the
hypothesis that Ret signaling performs an essential role in PND morphogenesis in
anamniote embryos.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite
the fact that PND morphogenesis is the central event in establishing the
excretory system, little is known about its formation in vertebrates that don't
make a metanephros, i.e. fish and amphibians. The PI is one of only a few
investigators exploiting fish or amphibian embryos to ask questions about PND
morphogenesis; she is the only investigator currently studying this in the
axolotl, even though its PND morphogenesis has been better characterized than
either Xenopus or zebrafish. In addition, her work provides the first evidence
showing that Ret function is required for morphogenesis of anamniote excretory
systems. Thus, the PIs work contributes fundamental information about excretory
system development and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will be conducted by the PI and
undergraduates at Rider University, some doing independent research projects,
some as participants in the PIs Recombinant DNA Techniques course. Rider's
student demographic includes 15% underrepresented minorities, 37% first-
generation college students and 58% women. Thus, the PIs research program
benefits several groups typically underrepresented in science careers. In
addition, most of her students performing independent research have the
opportunity to present their work at regional or national scientific meetings. &
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;