* 0235768
* Supercritical Fluids:   Tunable Media for Chemical Reactions and Materials Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Sergei Egorov, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 04/30/2006
* USD 287,664.00

Sergei Egorov, at the University of Virginia, is supported by the Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry Program to pursue research in supercritical fluids
and their uses as a tunable media for chemical reactions and materials
processing. The project deals with the theoretical and computational simulation
of diblock copolymers, such as partially fluorinated alkane chains, in a
supercritical carbon dioxide fluid. The diblock copolymer is modeled as a chain
of fluorinated and hydrogenated units which may exhibit bond bending or
torsional distortions. Nonbonded units interact via Lennard Jones potentials.
The fluid is modeled by treating the carbon dioxide molecule as three partial
charges interacting with neighbors via coulomb and Lennard-Jones potentials.
Specific phenomena to be modeled include density-induced formation and
disintegration of micellar aggregates, a statistical mechanical treatment of
sterically stabilized nanoparticles and the study of ionic mobility in
supercritical fluids. Long-term interest is in understanding how environmentally
friendly supercritical fluids may be used for chemical and materials
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with understanding how to
replace conventional liquid solvents, currently used in the chemical industry,
with environmentally friendly nontoxic, nonflammable, abundant and cheap
supercritical solvents such as carbon dioxide. The work will proceed by
understanding the structure and dynamics of supercritical fluids at the
molecular level by the development and implementation of new theoretical and
computational methods. Activity includes training of students in nanoscale
materials processing and preparing them for entry into industry.&lt;br/&gt;