* 0235755
* LTREB: Response of a Reservoir Ecosystem to Declining Subsidies of Nutrients and Detritus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2009
* USD 353,388.00

Intellectual Merit. The proposed LTREB research will use long-term data to test
hypotheses about how reservoir ecosystems respond to reduced nutrient and
detritus (sediment) subsidies. Nutrient and sediment subsidies to the study
site, Acton Lake, are declining because of changes in agricultural practices in
the lake's agricultural watershed. These include a marked increase in
conservation tillage and a reduction in phosphorus fertilizers. These changes
appear to be&lt;br/&gt;driving decreases in concentrations and loads of
phosphorus and suspended sediments in Acton Lake's inflow streams, based on an
8-year trend. In Acton Lake, concentrations of suspended inorganic sediment have
declined, and biomass of phytoplankton has increased, over this period. We
hypothesize that reductions in detritus input will induce a decline in the
population density of an important detritivorous fish, the gizzard shad, leading
to further changes in the ecosystem. In addition, we hypothesize that
phytoplankton and zooplankton species composition will change such that taxa
typical of high productivity (eutrophic) habitats will decline and those typical
of mesotrophic conditions will increase. This research will be unique in that it
will consist of a long-term study on interactive effects of multiple ecosystem
subsidies: 1) nutrient subsidies from watersheds, 2) detritus subsidies from
watersheds, and 3) nutrient subsidies via detritivorous fish. The proposed
research is also unique because it integrates watersheds, streams, and a
reservoir ecosystem. Although there are many studies of eutrophication and
recovery in natural lakes, we know little about how reservoirs respond to
reduced nutrient subsidies. Because nutrient and sediment exports are declining
in many agricultural watersheds in the US and globally, this research will shed
light on how these understudied ecosystems respond to a widespread and common
influence.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed research will have several
educational, environmental and societal impacts. Undergraduates will do summer
research through a variety of programs including an REU Site Program. Primary
school teachers will be recruited along with graduate students and postdocs, as
well. Data will be shared and collaborations continued with state and federal
agencies. This research will facilitate decision-making in regards to watershed
management, alternative agricultural practices (hence socio-economic influences
on farmers), water quality, and fisheries management.&lt;br/&gt;