* 0235488
* Poly(A) Removal and Translational Silencing of Maternal mRNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* W.Michael Wormington, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2008
* USD 430,000.00

Oocytes synthesize and accumulate a large pool of maternal mRNAs. Many of these
transcripts are actively utilized for protein synthesis throughout oogenesis,
but are subsequently silenced when the oocyte completes meiosis and matures into
an unfertilized egg, or when the egg is fertilized. As the oocyte has limited
translational capacity, this silencing is necessary in order to permit the
activation of other mRNAs encoding proteins essential for the completion of
meiosis and early embryogenesis. The developmentally regulated removal of 3'
poly(A) tails, a process termed deadenylation, is an evolutionarily conserved
mechanism by which maternal mRNA are silenced in diverse organisms. This project
addresses the molecular basis for the deadenylation-dependent translational
inactivation of maternal mRNAs during the meiotic maturation of Xenopus oocytes.
Deadenylation in mature oocytes is catalyzed by the poly(A)-specific
ribonuclease, PARN. PARN activity is stimulated by the presence of the m7GpppG
cap structure present at the 5' end of mRNAs, and cap recognition is an
intrinsic property of this nuclease. By interacting directly with the 5' cap,
PARN may also function in repressing translation initiation independently of its
poly(A)-degrading activity. Competing interactions among PARN, the cap-binding
translation initiation factor, eIF4E, and the poly(A) binding protein, PABP,
provide a mechanism which integrates translational efficiency with poly(A)
stability. This research utilizes complementary molecular biological and
biochemical in vivo and in vitro approaches to address the following aspects of
PARN-dependent deadenylation and translational silencing. First, to delineate
functional domains required for PARN's poly(A) and cap-binding activities, and
to address these aspects of PARN function in deadenylation. Second, this project
will analyze functional and physical interactions between PARN and cap-dependent
translation initiation factors. PARN deadenylation activity is intimately linked
with translation efficiency as the 5' cap and 3' poly(A) tail are major
determinants of both processes. These reactions are necessarily antagonistic as
the relevant mRNA binding proteins, eIF4E and PABP, synergistically promote
efficient translation initiation and inhibit PARN. In concert, these two
objectives will define the mechanism of a novel poly(A)-specific ribonuclease
and provide information on how translation initiation and poly(A) stability are
coupled. Understanding the molecular basis of these evolutionarily conserved
processes will provide insight into how maternal mRNAs are regulated to direct
stage-specific programs of protein synthesis during early vertebrate
development. As this translational regulation underlies many crucial events
including the completion of meiosis, activation of the mitotic cell cycle,
formation of body axes and the specification of cell fates, its elucidation is
of fundamental importance and direct relevance to numerous problems in
developmental biology and post-transcriptional gene regulation.