* 0235934
* Microtubule Dynamics and Chromosome Movements During Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* James LaFountain, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2007
* USD 272,397.00

This research project is aimed at resolving the mechanisms of chromosome
congression and chromosome segregation during meiosis. Dr. LaFountain recently
completed a very successful sabbatical stay in Conly Rieder's lab at the
Wadsworth Center in Albany, where he discovered that there are a variety of
forces acting on chromosomes during meiosis in insect spermatocytes. That work
provided indirect evidence that spermatocyte spindles are engaged in microtubule
flux -- a process in which tubulin subunits are constantly added to microtubule
plus ends and removed from minus ends. Findings from laser microsurgery
implicate flux in mediating the poleward transport properties of spermatocyte
spindles.

The main objective of the research is to analyze microtubule flux directly in
living spermatocytes in relation to the movement of chromosomes attached to
microtubules. Fluorescent speckle microscopy will be used to fluorescently label
discrete domains within unlabeled microtubules. From the comparison of
velocities of moving kinetochores to the velocities of speckles on kinetochore
fibers attached to those kinetochores, the relative contributions made by flux
and kinetochore motors to the mechanism underlying movement will be revealed.
This approach not only will test the "flux machine" model for chromosome
segregation during anaphase, it is expected to provide important data regarding
the mechanism underlying the congression of chromosomes to the spindle equator.

The research aiming to speckle-label spindle microtubules is built on findings
obtained from recently completed feasibility studies done in collaboration with
Christopher Cohan in the Department of Anatomy at Buffalo. These studies have
revealed the conditions for the successful microinjection of fluorescently
conjugated tubulin subunits into spermatocytes, ideal material for the study of
meiosis in vitro but heretofore regarded to be unsuitable for microinjection
methods.

During congression, the positioning process that occurs during prometaphase and
results in the alignment of chromosomes on the metaphase plate prior to their
segregation to the spindle poles, chromosome velocities usually exceed those at
anaphase, suggesting the involvement of kinetochore-based motors. To test that
hypothesis, the laser workstation in the Rieder lab will be used to bisect
congressing bivalents (conjoined homologous chromosomes) into two "univalents,"
each of which will contain the kinetochores of one of the homologues and will be
analyzed for its capability to move poleward immediately after the cutting
operation. Data from such operations performed at successive time intervals
during the course of prometaphase will test two competing models for
congression. The traction fiber model predicts the two univalents will move in
opposite directions toward the pole that each faces. By contrast, the motile
kinetochore model predicts only the leading univalent will continue moving
poleward; the trailing univalent would be expected to be in a "neutral" state
and not move at all.

Broader impact: it is expected that Dr. LaFountain will continue integrating his
research into educational activities, including teaching formal undergraduate
courses that include a laboratory component and training graduate students in
the research laboratory. He also gives presentations in non-academic settings
such as community groups.