* 0235403
* Using Phylogenetically Independent Contrasts to Examine Temperature Acclimation of Root and Mycorrhizal Fungal Respiration Among Organisms from Broad Latitudinal Gradients
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Roger Koide, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 12/31/2005
* USD 282,537.00

Temperature is a major constraint on mycorrhizal root metabolism in many
environments. In cold climates, temperatures in the spring restrict root
metabolism and nutrient acquisition. In the summer in temperate and tropical
climates, unshaded soils may reach temperatures that cause excessive
carbohydrate metabolism unless root acclimation occurs. The central objective of
this proposal is to examine how latitude of origin affects plant root and
mycorrhizal fungal respiratory responses to soil temperature. These
investigators will use phylogenetically independent contrasts (contrasts using
distinct evolutionary lineages) to permit general inferences on plant and
mycorrhizal fungal responses to temperature as a function of latitude of origin.
The research will focus on four, interrelated hypotheses associated with
organism response to temperature. Does diurnal temperature variation affect an
organism's ability to acclimate to temperature? Under conditions of no
acclimation, do plants and mycorrhizal fungi from higher latitudes exhibit
higher respiration than those from lower latitudes when measured at the same
temperature? Under conditions where acclimation occurs, do plants &amp;
mycorrhizal fungi from high latitudes exhibit less acclimation to high
temperature (i.e., excessively metabolize carbohydrates) than those from lower
latitudes? Are the independent mycorrhizal fungal or plants respiratory
responses to temperature the same when the organisms are measured in symbiosis?
The use of multiple, distinct evolutionary lineages of both fungi and plants
will provide new insight into how organisms respond globally to both average
temperatures and temperature variation.&lt;br/&gt;This work has several
opportunities for broader scientific impacts. Global climate change is an area
of intense interest to both scientists and government policy makers. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts a 1.4-5.8 degree C increase
in global surface temperature by 2100, using atmospheric models that assume
increases in atmospheric CO2 will lead to increases in ambient temperature,
which increases soil respiration, causing a positive feedback. Mycorrhizal root
respiration represents the dominant source of soil respiration in many soils. If
mycorrhizal roots acclimate to increases in temperature, than predicted
increases in surface temperatures may be overestimated. &lt;br/&gt;There will
also be several opportunities to enhance scientific training. At the
undergraduate level, students will be involved in the project in several
meaningful ways, including learning how to culture mycorrhizal fungi and assess
their colonization on roots, growing plants and measuring the respiration of
roots and fungi using a gas-exchange system that requires an understanding of
data loggers, gas analyzers and gas flow meters and controllers. The
postdoctoral fellow will also have opportunities to become trained both in root
and mycorrhizal fungal physiology and participate in a field project with a
foreign graduate student in Poland.&lt;br/&gt;