* 0235774
* Membrane Protein Solid State NMR: PISEMA Development and the M2 Tetramer Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* John Quine, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2007
* USD 516,254.00

Membrane proteins represent approximately 30% of all genomes yet characterized.
Today, less than 40 unique membrane protein structures are in the Protein Data
Bank. Membrane proteins carry out numerous critical functions for cells and they
are vastly different from their water-soluble counterparts through: their amino
acid composition, the forces that stabilize their structure, their internal
dynamics, etc. Sold state NMR is a demonstrated technology for achieving 3D high
resolution structure in a lipid bilayer environment. This technology uniquely
utilizes fully hydrated lipid bilayers for solvating protein samples. This work
will further develop the primary solid state NMR experiment used for the
structural characterization, PISEMA. Several modifications including the use of
ramped pulses during the Lee-Goldburg sequence suggests significant gains in
making PISEMA a more robust experiment. Advanced NMR probes with balanced RF
circuits in high field magnets available at the NHMFL will be a great help in
achieving this goal. The analysis of PISEMA spectra of alpha-helical proteins
has led to cover stories in both the Journal of Magnetic Resonance and Protein
Science. The characterization of solid state NMR data leads directly to a
description of the tilt and rotational orientation of the helix within the lipid
bilayer. Here, this analysis will be advanced using mathematical expressions to
show how degeneracies in the structural solutions are resolved, by showing that
unique spectral patterns are predicted for alpha, 310, and pi helices, and by
characterizing the more complex spectral patterns for helices in the plane of
the lipid bilayer. Moreover, it is the aim of this project to solve the complete
backbone structure and assembly of the 44 kDa tetrameric M2 proton channel in
hydrated lipid bilayers above the phase transition of the lipids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this project Dr. Cross and his colleagues will develop
a unique approach for determining the three dimensional structure of membrane
proteins in their native environment - the lipid membrane that surrounds each
cell. These proteins control everything that enters and leaves the cells, and
they are responsible for accepting and sending information between cells. 30% or
more of the proteins of a given genome are membrane proteins and yet
technologies are very limited for their structural characterization. With a
unique team of chemists, mathematicians and biophysicists, Dr. Cross brings
together the necessary skills for the development of a Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance methodology that has now been demonstrated to achieve unique
structures of membrane proteins. Dr. Cross and his coworkers are refining the
technology and enhancing its sensitivity for greater applications. This research
will have a broad impact in both the fields of membrane protein biophysics and
structural biology and students in chemical, biological and mathematical
disciplines will be trained in a proven interdisciplinary
environment.&lt;br/&gt;