* 0235676
* Phylogeny of the Batrachospermales (Rhodophyta, Red Algae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Morgan Vis-Chiasson, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 01/31/2007
* USD 164,168.00

0235676 Vis-Chiasson In the red algae, molecular DNA sequence data have
challenged traditional morphologically based theories of relatedness. The order
of freshwater red algae, Batrachospermales, is no exception; and at present,
evolutionary relationships among genera and species of this order are not well
understood. To compound the problem, knowledge of the flora in most of the
southern hemisphere is very poor. The object of this project is to produce a
robust molecular framework as the foundation for future taxonomic revision in
this group of algae. Collection of specimens will focus on potential "hot spots"
of diversity in New Zealand, Tasmania, Northern Brazil, Malaysia and South
Africa. Two gene regions will be sequenced from the taxa to ensure abundant
molecular data. The combination of new DNA sequence data and more taxa will
result in a well-resolved framework of relationships. This study of freshwater
red algae is timely given that molecular evolution studies of marine red algae
are underway, to which this research will dovetail. Although the field research
is localized, the results will tie together information from five continents
(North America, South America, Africa, Asia and Australia) for an integrated
understanding of the biogeography of a group of freshwater algae. Freshwater red
algae are important biological components of stream ecosystems worldwide,
serving as food and shelter for numerous aquatic insects and fish. The
Batrachospermales tend to occur in streams that have had little anthropogenic
disturbance and can be an indicator of good water quality. Our ability to use
them as biological indicators is hampered by our lack of knowledge of their
systematics. For example, a Batrachospermum species defined by morphological
characteristics was thought to be cosmopolitan, occurring in a wide range of
streams, but recent molecular research has shown that the organisms from
Australia that were attributed to this species were in fact endemic to that
region, and a new species unrelated to the North American species was described.
Knowing this information, the geographic and ecological range of each species
has been refined. In addition to the new knowledge produced, graduate students
and undergraduate students will benefit from participation in this research. The
students will participate in the collecting trips to other parts of the world.
They will interact with in-country colleagues gaining not only field experience
but also an appreciation for the science and culture of that country. The
laboratory research the students conduct will result in presentations at
scientific meetings by the students and peer-reviewed publications. At the end
of their studies, the undergraduates will be fully prepared to pursue research
in graduate school and the graduate students will be highly trained
professionals ready for a career in academia or industry.