* 0235379
* Intrinsic G1 Delay in S. Cerevisiae Daughter Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Warren Heideman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2007
* USD 338,998.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr Heideman of the University of Wisconsin to study
the fundamental processes that allow cells to maintain a constant size. The
proposed research will focus on the process by which newly formed yeast cells
regulate cell division. The budding yeast, S. cerevisiae, divides by producing
newly formed daughter cells. These daughters must delay cell division until they
have time to grow to the proper cell size. Dr Heideman's recent results show
that cell cycle delay in the newly formed daughter cells is mediated by a
protein factor called Ace2 that is specifically located in the nucleus of new
daughter cells and excluded from mother cells. In mutant strains that are unable
to make Ace2, daughters enter the cell cycle prematurely and divide at a smaller
than normal cell size. The proposed research will study the connections between
Ace2 and the production of a protein called Cln3 that regulates the rate of cell
division. Cln3 is a member of a family of key cell cycle regulatory proteins
called cyclins. Cyclins are found in all higher organisms. The proposed research
will determine how Ace2 regulates the level of the messenger RNA that encodes
Cln3. This work will involve time-lapse digital microscopy, molecular genetics,
and the use of genomic tools that have recently become available. This research
is aimed at a fundamental question in biology: How do cells balance growth in
size with cell division? This process is clearly a part of all cellular life,
since organisms throughout the biological world are able to maintain a constant
cell size. The research focuses on budding yeast, one of the simplest and most
readily understood eukaryotic organisms. Work in yeast has historically yielded
very rapid progress, especially in the field of cell cycle research. Because the
basic machinery of cell cycle control remains conserved among eukaryotes, this
work will have relevance to understanding how other organisms maintain cell size
as well. In addition, the project will provide research training for graduate
and undergraduate students, as well as hands on research experience for
undergraduate and high school students in summer programs targeting under-
represented minority students

