* 0235778
* The Role of Ornamentation Versus Genetic Compatibility in Passerine Bird Mate Choice
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 03/31/2008
* USD 530,006.00

The Role of Ornamentation Versus Genetic&lt;br/&gt;Compatibility in Passerine
Bird Mate Choice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Dr. Geoffrey E. Hill and Dr. Herman
Mays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do female animals choose mates? It has long been
known that female animals the use expression of ornamental traits, such as
bright coloration, as the basis for choosing mates. Indeed there is growing
evidence that such ornamental traits evolved as indicators of mate quality. A
new theory in behavioral biology suggests that animals may also choose mates
based on genetic compatibility. Recent studies indicate that genetic diversity
is linked to important aspects of individual fitness, such as the ability to
fight disease. There may, therefore, be an advantage for females to choose males
within a population whose genetic makeup is most dissimilar to hers, thereby
producing offspring that are genetically diverse and healthy. Whether females
use the expression of ornamental traits, genetic complimentarity, or both in
their choice of mates is the focus of this study of Eastern Bluebirds, a species
with bright blue plumage coloration that is used by females in mate choice. New
genetic techniques will be used to determine the genetic compatibility of pairs
of bluebirds. The health of offspring from pairs that are more or less similar
in genetic makeup will then be measured. Mate choice experiments will also be
conducted in which females are allowed to choose between potential mates who are
either genetically similar or brightly colored. Throughout this project high
school, undergrad, and grad students will be involved in research. &lt;br/&gt;