* 0235114
* CAREER:    Characterization of Propagating and Receding Flame Edges in Composition and Velocity Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Michael Renfro, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 01/31/2009
* USD 417,999.00

Non-premixed flames in practical combustors are often operated such that local
extinction of the flame occurs. For example, large fuel velocities relative to
the oxidizer can lead to sufficiently large scalar gradients at the flame base
to cause extinction, and large Reynolds numbers can lead to extinction at
downstream locations. Localized extinction can result in stable flames that are
lifted from the burner, can result in local holes in the reaction sheet, or can
lead to global extinction of the flame. A common feature of localized extinction
is a flame edge, which may either propagate toward unburned fuel and air
(ignition) or may recede toward combustion products (extinction). Because the
edge flame separates fuel from air, a strong composition gradient can exist
beyond the edge. Theories for the propagation of edge flames in composition
gradients have been developed, and a few measurements of stable propagating
flames have been made. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses edge-flame propagation through
measurements of velocity and concentration fields in numerous reacting mixing
layers. The measurements provide a complete examination of the effects of
mixture and velocity gradients at the flame edge. In addition, stable flames
that recede (negative propagation velocities) are established and compared to
theoretical developments for the first time. Since both receding and propagating
edge flames are important to turbulent lifted jet flames and turbulent flames
with localized extinction, the proposed measurements permit development of a
more accurate and complete model for this important feature of turbulent flames.
Raman scattering, Rayleigh scattering, laser-induced fluorescence, and particle
image velocimetry are applied to the proposed geometry for many selected flames.
The work is expected to provide an understanding of flame stability at
interfaces between reacting and nonreacting flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study draws its potential importance from its
impact on future industrial combustor designs that propose to use local
extinction or lifted flames to reduce pollutant production. Therefore, an
understanding of edge flames and the development of models for edge-flame
propagation in turbulent flows are critically important. This development also
impacts other areas of combustion including flame spread over liquid and solid
surfaces (which may be the result of unwanted fire) and flame propagation with
solid propellants. Undergraduates are involved through the accelerated M.S.
program in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, and through direct
undergraduate assistantships. The undergraduates focus on short-duration
projects that examine only a few test conditions. In addition to this research
element, senior undergraduates will design a simple model combustor to be used
for demonstrations with local high-school science educators. This combustor will
be designed to allow for discussion and model demonstrations of flame stability,
modes of combustion, and the application of combustion in industry.&lt;br/&gt;