* 0235544
* Transduction of Calcium Signals in Guard Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Raymond Zielinski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 09/30/2004
* USD 113,750.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Raymond Zielinski of the University of Illinois
to elucidate mechanisms regulating the function of stomatal guard cells by
calcium.. His study will employ a combination of molecular, cellular and genetic
approaches to visualize the activity of regulatory molecules that control
stomatal function in living cells. Changes in the concentration of calcium ions
are an early, important signal in regulating stomatal closure and restricting
water loss from leaves. However, little is known about the mechanisms by which
calcium signals are communicated to facilitate stomatal closure. The primary
hypothesis driving this research is that the information in calcium signals
required for stomatal closure is transduced by characteristic changes in the
activation and distribution of the calcium receptor protein calmodulin. To test
this hypothesis, he will measure changes in calmodulin activation using novel
fluorescent indicators expressed in transgenic plants that allow calmodulin
activation to be visualized in live cells. His project will employ the model
plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, to take advantage of the tremendous number of
genetic resources facilitated by the genomic characterization and sequencing
efforts.

Stomata are structures defined by pairs of guard cells that form pores on leaf
surfaces, which open or close in response to the vast array of environmental
conditions experienced by plants. Stomatal pores open to allow the entry of CO2
into leaves for photosynthesis while at the same time restricting water loss by
evaporation that can lead to wilting and plant death. Balancing these
conflicting activities plays a major role in determining plant growth in natural
ecosystems and crop plant productivity in agriculture. Defining how stomatal
guard cells regulate the critical balance between CO2 uptake and water loss is
key to understanding the major determinant influencing agricultural yields and
how it may be affected by global climate change.

