* 0235307
* Phylogenetics and Evolutionary Biomechanics of Coral Reef Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mark Westneat, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 315,163.00

Fishes of the family Labridae are a diverse group of nearly 600 species that
inhabit tropical and temperate marine waters throughout the world and constitute
a major segment of the diversity found on coral reefs. Advances in our
understanding of the labrid family tree and study of the biomechanics of feeding
behavior will allow exploration of evolution in coral reef fishes. The first
goal of this project is to collect new DNA sequence data for several species
groups within the Labridae. With previous NSF support, a family tree for the
Labridae was generated using data for 115 species. Resolution of phylogenetic
relationships on this tree was excellent based on four genes from different
parts of the cell (2 each from the mitochondrion and the nucleus). However
several large species groups remain unresolved. In this project, sequences of
genes that are appropriate for species-level questions will be obtained for 120
additional taxa. In addition, this project will investigate two genes involved
in early growth and development of fish skulls. These include Otx1, a gene that
plays a role in head growth and Dlx2, a gene involved in both lower jaw
formation and tooth development. Sequences for these genes will be collected in
50 species, having diverse skull structures and jaw anatomy. Thus, this study
will provide new information from many species and many genes, some of which
have known regulatory involvement in building a key part of the animal, the
skull. The second objective of the proposal is to combine evolutionary trees
with concepts from engineering design and knowledge of feeding behavior to study
skull function. Specific hypotheses of evolutionary convergence will be tested
to determine whether the same engineering solution has been achieved multiple
times in the history of the group. The extreme modifications of jaws and skull
found in this family make them a model system for evolution in cranial structure
and function. Biomechanical engineering models allow calculation of basic
feeding mechanics such as jaw closing force and speed, and jaw protrusion.
Biomechanical models, generated as physical constructs and computer models, are
useful for research and education. Combining evolution with function in many
species, this project will examine evolutionary change in the biomechanics of
one of the most diverse radiations of vertebrates on Earth. The movement toward
an integrated understanding of biological structure and function, from genes to
tissues to whole organisms, is one of the major frontiers of biology. This
project contributes to that goal by testing specific hypotheses of functional
evolution using molecular phylogenies and engineering concepts. This project
contributes to education, training, exhibits, and research infrastructure in
many ways. The Principal Investigator teaches undergraduate courses at the
University of Chicago and lab exercises are held each year in the collections of
the Field Museum. Students at the college, graduate, and postdoctoral levels are
involved with all aspects of the proposed research, including sequencing,
analysis, and biomechanics. Collaborations are underway with people from
Austria, Australia, Chile, Kenya, Madagascar, New Zealand, The Philippines, and
Thailand. Museum exhibits are now on display that feature models of fish head
function developed from NSF-funded research, and exhibits are planned to feature
both phylogenetic and functional research at the Field Museum. The PI gives
museum lectures, has spoken on public radio, visits local schools, and presents
coral reef fish biology to groups such as Elder Hostel and Rotary in the Chicago
area. Physical and computer models of animal function featured in this proposal
are fantastic tools for classroom education, research training, and museum
exhibits.