* 0235705
* Mycothiol Biosynthesis and Metabolic Functions
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Robert Fahey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 05/31/2007
* USD 374,454.00

Mycothiol (MSH, AcCys-GlcN-Ins), is the major low-molecular-weight thiol
produced by actinomycetes, a broad group of gram positive bacteria which include
the streptomycetes and mycobacteria. Current evidence indicates that MSH has
functions in actinomycetes analogous to glutathione (GSH) in GSH-producing
organisms but our understanding of MSH biochemistry is still limited. The four
enzymes involved in MSH biosynthesis and one enzyme involved in a novel MSH-
dependent detoxification pathway have been identified in this laboratory.
Mycobacterial mutants have also been obtained which are blocked at various steps
of MSH biosynthesis. The present studies continue the elucidation of the
metabolic biochemistry of mycothiol. The regulation of MSH biosynthesis will be
examined through kinetic studies with the final two enzymes of MSH biosynthesis,
MshC and MshD, and through gene replacement studies to test the role of putative
MSH regulatory genes. The importance of MSH and its biosynthetic intermediates
for mycobacterial sensitivity to toxins and antibiotics will be determined
through studies of MSH deficient mutants blocked at various steps of MSH
production. The role of MSH in the detoxification of the antibiotic rifamycin
will be examined using radioactive labeling of MSH in Mycobacterium smegmatis to
permit identification of MSH adducts and degradation products, and through
kinetic studies of MSH-rifamycin adduct metabolism by the degradative enzyme
mycothiol S-conjugate amidase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel antioxidant named
mycothiol has been found to be produced by a class of bacteria which include the
streptomycetes, the main antibiotic-producing bacteria, and the mycobacteria,
the causative agents of tuberculosis and leprosy. Evidence indicates that
mycothiol is involved in protecting cells against various toxins and
antibiotics. This research will elucidate the factors involved in regulating
mycothiol production in mycobacteria and the role of mycothiol in detoxifying
the antibiotic rifamycin. The results could provide the basis for devising
methods to enhance the ability of bacteria to detoxify environmental pollutants
(bioremediation) and for increasing antibiotic production in streptomycete
fermentations.&lt;br/&gt;