* 0235311
* Investigation of a Brood Fostering Hypothesis that Explains Variation in Levels of Sociality
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Susan Riechert, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2006
* USD 368,000.00

Investigation of a Brood Fostering Hypothesis that Explains Variation in Levels
of Sociality Susan E. Riechert & Thomas C. Jones

The exhibition of altruistic and cooperative behavior in a world, which favors
individualism and selfishness is a problem that has been approached through the
study of bee, wasp and ant social systems. The social insects, however, possess
a unique mechanism of inheritance (haplodiploidy) that makes self-sacrifice
easier to achieve than in other systems. Spiders make a better model for
investigation of the determinants of social behavior as they have the typical
diploid pattern of inheritance. This study involves the analysis of the factors
underlying cooperative brood care in a spider that exhibits a higher incidence
of multiple female colonies caring for a common brood at higher latitudes. A
mathematical model indicates that females will cooperatively care for a brood in
those environments in which a single female has a high probability of dying
before her offspring are able to care for themselves. A series of field measures
and experiments will be completed along a latitudinal gradient to quantify the
effect of cooperation on reproductive success under different environmental
conditions. Breeding experiments and molecular genetics analyses will also be
completed to examine the degree to which cooperative behavior is flexible and to
learn whether cooperating individuals are relatives.