* 0235766
* Ecology and Evolution of a Novel Symbiont Lineage: The Interaction of Burkholderia Bacteria with Neotropical legumes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Matthew Parker, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2006
* USD 128,609.00

The symbiosis between legume plants and root nodule bacteria (rhizobia) is
globally significant both to human welfare and to natural ecosystems, because it
converts nitrogen gas to ammonia, which is often a key limiting nutrient for
plant productivity. Yet despite more than a century of intensive study,
biologists did not discover until 2001 that certain legume plants use nodule
bacteria in the genus Burkholderia, which have an extremely distant relationship
to all other known rhizobia. This project will analyze strains of Burkholderia
from the tropical forest on Barro Colorado Island, Panama to determine which
legume plant species use Burkholderia as nodule bacteria. It will also examine
whether legume species that associate with Burkholderia in this community also
utilize similar Burkholderia strains in other parts of their geographic range.
Finally, it will also compare the relative benefits to plants of interacting
with Burkholderia vs. other rhizobia. The main value of this project is that it
will provide a broader comparative understanding of legume-rhizobial symbioses,
by analyzing a group of symbiotic bacteria unknown to biologists until very
recently. Many Burkholderia species are important human pathogens or plant
pathogens, and at least one legume host of Burkholderia nodule symbionts is a
serious invasive weed. Therefore, this research will also provide a better
understanding of the basic ecology of this bacterial genus, especially, whether
bacterial pathogens may potentially evolve to become beneficial plant symbionts
(or vice versa). This information is important for evaluating the impact of this
bacterial group on the environment and on human health.