* 0235653
* Structure, Assembly, and Host Interactions of Filamentous Plant Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Gerald Stubbs, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2008
* USD 545,060.00

The three-dimensional structures of a number of important filamentous plant
viruses will be determined in molecular detail, using fiber diffraction methods.
These viruses are models for filamentous assemblies in virology and cell
biology. They also have enormous potential in agricultural biotechnology; the
potyviruses cause half the viral crop damage in the world. Knowledge of viral
structures can lead to improved technologies for disease resistance. Structures
to be determined will include the type member of the potexvirus genus, potato
virus X (PVX), and two other potexviruses, papaya mosaic virus and narcissus
mosaic virus. The crystal structure of PVX coat protein will serve as a starting
point for determination of the structures of the intact viruses by fiber
diffraction. Preliminary studies will be carried out on potyviruses including
bean common mosaic necrosis virus, wheat streak mosaic virus, and potato virus
Y. The structure of odontoglossum ringspot virus, a rigid rod-shaped tobamovirus
important in studies of viral host specificity, will be determined. Plant
viruses have been paradigms for developments in fiber diffraction, a powerful
tool for structural analysis of naturally occurring filaments, and in this
project they will continue to be so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the project will include integration of research and education, in particular, a
strong program involving undergraduates and K-12 teachers in research, and
potential applications to crop protection and plant biotechnology.