* 0235146
* Training Underrepresented Basic Science Researchers Utilizing Structure-Function Investigations of Neuropeptide Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* James Porter, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 04/30/2007
* USD 395,333.00

Principal Investigator: James E. Porter&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
0235146&lt;br/&gt;Title of Proposal: Training Underrepresented Basic Science
Researchers Utilizing Structure-Function Investigations of Neuropeptide
Receptors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The immediate goal of this project is
to promote the teaching and training of students by characterizing fundamental
processes by which a stimulus is detected and transmitted by organisms to
initiate essential biological events. The calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
is an established neurotransmitter that is prominently associated with
initiating complex multicellular interactions that regulate or modulate the
function of many living organisms (e.g., sensory pathways). Unfortunately, the
types of CGRP ligands currently available limit information about the cellular
effects associated with CGRP modulation of physiological responses. This
proposal will test the hypothesis that insights into the cellular mechanisms of
CGRP mediated effects will provide a background for the rational development of
novel non-peptide ligands. Pharmacological analysis of CGRP signaling mechanisms
for mutant and wild type proteins will be examined using biochemical, molecular
and cell biological techniques. Differences in the properties of these mutant
proteins from the wild type will be used to advance a molecular model associated
with CGRP cellular effects. Furthermore, this knowledge could be used to develop
compounds that would help researchers understand the specific modulatory
functions associated with this neuropeptide. Moreover, results generated from
completion of this proposal will forward our understanding of how ubiquitous
peptides are recognized and communicated through sensory pathways using
intracellular signaling systems. Finally, this research would benefit the
education and training of underrepresented groups in a demographically
disadvantaged state, by providing support for advanced training in the
biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;