* 0235113
* GOALI:  An Information Technology-Based Template for a Background Curriculum in Computer-Aided Modeling and Design
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Jack Zhou, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2006
* USD 51,797.00

In this GOALI project, Carnegie Mellon proposes to develop a web-based
Background Curriculum, allowing computer-aided simulation, design, modeling and
prototyping skills to be transparently overlaid onto and distributed through the
traditional engineering curriculum.

This proposal involves a partnership between Carnegie Mellon University,
Parametric Technologies Corporation, Drexel University and Pine-Richland High
School. An objective of this project is to grow our experience base and create a
readily transferable suite of web-based course modules that others can use to
teach and motivate their students. Undergraduate students at Carnegie Mellon
will collaborate with faculty and develop a series of modules for use in
mechanical engineering undergraduate courses. Colleagues with expertise in
assessment and cognitive psychology from the CMU Eberly Center for Teaching
Excellence will assess the effectiveness of our efforts by using focus groups,
survey instruments, and software for tracking web page use patterns. A work
product of this project will be a suite of freely available web-based course
materials appropriate for use as a template for integrating computer modeling
and design skills into any mechanical engineering undergraduate program, and for
exposing high school students to the excitement of the mechanical engineering
profession.

Dissemination of our work product will be a critical aspect of this project.
Carnegie Mellon will partner with Drexel University to integrate the web-based
course modules developed at Carnegie Mellon into the Drexel curriculum. In turn,
Drexel will provide assessment and feedback data for refining and improving the
learning modules. High school students and the instructors in the Pine-Richland
High School Engineering Systems course will use a subset of the web-based
modules and computer-controlled prototyping hardware with the objective of
exposing their students to the excitement, hardware, and tools of the mechanical
engineering profession.

