* 0235605
* Adaptive Divergence Versus Gene Flow in the Wild: Evaluation in Trinidadian Guppy Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* David Reznick, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2008
* USD 399,139.00

This research investigates the impact of gene flow (genetic exchange among
populations) on the evolution of biological diversity. The investigators will
first document background patterns of diversity in adaptive traits (e.g.,
morphology, color pattern, life history) and gene flow for wild populations of
Trinidadian guppies that face different environmental conditions (high vs. low
predation). The investigators will then perform an experimental manipulation of
the rate of gene flow between selected populations in order to evaluate
theoretical predictions about the impact of gene flow on variation in adaptive
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene flow is pervasive in
the wild, but the activities of humans have extensively altered natural patterns
of gene flow and adaptation. A growing body of theory suggests that gene flow
may have substantial implications for the persistence of adaptation and hence
for the evolution and preservation of biological diversity. Unfortunately, most
current theory relating gene flow to adaptive trait variation remains largely
untested in natural populations (particularly for the traits most closely
related to fitness). The proposed research will test this theory and thus help
develop robust strategies for managing gene flow in disturbed systems. It will
also build on an increasingly popular case study for teaching evolution in
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;