* 0235878
* Chlamydomonas genomics:  Photosynthesis and acclimation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,197,682.00

This award provides continuing support for the development and application of
genomic resources for the study of fundamental biological processes in
Chlamydomonas, an important model organism. This project will enhance the use of
Chlamydomonas for elucidating the regulation of the photosynthetic apparatus
with respect to changing environmental conditions. The investigators have the
following five goals: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Implement a Generic Model Organism Database
(GMOD) for Chlamydomonas that will display the genome and its features,
including coding regions, ESTs, cDNAs, splice sites, BAC positions, molecular
markers and sites of insertion elements in mutant strains. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Create
a Phase II microarray representing 8,500-10,000 unique genes and supplement the
array with an oligonucleotide-based array that will include genes that are
defined by whole genome sequencing and that are not included on the Phase II
array. Arrays will be used to catalog mechanisms of acclimation to environmental
stress, using both wild-type and mutant strains whose biological phenotypes have
already been determined; an emphasis will be placed on photosynthetic function.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Build an insertional mutant collection saturated for nuclear
genes whose products are linked to photosynthetic function. Insertion strains
will be challenged with a battery of screens, and the insertion sites of 5,000
strains affected in photosynthetic function will be sequenced and made available
to the community. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Create high-throughput mapping tools to
facilitate gene isolation from mutants that are not tagged by insertions. These
will primarily be suppressors of other mutations, or mutations in genes for
which a null lesion would be lethal. The mapping will be based on simple
sequence repeats, automated and made more rapid by the use of bulked segregant
analysis. A mapping service will also be offered to the community.&lt;br/&gt;(5)
Develop vectors to facilitate RNA interference-mediated reverse
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular haploid
green alga, is an important model system for elucidating basic biological
processes, especially in plants. The further development of sophisticated
genome-wide methodologies for studies of Chlamydomonas will greatly augment its
usefulness to the scientific community. This project will also produce extensive
data on photosynthesis and acclimation, adding to our knowledge of how
photosynthetic organisms sense, respond to, and survive in a rapidly changing
environment. It will also enhance Chlamydomonas's usefulness as a 'training'
organism in laboratories throughout the world, and provide a new and exciting
entry point into research careers for young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;