* 0235986
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course of Arabidopsis Molecular Genetics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 06/30/2004
* USD 69,895.00

0235986 Grodzicker

Funding is requested for the Cold Spring Harbor summer course on Arabidopsis
Molecular Genetics. This course is a continuation of the course that has been
funded by the National Science Foundation since its inception 18 years ago. The
current emphasis on Arabidopsis as a model plant for the laboratory portion of
the course reflects the current research interests of many US and international
laboratories, allows students to take advantage of a wealth of genomic
resources, and allows the course participants to focus on one system as they
learn the more general biological or technical principals being taught. The
course is designed to fulfill a growing need within the plant science community
for training in this area. The intention is (1) to teach state of the art
molecular techniques to scientists already involved in plant research so that
they can apply these technologies to their own future research and (2) to teach
scientists familiar with microbial, animal or plant systems about current
research in plant biology using Arabidopsis as the model plant system. The
course consists of a rigorous lecture series, a hands-on laboratory and informal
discussions. Speakers will provide both an in-depth discussion of their work and
an overview of their specialty. Many of these speakers will be experts in plant
systems other than Arabidopsis thaliana; others will be non-plant scientists
expert in disciplines that apply to all biological systems. The laboratory
sessions provide an intensive training in modern techniques in plant biology and
reinforce the lessons learned in lecture. The broader impact of the course is
the training of plant researchers from throughout the world in the most recent
information and techniques of the field. The students are chosen such that those
who will likely disseminate information acquired in the course most broadly,
i.e. professors and postdocs are favored. In typical years the students are an
equal mix of male and female students, and efforts are made to achieve an ethnic
diversity as well, with several students from last year coming from different
countries. Many of the students of the course go on to lead their own
laboratories and the course provides a foundation of knowledge for these new lab
heads.