* 0235985
* Collaborative Research: Biodiversity, Phylogeny and Biogeography of Hornworts
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Karen Renzaglia, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 102,203.00

0235985&lt;br/&gt;Renzaglia&lt;br/&gt;As one of the oldest living assemblages of
terrestrial organisms, the hornworts are crucial to understanding the survival
and diversification of early plants on land. With a worldwide distribution of
approximately 150 species, the hornworts are tiny, inconspicuous plants that are
poorly known, even by botanists. These plants exhibit unique and innovative
means of coping with their existence on land, including positioning all
vulnerable organs in mucilage-filled cavities that are nested within vegetative
tissue. Intriguing features of the cell include a solitary chloroplast
(photosynthetic organelle) that has an architecture reminiscent of algal cells.
Detailed examination of such features will clarify more fully the changes that
occurred when algae made the transition from water to land and ultimately gave
rise to land plants. Despite their evolutionary importance and peculiar
features, hornworts are among the few major groups of plants for which a
comprehensive scientific study has yet to be conducted. This first examination
of hornworts will provide a portrait of the phylogeny and biodiversity of the
group from a global perspective. Information on genetic and structural diversity
will be accumulated for hornworts collected from multiple geographic regions by
an international assemblage of experts on these plants, headed by Dr. Robert
Duff at University of Akron and Dr. Karen Renzaglia at Southern Illinois
University. The goals are to: 1) establish a robust phylogeny of hornworts by
generating and analyzing multiple data sets; 2) produce a revised classification
based on the relationships established by the phylogenetic analyses; and 3)
reconstruct global patterns of hornwort diversification and especially among the
Australasian landmasses. The program will greatly expand knowledge of this
widespread but relatively obscure group of evolutionarily significant plants,
and will also explore more global issues relating to biological diversification
and biocomplexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have an impact on the
infrastructure of education within the principal investigators' institutions,
communities and beyond. Both PIs have demonstrated a strong commitment to
providing enriching and supportive educational experiences for elementary, high
school, undergraduate and graduate students. Students involved in the project
will experience a wide range of professional activities and will be involved in
all aspects of the research enterprise. Emphasis will be placed on attracting
and mentoring students from underrepresented groups. The international component
of this proposed program will provide the resources and opportunities for
students to explore collaboration with students and scientists from a diversity
of cultures and backgrounds. By the dissemination of data through presentations,
publications and a Web site dedicated to the program, awareness of hornwort
biology will be extended to the international scientific community as well as
the general public. The results of this study will be valuable for informing
decisions on conservation and environmental management as the habitats of these
tiny ancient plants become increasingly threatened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;