* 0235803
* Non-Specific Cation Channels in Yeast Plasma Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Clifford Slayman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 12/31/2004
* USD 120,000.00

Each microscopic "cell"-like unit of living matter is delimited by a thin-lipid
surface membrane, spiked with various protein molecules which are collectively
tasked to inform the cell about its environment, to defend against hostile
environments, and to sustain inward transport of nutrients and outward transport
of waste products adequate for normal development. Free-living "model" cells,
such as the common bakers' yeast, with membranes directly exposed to the
environment-and to the investigator-have become a powerful tool for
investigating such vital membrane processes. The primary objective of this new
research on yeast membranes is to identify a protein, designated NSC1, which is
responsible for switching fungal membranes between plant-like (P) and animal-
like (A) behavior, where the critical difference is low permeability keyed
mainly to electrically driven transport, versus high permeability keyed to
chemically driven transport. Normally, gross elevation of external salt (NaCl)
triggers P_A switching, but in the laboratory, switching is best accomplished by
depleting extracellular calcium, and reversed by re-adding divalent metal ions
or polyvalent amino cations. The latter reagents are being used in functional
screens for the presence or absence of NSC1 protein, in yeast systematically
mutagenized or transformed with gene libraries. The established correspondence
between genes and proteins, plus accepted knowledge of the entire yeast genome,
should reveal the NSC1 protein itself and its encoding gene. &lt;br/&gt;That
gene, in turn, will facilitate three important practical applications: a)
identification of corresponding proteins in plants; b) manipulation of protein
structure, both to explore the molecular mechanism of switching and to enhance
or retard activity; and c) targeting the protein with new reagents designed as
either growth enhancers or antibiotics. Plants, fungi, and bacteria are all
natural P-state organisms, and salt-triggered P-A switching is partly
responsible for poor crop productivity in saline soils. By reducing the tendency
of plant root membranes to undergo such switching, applications a,b should
immediately benefit agriculture in saline soils; and application c should assist
suppression of major plant pathogens (mostly fungi). &lt;br/&gt;