* 0235257
* Design as Creative Model for Technical Education: The Development and Implementation of Interdisciplinary Studio Models-National Graduated Distribution Concept
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Gary Gabriele, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2008
* USD 426,934.00

This project aims to transfer, through workshops to graduate students and
faculty, studio models for teaching engineering design in a way that effectively
integrates technical, social/cultural, and aesthetic issues. This model is based
on Rensselaer Polytechnic's (RPI) NSF funded interdisciplinary Product Design
and Innovation Program and Deep Dive design exercises.

Recent changes in ABET put an emphasis on design as a critical component of the
engineering curriculum. The ABET Strategic Plan intends to "Recognize programs
that promote educational quality and innovation by identify(ing) and
disseminat(ing) educational best practices; Cooperate with other organizations
to develop programs that promote educational quality and innovation; Expand
diversity of participation by increase(ing) the numbers of those historically
under-represented in ABET to reflect the full spectrum of participants in the
engineering community; Encourage and accommodate new educational paradigms."
These are the premises for this proposal.

The first phase workshops include Hampton University (HU), a master's
university, with a deep commitment to undergraduate education and diversity
activism and the University of Colorado (UC), a doctoral/research state
university with a strong foundation in problem-based learning. The second stage
workshops are open to applicants from other interested institutions. RPI, using
experienced engineering, social science, and architecture faculty, will deliver
the workshop sessions and associated support to help develop and deliver these
studios. This project updates best practices of normative and cross-disciplinary
design education; and develops and implements models for dissemination and
distribution to colleague institutions.