* 0235767
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Role of Resource Heterogeneity and Clonal Plant Integration on Plant Diversity in Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Heather Reynolds, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2007
* USD 41,964.00

Non Technical Summary (200 words)&lt;br/&gt; "Collaborative Research: Testing
the Role of Resource Heterogeneity and Clonal Integration on Plant Diversity in
Grasslands"&lt;br/&gt;PIs: KL Gross, GG Mittelbach, HL Reynolds (NSF proposal
#0235699)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What determines the number of coexisting species
in a local area is a long-standing question for ecologists. This is particularly
challenging for plant communities because plants require similar resources and
so we would expect the number of coexisting species to be strongly limited by
competition. One important, but rarely tested, hypothesis to explain the high
diversity of plant communities is that variation in resource levels across
different patches (i.e., spatial resource heterogeneity) may regulate species
diversity. We are currently testing this hypothesis in a large-scale field
experiment in Michigan grassland by experimentally increasing soil resource
levels through fertilization in either a homogeneous or heterogeneous fashion.
This manipulation is combined with a species (seed) addition treatment to test
if the ability of species to invade these grassland communities changes under
different nutrient regimes. In this renewal, we will continue to follow changes
in plant species diversity in response to our treatments of nutrient patchiness
and potential species invasion. We also will establish a new experiment in which
we will determine whether the presence of clonal plants - species that grow by
producing vegetative shoots - influences the ability of non-clonal species to
respond to heterogeneity in soil resources. &lt;br/&gt;