* 0235351
* Collaborative Research:  Photosynthetic Acclimation, Photoprotection, and Phloem Loading
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* William Adams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2007
* USD 411,580.00

&lt;br/&gt;As efficient collectors of solar energy, plants are subject to damage
by light when it is particularly intense, or when harsh environmental conditions
prevent the energy from being used productively. Evergreen plants use one of two
contrasting strategies to cope with strong light during the winter. Some species
protect themselves by completely shutting down photosynthesis and rearranging
their light-collecting apparatus to harmlessly dissipate absorbed light. Other
species are able to acclimate and remain productive, using solar energy for
photosynthesis and growth during brief warm spells. Plants using these two
strategies sometimes grow side-by-side in the field. There is speculation that
these contrasting responses to environmental change involve differences in the
mechanisms by which the products of photosynthesis (sugars) are loaded into the
long-distance transport tissue (the phloem) from the leaf cells where they are
made. According to this view, species that maintain photosynthetic capacity in
winter may be those that use transport proteins for phloem loading, whereas
species that downregulate photosynthesis may load via the pores (plasmodesmata)
that connect these cell types. Loading via the latter path may be more sensitive
to disruption by cold. One representative of each plant type, spinach (with
transport proteins) and Mullein (with pores), will be used to study the response
to cold temperature under natural conditions in the field and controlled
conditions in growth chambers. These species have similar growth forms
(rosettes) and retain leaves while overwintering in Colorado. They, as well as
additional species of each type (pea, with transport proteins, and pumpkin, with
pores) will also be used to study the response of plants when they are
transferred from low to high light, which also subjects leaves to potentially
damaging, excess energy. An inhibitor of the sugar transport proteins will be
used to determine whether species known to export sugars via pores acclimate to
cold or high light by altering their sugar export strategy and adding a
transport protein component. The focus on these two sugar export strategies will
be broadened by characterizing a range of additional structural and
ultrastructural features related to carbon export capacity, including the number
and cross-sectional area of exporting phloem elements, the density of pore
connections, and membrane features associated with the transport proteins. Some
or all of these structural features may be augmented to increase carbon export
capacity under cold or high light conditions, and it is hypothesized that the
downregulating species will exhibit less flexibility in their ability to
modulate these structural features. Through these studies a better understanding
of sugar export characteristics as potential pivotal determinants of
photosynthetic acclimation will begin to emerge. As to the broader impact of
this work, this project will (1) involve graduate students in the process of
scientific discovery, (2) facilitate a collaboration between disciplines within
plant biology and between investigators at two institutions, and (3) allow a
better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the adaptability/resistance
of crops and native plants to environmental stress. This will furthermore
contribute to a better prediction of changes in plant productivity in response
to global change, as well as providing the underlying knowledge necessary for
potential increases in the resistance of crops to increased stress through
genetic engineering.&lt;br/&gt;