* 0235380
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Elevated CO2 on Forest N Cycling: Assessment with Large-Scale 15N Tracers and Modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2003
* William Currie, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kelman Wieder
* 12/31/2003
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract. Forest ecosystems exchange large amounts of carbon (C) with the
atmosphere each year, an exchange that is strongly constrained by nutrient
cycling. Forest productivity is anticipated to increase with the projected
doubling in the concentration of atmospheric CO2 over the next century. A
critical area for research and synthesis concerns the feedback effects of
elevated CO2 on soil N cycling. Elevated CO2 significantly increased plant
productivity, the uptake of N from soils and the flux of C to soil microbes but
did not change litter chemistry, decomposition, the mass balance of N among
ecosystem pools, gross and net N mineralization or plant N availability. Even
though plant N availability did not increase under elevated CO2, there is no
indication that N is progressively limiting the enhanced productivity of this
ecosystem now in it sixth growing season under elevated CO2. This result is
surprising given that (i) Net Primary Productivity is demonstrably N limited in
this ecosystem, (ii) that there is intense competition for available
N&lt;br/&gt;among plants, microbes and abiotic sinks in soils, and (iii) that
the long-term productivity of a&lt;br/&gt;single prototype FACE plot at this
research site was stimulated by elevated CO2 only after the addition of N
fertilizer. These results suggest a fundamental gap in our understanding of the
coupled nature of C and N cycles in forest ecosystems, and an opportunity to
expand our knowledge of ecosystem biogeochemistry. This research will have
direct benefits to society by addressing a major potential limitation to C
sequestration in ecosystems that cover over 24 million hectares of forest land
in the southeastern US; ecosystems that are likely to be managed for their
C-sink potential under the Kyoto Protocol.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Given the
interdisciplinary and multi-institutional nature of the Duke Forest FACE
experiment, this research will have impacts that extend well beyond this
collaborative team. This grant will train future scientists and recruit and
retain women graduate students, and will make an effort to broaden the
participation of minorities by actively participating in the SEEDS program (a
joint program of ESA and UNCF). This project will enhance infrastructure for
research by contributing data sets and an enhanced model to current synthesis
activities at NCEAS and an international network of 15 N tracer study sites. We
expect the impact of this work to continue to be high, both in advances to
fundamental ecosystem science, and in the demonstrable application of ecosystem
science to issues of global change; issues that will increasingly impact society
over the next century.&lt;br/&gt;