* 0235911
* LTREB: Collaborative Research: Responses to Unpredictable Environmental Events: An Integrated Study of Stress Physiology, Environmental Cues, and Reproductive Success.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Thomas Coombs-Hahn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard K. Zimmer
* 04/30/2009
* USD 165,022.00

Breuner Hahn Abstract

Most organisms occupy environments that vary in space and time. Environmental
conditions often change rapidly, with little or no advance warning. Survival and
reproduction depend on animals' ability to perceive these unpredictable events
and to adjust physiology and behavior quickly and appropriately. The stress
response is one mechanism by which animals can redirect behavior and physiology
to cope with unpredictable events in the environment. When white-crowned
sparrows return to their mountain breeding grounds each May, weather conditions
are extremely unpredictable, and fresh snow can temporarily cover all available
foraging areas. The birds' behavior can change rapidly and dramatically in
response to these storms. They often abandon breeding territories and move
temporarily to lower elevations (i.e., make facultative altitudinal migrations),
where weather conditions are less severe and food is available. This proposal
includes three kinds of studies. First, in a series of field studies the
relationships between food availability, body condition, stress physiology and
facultative altitudinal migration will be investigated. Second, in the
laboratory, interactions between these factors (food availability, body
condition, stress physiology and activity) will be tested under more controlled
conditions. Third, reproductive success will be measured, permitting the
evaluation of the functional relationships among the environment, physiology,
and fitness. Broader impacts: This study will make several general
contributions. It will provide research and training opportunities for several
undergraduates and graduate students. The PIs place strong emphasis on
undergraduate involvement in research, and this project will reflect that.
Several aspects of this project (determination of changes in snow cover, food
availability, territory quality, nest location and individual localization of
birds using radiotelemetry) are ideal for undergraduate projects. The project
also lends itself to involvement of undergraduates in laboratory studies; the
birds are extremely tractable in captive studies. As an integrative,
collaborative project, it will foster interactions among universities, and help
to develop field-bridging approaches to the study of physiology and behavior.
This study will also serve to maintain a long-term database on the breeding
biology of this species, started by Martin L. Morton in 1968. With the
continuing data on environmental conditions (snow depth, snow cover,
temperature), body condition, and timing of reproduction, we can examine long-
term trends in features of the population that may be affected by global climate
change, such as overall population reproductive output or inter-year adult
survivorship.