* 0235892
* Understanding the Basis of Flight-enhanced Reproduction in Melanoplus sanguinipes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Mary Ann Rankin, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2007
* USD 556,400.00

This study will examine the relationship between migration and reproduction in
an economically significant migratory grasshopper, Melanoplus sanguinipes.
Previous work has shown that migratory behavior has a genetic basis in this
species and that the performance of migratory flight significantly accelerates
onset of reproduction and enhances fecundity over the entire life of the insect.
This observation challenges the conventional assumption that migration
necessarily involves a reproductive cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
addresses two general objectives: to determine the endocrine mechanisms involved
in flight-enhanced reproduction, and the possible effect of long-duration flight
on nutrient acquisition or utilization. To accomplish the first objective, the
effects of long-duration flight on the release or synthesis of neurohormones,
that might in turn cause changes in the pattern and/or level of hormones
involved in reproduction, will be determined. In pursuit of the second
objective, the effect of flight performance on two avenues of nutrient
acquisition, mating and feeding, will be determined. In the model species, males
contribute nutrient to females at mating via spermatophore transfer with sperm.
Thus, this study will establish whether the performance of long flight changes
the frequency or duration of mating behavior after flight and if it does,
whether this change is hormonally regulated. It has been shown that feeding
activity does not increase after long flight, but this study now intends to
establish whether performance of long-duration flight improves food utilization,
and whether this occurs via endocrine stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-
term goal of this project is to analyze the consequences and limits of these
physiological relationships through genetic analysis. The results of this work
will be of interest to population biologists studying life history theory and
evolution, physiologists interested in understanding endocrine relationships in
insects, physiological ecologists interested in resource allocation and
coordination of life history characters, and entomologists interested in
controlling M. sanguinipes and other serious agricultural pests. This project
will involve minority and women undergraduates (usually 4 students/semester). It
will also involve pre-service math and science high school and middle school
teachers as research interns (2/semester) as a part of an innovative new
teacher-training program (UTeach) at The University of
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;