* 0235398
* Neural mechanisms of motion integration and segmentation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Ennio Mingolla, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 03/31/2007
* USD 354,780.00

Neural Mechanisms of Motion Integration and Segmentation Abstract With National
Science Foundation support, Drs. Mingolla and Pack will conduct a three-year
study to investigate the mechanisms by which motion signals are integrated in
the visual cortex of the alert primate. Coordinated theoretical and experimental
methods will be used. Modeling work done in Mingolla's laboratory will include
software implementation of competing models of motion integration and
segmentation in order to derive the models respective parametric predictions of
behavior of cells of the primate visual pathway. The experimental work will be
performed by Christopher Pack in the laboratory of Richard Born at Harvard
Medical School (HMS). Mingolla and Pack will work together with a graduate
assistant at Boston University (BU) to ensure that model predictions are
carefully derived and testable by electrophysiological techniques. Human
psychophysical paradigms from the literature will be implemented and pilot
tested at BU to ensure that they can be adapted to awake, behaving monkeys in a
manner such that experimental results will discriminate meaningfully between the
model predictions. The two categories of models to be investigated include those
based on the intersection-of-constraints in velocity space and those that
operate by a combination of feature tracking and vector averaging in networks of
neurons involved in cooperative and competitive interactions. The experimental
paradigms that have been identified as most promising are: (1) interaction of
first-order and second-order motion signals, (2) multi-aperture stimuli, and (3)
differential processing of intrinsic and extrinsic terminator signals. The
neurophysiological experiments will be performed on alert rhesus macaque
monkeys. All surgeries, animal care, training, and recording will be performed
at Harvard Medical School. The bulk of the neural recordings will be done in
cortical area MT, based on its central role in processing visual motion signals.
We will also have the ability to record from areas V1, V2, and MST if necessary.
All experiments will be carried out on two monkeys to ensure the generality of
the findings. Mingolla and Pack have already collaborated successfully in both
modeling and psychophysical projects. They have continued to meet on a regular
basis since Pack joined Born's laboratory; this proposal is one outcome of their
discussions. Funding would ensure that Mingolla's modeling work, partially
funded by the Office of Naval Research, becomes ever more tightly coupled to the
constraints of physiological data. At the same time, Pack's career development
will be fostered by his taking primary responsibility for conducting
theoretically important experiments in the area of human motion perception.
Results of research will be reported at the Vision Sciences Society and Society
for Neuroscience annual meetings. Software implementation of the NN model will
be developed for distribution on the web. While the graduate assistant at BU
will be the primary beneficiary of the enhanced training afforded by the
collaboration, all of Mingolla's students at BU will profit from closer ties
being fostered with HMS.