* 0235834
* Molecular Studies of a Mitochondrial Channel
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Kathleen Kinnally, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* LaJoyce Debro
* 02/29/2008
* USD 509,429.00

Protein translocation across membrane barriers is an important process in all
organisms, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Protein translocation is critical to
a variety of cellular functions, including protein secretion, biogenesis of
organelles, compartmentalization, and cell signalling. Since about half of the
proteins synthesized in a cell must cross at least one membrane before reaching
their final destinations, protein translocation across membranes is a
fundamental cellular process. The process by which precursor proteins are
imported into the mitochondrion, a double-membraned organelle, is not only
important in its own right, but it also serves as a model system for studying
this ubiquitous process. There are complex sets of proteins in both the inner
and outer membranes of mitochondria that recognize, sort and selectively
translocate precursor proteins across each respective membrane to their final
destinations. The outer membrane import machinery is called the Tom
(translocation, outer membrane) complex and the inner membrane machinery is
called the Tim (translocation, inner membrane) complex. Components of the
complexes are designated Tim or Tom followed by their molecular weight. Integral
membrane proteins are imported by the Tim22 complex. Water-filled channels are
purported to play key roles in this process in both the inner and outer
membranes, and these channels are named TIM and TOM, respectively. A major goal
of this project is to define the mechanism of action and regulation of these
mitochondrial channels during protein import, using yeast mitochondria. The
findings should be applicable to this process in other cell membranes and higher
eukaryotes.

The protein import channels of the native mitochondrial inner and outer
membranes will be studied by using a technique called "patch-clamping" in which
electrophysiological measurements are made across single channels in a small
patch of membrane. Mitochondria and mitoplasts (mitochondria stripped of their
outer membrane by French pressing) from various genetically manipulated strains
of yeast will be subjected to direct patch-clamping. The electrophysiological
channel activities will be recorded and compared with those of mitochondrial
channels reconstituted in proteoliposomes using recombinant Tim proteins thought
to play a major role in protein translocation. The single channel behavior and
peptide sensitivity of specific recombinant Tim proteins (e.g., 23, 17 and 50)
will be compared with TIM found in mitoplasts and proteoliposomes. The the
single channel properties of TOM will also be studied, including its regulation
by targeting peptides and architecture of the Tom complex. The channel activity
of recombinant Tim22 will be compared with that found in the mitoplast, after
establishing channel activation protocols. The mechanism of protein
translocation through TIM and TOM will be further examined by patch-clamping
genetically manipulated mitochondria and mitoplasts during actual protein
import. The architecture of the complexes and the effects of preprotein folding
on import will be addressed using mutants and model proteins.

As head of the only lab in the U.S. with the expertise to routinely apply these
techniques to native and reconstituted mitochondrial membranes, Dr. Kinnally is
in a unique position to undertake these investigations of the mechanisms of
protein import in mitochondria.

While these experiments will enable studies of the mechanism(s) and the role of
channels in protein translocation in mitochondria, it is likely that the same
principles are followed in all biological membranes. Therefore, understanding
mitochondrial sorting and protein translocation can facilitate understanding of,
for example, the same process in the prokaryotes, endoplasmic reticulum and
chloroplasts.

The results from this project will be published to increase the information base
of a fundamental cellular process, i.e., protein translocation across membranes.
This information is a resource for research in this and other areas, as well as
education. The PI is keenly interested in development of human resources in
science. Many graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, postdoctorals,
senior scientists and teachers have visited and/or trained in this laboratory
(this training has the added benefit of serving as a further mechanism for
dissemination of both scientific results and the techniques uniquely employed in
the laboratory).