* 0235286
* Role of Oligopeptide Transport in Plant Growth and Development
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Gary Stacey, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2007
* USD 442,498.00

Peptide transport is a widespread phenomenon exemplified by the translocation of
peptides 2-6 residues in length across the plasma membrane in an energy-
dependent and saturable manner. Peptide transporters fall into three families;
the ATP binding cassette family (ABC transporters), the peptide transporter
(PTR) family (transporting di- and tripeptides) and the recently described
oligopeptide transporter (OPT) family. Completion of the Arabidopsis genome
revealed that this plant possesses 10-fold more predicted peptide transporters
than other sequenced organisms. For example, there are 52 predicted members of
the PTR family and 9 putative members of the OPT family of peptide transporters.
The OPT family members mediate the uptake of tetra- and pentapeptides. Recent
results indicated that an AtOPT3::T-DNA mutant is defective in embryo formation
in the developing seed. Examination of the opt3 embryo showed that development
was blocked at the 8-cell stage. Together, these data strongly suggest that
peptide transporters play very important, unexplored roles in plant growth and
development. The proposed research seeks to define the physiological role for
each of the Arabidopsis OPT peptide transporters. This will be done by examining
the peptide transport activity of these proteins expressed in yeast and in
Xenopus oocytes. Reverse genetics will be used to obtain plants defective in
transporter function. Mutants will be characterized with regard to their growth
and developmental (e.g., embryo) phenotype, as well as their ability to
transport peptides. The cellular localization of each protein will be examined
by expressing epitope-tagged proteins in transgenic plants. This research may
lead to the recognition of new signaling pathways or avenues of nutrient
circulation, which are critical to normal plant growth and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Research and education will be
integrated in the project by the involvement of undergraduates, graduate
students and postdoctoral associates. Participation of under-represented groups
in science will be increased by interfacing with well established programs on
the University of Missouri campus. Infrastructure will be improved by the
purchase of needed electrophysiology equipment, which will serve as a campus-
wide resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Molecular Biochemistry and Integrative
Plant Biology Programs jointly fund this project.&lt;br/&gt;