* 0235122
* Structure and Function Diversity of Phosphotransfer Proteins and their Sequence Family Relatives
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Osnat Herzberg, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2009
* USD 897,472.00

The goal of this project is to gain insight into the pivotal role that
phosphotransfer reactions play in biology, and to explore the range of
activities performed by proteins in a structural family. In addition to proteins
whose function are already known, the enzyme family members include proteins
emerging from genome sequencing projects, that the structural/sequence
information available so far indicates that they are incorrectly annotated in
sequence databases. The information gained will be used to relate active site
structure to catalysis, and to identify markers, which can be applied in the
assignment of function to other proteins from each family studied. These studies
will lead to the discovery of novel biochemistry and pathways, and will provide
insights into the evolution of function from ancestral active site templates.
Two proteins provide the framework for selection of sequence families: (1)
Pyruvate phosphate dikinase (PPDK), a multi-domain enzyme that catalyzes the
inter-conversion of ATP, Pi and pyruvate with AMP, PPi and phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP). (2) PEP mutase, an enzyme that catalyzes the rearrangement of PEP to
phosphonopyruvate, a reaction that serves as the major entry step into the
synthesis of all natural phosphonates. This is a structure/function
collaborative effort, focused on structural data that are obtained by x-ray
crystallography. The x-ray structures provide the basis for understanding enzyme
mechanisms, and for testing proposals by site-directed mutagenesis and inhibitor
design. In addition to the above proteins, new proteins that will be
investigated include (1) a PPDK homologue from M. tuberculosis, Rv1127c, lacking
the pyruvate binding-domain, and therefore expected to lead to the discovery of
a novel phosphotransfer pathway; (2) members of the PEP mutase/isocitrate lyase
enzyme family, with special emphasis on a protein associated with carnation
flower petal death, which is annotated as a mutase in sequence databases, but is
actually a novel lyase.

Broader Impact: The project will provide research opportunities to students at
all levels: post-doctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate
students. It will lead to the discovery of novel protein functions and novel
biological pathways. The results will provide new targets for biotechnological
exploitation, and will be disseminated by publication in scientific journals, by
depositing the coordinates in the Protein Data Bank, and by correcting
annotations in sequence databases.