* 0235800
* Analysis of the Interaction of Histone H1 with Chromatin In Vivo
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* David Brown, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 05/31/2008
* USD 389,997.00

The DNA of higher organisms is organized in a complex structure called
chromatin. A primary function of chromatin is to facilitate the compaction of
DNA so that it can be packaged into the nucleus. However, this must be done such
that the underlying genes are accessible to regulatory responses and chromatin
structure clearly plays a dominant role in regulating much of eukaryotic
transcription. The linker or H1 histones are stoichiometric components of the
nucleosomal subunits of metazoan chromatin. These proteins make important
contributions to the overall structure and function of chromatin but the
underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. There is little direct
structural information regarding the exact location of histone H1 on the
nucleosome. This information is crucial to understanding how these proteins
might function to regulate gene expression. Recently, photobleaching techniques
were used to measure the dynamic binding of H1 to unperturbed chromatin in
living cells. The results indicate that most H1 molecules are continuously
exchanged between chromatin binding sites suggesting a 'stop-and go' mechanism
in which an H1 molecule resides at a chromatin binding site for one or two
minutes then dissociates and rapidly binds to another site. Photobleaching
studies can also provide quantitative measurements of the binding affinity of H1
to DNA in living cells. The major goal of this research is utilize these
techniques to obtain insight into the interaction of H1 with genomic DNA in
living cells. Expression vectors containing genes for wild type and mutant H1
isotypes coupled to the green fluorescent protein will be constructed. These
constructs will be expressed in mouse cells and the kinetic behavior of the
proteins will be assayed by photobleaching techniques. From these studies the
relative binding affinities of these mutant constructs will be determined.
Molecular modeling will then be used to develop high resolution models of the
molecular interaction of each of these H1 isotypes to nucleosomes. Additional
studies to be performed in this project include an analysis of H1 dynamics
during erythroleukemic differentiation and development of assay systems to
identify in vivo H1 binding proteins.