* 0235144
* Merging Physical Bioinformatics and Molecular Simulations: Investigating the Function and Docking of HisH/HisF Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2005
* USD 321,694.00

The transient formation of protein complexes and the channeling of ammonia to
the active site are major factors in the regulation of histidine biosynthesis.
The objective of this project is to investigate the energy landscape of the
docking process and the conduction of ammonia through a putative protein channel
by integrating methods from molecular dynamics simulations, bioinformatics, and
experimental biochemistry. This channel through a globular protein presents a
novel scenario not previously studied. The free energy profile of the ammonia
transport will be reconstructed from constant velocity steered molecular
dynamics trajectories using the Jarzynski identity as well as other statistical
mechanical sampling procedures. The overall goal of this research is to
understand the mechanism of protein-protein interactions in the formation of
large complexes. A bioinformatics approach will be used to suggest pathways for
the docking process which can be probed using both steered and interactive
molecular dynamics protocols. Merging the techniques of physical bioinformatics
and molecular simulations to model this process in a more realistic environment
provides an opportunity to understand how these proteins communicate to achieve
metabolic regulation. Recently published structures on the transient protein
complex of cytochrome c2 to the reaction center of photosynthetic bacteria offer
another valuable opportunity to apply the energy landscape analysis to the
docking of small redox proteins to integral membrane proteins.

Histidine biosynthesis is a model system for studying complex metabolic
networks. Regulated production of histidine depends on the complex interplay
between nine active sites located on several polypeptide chains. It has been
suggested that the formation of protein complexes through protein-protein
interactions is a major factor in the regulation of this metabolic pathway. An
understanding of how these proteins communicate will have an impact on our
understanding of the mechanism of the formation of transient complexes in
biological systems. This work will involve a collaboration between experimental
biologists and computational biophysicists and the results will be incorporated
into the course "Computational Chemical Biology" which is aimed at
undergraduates and first-year graduate students interested in research at the
interface of chemistry, biology and computer science. The algorithms and
approaches to docking developed in this project will be made available to the
broader scientific community through a NSF sponsored Summer School on
Computational Biophysics and through plugins for the visualization program VMD
that is freely distributed. This work is funded jointly by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division.