* 0235329
* Investigating Mechanisms by which Tandem Repeats Mediate b1 Paramutation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Vicki Chandler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2008
* USD 732,000.00

The control of where and when genes are expressed is fundamental to the
development and function of all organisms. Genes are within DNA molecules that
are packaged into chromosomes. How the genes are packaged, referred to as
chromatin organization, and the activities of protein complexes that modulate
chromatin organization, such as chromatin remodelling complexes, are crucial for
correct gene regulation. Inappropriate activation or inactivation of genes
affects growth, development and physiology, which impacts clinical medicine and
agriculture. This project's experiments investigate chromatin-level gene
interactions in maize (corn). Maize is an excellent model system, in that the
genetic tools available allow experiments not possible in humans or most
animals. Unlike certain model genetic systems such as yeast and fruit flies,
maize has gene and chromosome organization similar to humans and other mammals.
We study the regulated expression of the genes required for the synthesis of the
purple anthocyanin pigments in maize. Changes in purple gene activity produce
obvious visual changes in pigment, easily revealing gene activity and
inactivity, providing a powerful system for experimentation. In particular this
project studies paramutation, which occurs when two different forms of the same
gene interact, and this interaction leads to a reduction in expression of one
gene. This change in expression is passed on to progeny, resulting in altered
gene expression in subsequent generations. With prior NSF funding this project
completed a series of experiments that identified what regions of the gene are
required for this phenomenon to occur and isolated a series of mutations in
other genes that perturb this phenomenon. In addition, previous experiments
demonstrated that paramutation is associated with specific chromatin changes
that are transmitted to progeny. The experiments currently being pursued are
designed to further characterize the DNA sequences required for paramutation and
to test specific models for how distinct chromatin states are established,
maintained and transmitted to progeny. As genetic mechanisms are frequently
conserved between organisms, results from the experiments with maize will
provide important paradigms for many species, such as mammals and other
important plants, where genetic tools are not as well developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;