* 0235579
* Collaborative Research:  Compensatory VS Amplifying Effects of Community  Structure  on Ecological  Systems in Response to Environmental Fluctuations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Mathew Leibold, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2006
* USD 262,580.00

Intellectual merit: The dynamics of ecosystem attributes are regulated by the
dynamics of the interacting species within ecosystems, yet little is known about
how this occurs. Theoretical work suggests that the dynamics of ecosystem
attributes will depend strongly on how the dynamics of species with similar
effects on these attributes are related. Some studies have suggested that
compensatory dynamics among such species involving negative
correlations&lt;br/&gt;in their fluctuations are important in stabilizing
ecosystem fluctuations. However there are several reasons to think that such
compensatory dynamics only occur under limited conditions and that synchronous
dynamics (positive correlations in species fluctuations) are also likely. Such
synchronous dynamics would tend to amplify oscillations in ecosystem attributes.
The conditions under which compensatory vs synchronous dynamics occur is poorly
understood and not well documented. A hypothesis states that compensatory
dynamics depend on three factors: First, species with similar effects on
ecosystem attributes must show trade-offs that are sufficient in magnitude to
allow the possibility of compensation. Second, the environment must fluctuate
appropriately with respect to factors involved in these trade-offs. Third,
species that show these trade-offs must coexist only if they are not too similar
to each other. This set of ideas and hypotheses will be tested by experimentally
manipulating the diversity,&lt;br/&gt;composition and food-web structure of pond
communities subjected to different types of external recurrent fluctuations.
This work will provide important insights into the ways that various aspects of
community structure affect ecosystems. This is of key interest for both basic
science and for informing society about the potential ecosystem consequences of
human alteration of biological communities and environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research will contribute to education
and society by:&lt;br/&gt;1) Being integrated into the teaching of undergraduate
students at OWU (a non-PhD granting institution) and UT. 2) Directly involving
and mentoring selected students from these institutions into field research. 3)
Directly supporting graduate students and post-docs involved the proposed
research or in closely related projects of their own design. 4) All of these
participants will be expected to be involved in the dissemination of results via
publications and presentations at meetings. 5) Developing new statistical
methods for analysis of ecological data and making these methods available to
others (via the web). 6) Making data available for research purposes through the
Environmental Statistics Center (an EPA-funded center for statistical research
on environmental problems at the University of Chicago). Seeking ways to
communicate results that might inform societal environmental concerns via
networking with appropriate organizations such as NCEAS, Resilience Alliance,
ESA etc. &lt;br/&gt;