* 0235662
* Physiological basis of germination responses to seasonal cues in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Kathleen Donohue, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2006
* USD 492,000.00

Timing of seed germination is highly responsive to environmental conditions.
Consequently, if environments change, due to habitat alteration, global warming,
or dispersal into new regions, for example, germination behavior is likely to
change as a direct and immediate response. Germination responses to seasonal
cues contribute to fundamental life-history variation and can strongly influence
important demographic properties of populations such as generation time and
reproductive success within a generation. Characterizing the genetic and
physiological basis of germination responses to seasonal environments can
identify mechanisms for basic life-history variation and can identify causes of
variation in population growth rates and distributions in desirable and
undesirable species. The proposed research is an investigation of the
physiological basis of germination responses to seasonal cues in mutant and
natural genotypes of A. thaliana.&lt;br/&gt;The project has two components. The
first component characterizes the physiological basis of germination responses
to seasonal cues experienced during the maternal generation and after dispersal.
This component uses mutant lineages that are defective in one or more
phytochromes in order to identify the phytochromes involved in germination
responses to different seasonal cues, and to further characterize the
phytochrome-mediated mechanisms that regulate germination. Mutant A. thaliana
lines will be grown in controlled environments in growth chambers and in the
field. By combining studies in controlled environments and in the field, we will
investigate the physiological basis of responses to real ecological cues that
influence germination in the field. The second component uses variable natural
genotypes to investigate the physiological basis of natural variation in
germination responses to seasonal cues. Studies using natural genotypes will
complement the mutant studies by testing whether the same physiological
mechanisms that influence germination in mutants also influence germination in
natural genotypes.&lt;br/&gt;By combining classical genetics, quantitative
genetics and ecological manipulations, the research will expand the context of
physiological studies on this model organism. It does so by characterizing
responses of mutants to actual ecological environments and by characterizing the
physiological basis of germination responses of natural genotypes in addition to
those of mutants. As such, it will contribute to our knowledge of natural
variation in physiological mechanisms and our knowledge of specific genes
associated with variation in germination in natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;