* 0236276
* Native Earthworms Reduce Impacts of Exotic Earthworm Invasions on Soil Processes in Wildland Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Paul Hendrix, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Russell
* 02/29/2008
* USD 542,000.00

Research over the past century has shown that where earthworms are abundant,
they significantly influence soil processes critical to the functioning of
terrestrial ecosystems. Recent interest has focused on impacts of invasive,
exotic earthworms on soil processes, particularly in temperate regions. Dramatic
effects of introduced earthworms on soil organic matter dynamics have been
reported in a number of cases. The focus of nearly all of this work has been on
a few species of exotic earthworms which have achieved wide distributions and
now dominate the soil fauna in many ecosystems. Such effects have rarely been
reported from invasions of ecosystems inhabited by native earthworm assemblages,
particularly where soils are undisturbed. Objectives of this proposed work are
to address the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) Do native earthworm species
maintain exclusivity or dominance over exotic earthworm species in undisturbed,
native ecosystems? &lt;br/&gt;2) Are the impacts of exotic earthworm species on
soil processes reduced in the presence of native earthworm species in their
native ecosystems? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This work will promote
training of a post-doctoral associate, a graduate student and several
undergraduate students. Collaborations with regional and national museums will
be developed to foster any new biological collections and to promote
biodiversity information.&lt;br/&gt;