* 0236900
* Conference: 2002 Rustbelt RNA Meeting; Mt. Sterling, Ohio, November 1-2, 2002
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Eugene Mueller, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 10/31/2003
* USD 5,500.00

The Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM) will be held on November 1-2, 2002 in the Lodge
at Deer Creek State Park &amp; Resort in Mt. Sterling, OH. The RRM is the only
major Midwest regional meeting of RNA researchers. Based on attendance in
previous years, approximately 100 participants are from institutions in Indiana,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, and adjoining states (though participants from farther away
are not excluded). The intellectual objective of the RRM is to provide an
inexpensive, high caliber, interdisciplinary meeting for RNA researchers in the
Midwest. The field of RNA (bio)chemistry continues to expand and touches many
broader topics due to the middle position of RNA in the central dogma of
molecular biology. As a result, research groups need a forum where they can hear
and discuss new results and techniques in areas of RNA research that may be
distant from their own but may provide new insights or research tools to further
their own aims. The size and organization of the meeting provides an excellent
environment for discussions between research groups, including not only
interactions between PIs but also between trainees and PIs and between trainees.
With respect to broader impact, the RRM emphasizes trainee participation. In
addition to offering opportunities for interactions with PIs and other trainees,
the RRM provides invaluable experience presenting research in a friendly and
supportive atmosphere.