* 0236846
* CAREER:    Controlling Helix-Helix Interactions in Membrane Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Krishna Kumar, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2008
* USD 517,140.00

This research program addresses helix-helix interactions in membrane proteins.
Materials that phase separate from both aqueous and hydrocarbon solvents will be
utilized to direct the packing and assembly of helices within membrane bilayers.
Peptides with fluorinated or p-aminophenylalanine residues lining interhelical
surfaces and equipped with hydrocarbon sidechains at membrane exposed positions
will be used to investigate driving force, packing tendencies, and orientation
of the assemblies within the membrane. Using a combination of selected unnatural
amino acids, the relationship between sidechain properties and self-assembly
will be explored. Biophysical studies detailing the thermodynamics of
partitioning and folding will be carried out to obtain a detailed map of
peptide-lipid interactions. Sedimentation equilibrium and fluorescence resonance
energy transfer in the presence of detergents will be used to ascertain the
molecular weight and stoichiometries of the assemblies. Scanning force
microscopy will be employed for direct visualization of morphological changes. A
variety of curricular changes designed to bring interactivity to the learning
environment will be implemented, and a public outreach program in the form of
science and policy seminars targeting the non-scientist will be
initiated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this CAREER Award from the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Krishna Kumar, of the
Department of Chemistry at Tufts University, is carrying out fundamental studies
related to the designed aggregation of proteins. By developing new approaches
for the control of how peptide molecules interact with one-another, Professor
Kumar's studies may lead to new methods to control the passage of molecules
across membranes and to new drug delivery systems. Professor Kumar will bring
science to the non-scientist through a public seminar program addressing both
science and science policy and will enhance the educational experience of
undergraduates through the development of a series of interactive learning
projects.