* 0236743
* Group Travel and Workshop: International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology, September 2002, Patras, Greece
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mary Mickevich, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 70,000.00

0236743 Mickevich This Group Travel / Workshop grant provides partial support
for a U.S. delegation of ca. 65 scientists to attend the 2002 meeting of the 6th
International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology (ICSEB-VI). The
title and theme of the Congress, Biodiversity in the Information Age, highlight
the growing importance of Internet access to information on the species
composition, phylogenetic relationships, distribution, and abundance of plants,
animals, fungi, and bacteria throughout the world. The purpose of ICSEB is to
facilitate international exchange and communication among systematists and
evolutionary biologists. International and national meetings in these areas of
biology are usually specialized either by taxonomic group or methodological
approach. As the previous meeting in Hungary in 1996 opened ICSEB to Eastern
European Countries, ICSEB-VI will include scientists from countries in the
Balkans, the Near East, Asia and the Pacific. In the last decade, several prime
issues have stimulated the scientific community to shift emphasis in their work.
These are revolutions in web-based informatics and molecular sequencing
techniques, and the global biodiversity crises. Because of the revolution in
computational abilities and molecular sequencing techniques, the last decade has
seen changes in evolutionary theory and major breakthroughs in our knowledge of
the Tree of Life, the map of genealogical relationships among all species. Also,
unique applications of these techniques have created a new comparative approach
to the study of organismal development: evolutionary development or "Evo-Devo."
The theme, Biodiversity in the Information Age, was chosen to reflect these
recent advances in Systematics and Evolutionary Biology. The 210 invited
speakers for the 25 major symposia are among the leaders in their field, and
from over 20 countries (described on the Congress website at www.icseb-
vi.biology.upatras.gr ). Topics to be addressed include: training of the next
generation of taxonomic experts; building teams of scientists to construct the
universal Tree of Life for all organisms; exploring the creation of a web-
accessible data matrix of morphological and anatomical information on all
organisms (the concept of "MorphoBank," analogous to GenBank); accelerating
biodiversity inventories toward completion of an All-Species inventory for
planet Earth. ICSEB-VI will take place on the campus of the University of Patras
in Greece from 9-16 September, 2002, under the joint sponsorship of the
University of Patras and IOSEB, the International Organization of Systematic and
Evolutionary Biology. The new Conference center and the town can accommodate up
to one thousand attendees. Abstracts of the presentations and fuller proceedings
are to be posted to the conference website and to various specialty outlets and
journals following the Congress.