* 0236667
* Near-surface Tornado Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2006
* William Lewellen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 328,223.00

One of the ultimate goals of tornado research is to predict tornado occurrence
and strength as a function of the environments which give rise to them, a goal
made extremely difficult by the range of physical scales and phenomena involved
and the complexity of the interactions between them. The objective of this
research project is an improved understanding of one critical ingredient of this
problem: the phenomenon of near-surface intensification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work by the Principal Investigators (PIs) and others
has demonstrated that the turbulent interaction of a vortex with the surface can
produce maximum wind speeds more than double those well above the surface and an
order of magnitude greater intensification for short periods. Changes in the
near-surface inflow can make the difference between extreme near-surface
intensification or none at all. The PIs have identified a corner flow swirl
ratio and a dimensionless time rate of change of low-swirl flux as two critical
parameters governing this behavior. Near-surface intensification is expected to
be important on both the mesocylone scale and the tornado scale, but much
remains to be done to clarify its role in both tornadogenesis and determining
tornado intensity, and to determine how to approximate this phenomenon in
subgrid/surface parameterizations for storm scale simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use and extend the PI's existing high-
resolution, three?dimensional, unsteady, numerical model of tornado vortices.
Controlled, limited-domain, numerical experiments will focus on identifying the
dynamical relationships involved in near-surface intensification during
transient vortex evolution. The approach complements observational case studies
and storm model simulations and should prove useful in interpreting the results
of both. The code will be modified to include buoyancy generated by latent heat
released in the core and debris loading to allow initial estimates of their
effects on the near-surface flow. Adding the funnel and debris clouds to the
simulations will also foster more direct comparisons with field observations of
tornadoes, such as videos and fine-scale Doppler radar measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society will benefit through increased public safety, if
improvements can be made in forecasting which radar detected mesocyclones will
generate a tornado and what the damage potential might be. This research, which
will include providing results to the research community through publications,
meetings, graduate student education, and personal interaction, is designed to
provide a necessary ingredient for such improvements. Also, detailed information
on the tornado wind structure and debris transport should aid engineer's
attempts to design structures to withstand tornado conditions. &lt;br/&gt;