* 0236956
* Research Starter Grant: Contribution of Indirect Genetic Effects to Genetic Architecture and Evolution of Complex Phenotypes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Jason Wolf, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

This project investigates the genetics and evolutionary potential of traits that
are influenced by the environment provided by conspecifics. These social
environments (e.g., the competitive environment) are particularly important
because, since they originate from features of individuals, they can have a
genetic basis. Theoretical models have demonstrated that these genetically based
environmental influences, or indirect genetic effects (IGEs), can have important
impacts on genetic architecture (GA) and evolution, but empirical studies of
IGEs are lacking (with the exception of studies of IGEs arising from the
influence of parents on their offspring). This project will provide valuable
insights into the role of IGEs in GA, contributing to a better understanding of
the genetic basis of complex phenotypes.

To analyze the contribution of IGEs to variation in trait expression the
proposed research will use empirical methods developed by the PI. This approach
applies a theoretical model of trait expression to interpret components of trait
variation in a population of interacting individuals. Using this approach it is
possible to separate direct and indirect effects of genes, which are often
confounded or, in the case of IGEs, hidden to traditional methods. The
theoretical models can also be used to analyze the dynamics of phenotypic
evolution based on observed GA, generating predictions that can be tested by
artificial selection experiments or can be used to predict response to selection
for improvement in agricultural systems.

These methods will be used to analyze the contribution of IGEs to the
development of complex traits (e.g., seed number and total biomass) in a rapid-
cycling variety of Brassica rapa. Data on the quantitative genetics of these
traits will provide the foundation for a future proposal that will examine
experimental evolution in the presence of IGEs and analyze molecular mapping of
IGE loci to trait expression. In this future project phenotypically divergent
lines will be derived by artificial selection to test model predictions. These
divergent lines will be inbred and used to examine the genotype-to-phenotype map
and evolutionary dynamics of IGE loci. Thus, a major goal of this starter grant
is to provide the critical data needed to develop a much larger and more
comprehensive proposal in the future. This will contribute significantly to the
development of the career of the PI as a research scientist and will help
establish the PIs new research lab.

The ultimate goal of this research program, to examine the molecular mapping of
IGE loci, builds on the work from Dr. Wolf's NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in
Biological Informatics, where methods to analyze the genotype to phenotype
mapping of maternal effect loci were developed. Molecular analysis of GA is
particularly complex when IGEs are present because the phenotype becomes the
property of, and thus can map to, the genotypes of multiple individuals. This
novel aspect of GA has been poorly explored but previous work by the PI
demonstrates that it can play an important role in mapping from genotype to
phenotype for some types of traits. To achieve this goal the previous advances
made in theoretical and empirical methods will be combined with the development
of new theoretical models to ultimately understand all of the pathways through
which genotypes make phenotypes.