* 0236569
* SBIR Phase II:  Analytic Simulation Method for Oil/Gas Field Management and Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Randy Hazlett, POTENTIAL RESEARCH SOLUTIONS
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2004
* USD 512,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project provides the
foundational R&D for new oil and gas reservoir management tools to optimize
hydrocarbon recovery. It proposes extension of state-of-the-art analytic
solution methods for potential flow in porous media from 2-D to 3-D. It
incorporates 3-D analytic fluid flow simulation technology into large-scale
optimization routines where reservoir recovery performance is required, such as
in the optimum placement of new wells or the optimum operation of existing
wells. Unlike previous analytic solution methods, complex heterogeneous
reservoir architecture can be managed without a loss of accuracy. This project
will provide a new class of reservoir management tools capable of rapidly and
accurately screening what-if scenarios for field development. Phase II will: i)
generalize analytic solution boundary element methodology to three dimensions,
ii) build a prototype, 3-D, well optimization tool, iii) develop analytic
stream-function technology for optimization of improved recovery operations, and
iv) extend algorithms to additional geometric shapes for enhanced flexibility.

Powerful analytic solution technology has been developed that allows robust
solution of fluid flow problems with complex, heterogeneous rock properties.
This general analytic solution methodology is an industry first, providing the
ability to generate a brand new line of desktop hydrocarbon reservoir management
tools. In particular, the results of this project will provide software and
services to optimally locate new wells within existing hydrocarbon reservoirs.
While reservoir simulation and well planning software both exist in the
marketplace, no current commercial product offers the ability to rigorously
compute well productivity within a feedback loop of a powerful gradient search
optimization method to automatically select the best drilling location for new
wells. This technology also addresses the optimum performance of existing wells
in improved recovery operations. Using analytic stream-function optimization,
well configurations in mature fields can be optimized for maximum productivity
and ultimate recovery, thus minimizing unrecoverable natural resources.