* 0236976
* Vermont EPSCoR's Research Infrastructure Improvement Plan
* O/D,EPS
* 04/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Christopher Allen, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 10/31/2007
* USD 8,513,079.00

The Vermont EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award will enhance the
research infrastructure in environmental science/engineering and materials
science. With the goal of developing an Environmental Water Center, the
university plans to build capacity through faculty lines in geochemistry and
aquatic biology, along with additional physical and human resources to enhance
established strengths. Incorporation of earth systems and landscape ecological
data into the Vermont Geographic Information Systems (GIS) data base will
provide a valuable tool for the environmental science community across the
state. In the materials area, the University of Vermont proposes to build on
recent investments in polymeric and nanoscale materials with two related
positions in chemistry and mechanical engineering and outreach to polymer
processing and fabrication companies in the state. The goal is to develop a
competitive materials science research center. Each focus area, environmental
science/engineering and materials science, will include support of early career
faculty, post-doctoral associates, and graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Vermont EPSCoR award includes an outreach
program involving high school students and teachers, diverse student
populations, baccalaureate institutions, the private sector, and public policy.
One aspect of the program supports high school teacher and student teams working
with faculty members at the University of Vermont or at one of Vermont's
baccalaureate institutions. An additional outreach program is designed to
increase the diversity of the undergraduate student population in Vermont by
building on an ongoing partnership with a Bronx high school. The rural poor of
Vermont will be eligible for summer job internships and math/science institutes.
Faculty and students at Vermont's baccalaureate institutions will be able to
compete for equipment grants and small college development grant; a small
business innovation research (SBIR) phase (0) program will provide seed grants.
Finally, Vermont EPSCoR will partner with the Vermont Technology Council to help
locate in-state resource persons for policy makers seeking scientific
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;