* 0236427
* LTREB: Variance and Synchrony in Flowering and Dormancy of Iteroparous Perennial Wildflowers
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Elizabeth Crone, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2008
* USD 95,937.00

Intellectual merit: We know extremely little about population dynamics of
herbaceous perennial plants, and few studies monitor individuals and populations
at appropriate the temporal scale (decades) to document or analyze patterns over
time. Funds are requested to continue demographic monitoring of four
iteroparous, perennial plants in semi-arid grasslands in western Montana and
southwest Alberta: Astragalus scaphoides, Silene spaldingii, Potentilla recta,
and Anenome patens. Continued monitoring will allow investigation of general
mechanisms of reproduction, resource acquisition and population dynamics in
herbaceous perennial plants. Initial analyses of data from. Ultimately, long-
term demographic monitoring will be used to analyze the extent to which temporal
patterns of flowering and dormancy are synchronous in each species
and&lt;br/&gt;population. In addition, patterns predicted by models of ultimate
evolutionary causes of synchrony will be tested, strength of feedback in
individual resource dynamics will be determined, and predictions of population
models based on individual resource dynamics to transition models based on
above-ground plant size will be compared. These analyses will build
relationships between individual allocation and demographic models of
populations dynamics. In doing so, general ideas will be developed to explain
mast-seeding in trees to mechanisms that could drive resource acquisition and
reproduction in all plants that store resources over multiple years.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Herbaceous perennial plants are of great applied
significance, because of the importance of grassland conservation, the need for
weed management, and the possible environmental advantages of perennial crops
for soil conservation and weed control. Observations of individual and
population dynamics at decadal scales are central to understanding herbaceous
plant population dynamics. In addition, each of the monitoring programs here
involves demography or impacts of sensitive or invasive species, and can
potentially improve our ability to manage specific species and populations.
Finally, the majority of the requested funds are for summer undergraduate
research interns, who will spend about 50% of their time participating in
independent research and/or public outreach programs at the University of
Montana, when not actively counting plants.&lt;br/&gt;