* 0236423
* Dictionary of American Regional English
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Joan Hall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2005
* USD 299,999.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Joan Houston Hall and the staff of
the "Dictionary of American Regional English" (DARE) will continue their
documentation of regional and social variation in American English. They will
concentrate on entries to appear in Volume V of DARE (Sl-Z), which is projected
for publication in 2008. Four volumes of DARE have already been published by the
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press: A-C, 1985; D-H, 1991; I-O, 1996;
P-Sk, 2002. DARE is based both on an extensive program of fieldwork conducted in
1,002 communities across the United States between 1965 and 1970 and on a
massive collection of written sources (including materials such as diaries,
letters, newspapers, novels, folklore collections, government documents, and
electronic collections) that document American English from the seventeenth
century to the present.

DARE provides full historical treatment of the words, phrases, and
pronunciations that vary from one part of the USA to another or that
characterize the usage of one social group or another. Unique to DARE is the
inclusion of maps (adjusted to reflect population density rather than geographic
area) showing distributions of words. Although language change is inevitable
over time, and though some have predicted the "homogenization" of American
English, DARE makes it clear that regional words and phrases are still very much
alive. The published volumes of DARE and the tape recordings and other materials
collected for the project have been used by linguists, sociolinguists, and
lexicographers. In addition, forensic linguists have used DARE to help identify
crime suspects; physicians have used it to explain folk terms for ailments and
diseases; and psychiatrists and gerontologists have used it in conjunction with
standardized tests that call for identification of household objects (since
makers of such tests have not recognized that use of regional vocabulary items
can skew the test scores and result in misdiagnosis of illnesses such as
aphasia). The DARE volumes are also widely used by teachers, researchers,
librarians, journalists, historians, and playwrights, as well as by readers who
simply delight in American English.