* 0236606
* Collaborative Research:  Facility Support to Establish and Operate the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2006
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2006
* USD 333,628.00

0236606 Dietrich

Also know as Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), Airborne Laser Swath Mapping
(ALSM) allows for the measurement of surface topographic features with
decimeter-level accuracies. The development of very high resolution
georeferenced digital elevation models (DEMs) acquired using ALSM, are critical
for observing a multitude of geomorphic features at scales appropriate to the
fundamental processes that govern their topographic expression. Examples
include, fault structures, hill slopes, riverine features, coastal zone
morphology, glaciers, volcanic edifices and vegetative canopy structure. The
DEMs developed from these data can be used to model and better understand the
dynamics of these landforms. The technique also has obvious applications in
civil engineering.

This grant provides support for the management and operation of a National
Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM) over a period of two years. A part of
a collaborative effort , the University of Florida (UF; EAR-0236720) and the
University of California - Berkeley (UC-B; EAR-0236606) will provide faculty
leadership, technical support, and the computational resources and software to
make available to the broader geosciences community, research-grade, digital
topographic data acquired with ALSM. NCALM will make available to the broader
community, the use of an existing Optech 33 kHz pulse rate ALSM system at UF
that can be flown on a UF twin engine Cessna aircraft equipped with GPS
equipment and an inertial positioning system. NCALM will assist researchers in
the design, budgeting and conduct of ALSM surveys for specific research projects
in order to maximize the scientific utility of the acquired data. Additional
goals include 1) advancing both the technology and the scientific discoveries
made possible as a consequence of ALSM; 2) tracking and evaluating other remote
sensing technologies that might complement ALSM, and developing methods for
multi-sensor data collection and fusion; and 3) providing a training ground for
students. NCALM will also support community involvement in the management of the
facility through support of a steering committee (SC) and annual community
workshops. The SC will provide guidance and review on the following: 1)
scheduling and prioritizing projects; 2) cost effective management of the
Center; 3) information dissemination; 4) opportunities and necessities for
technological upgrades; and 5) contact and coordination with major programs
(PBO, CUASHI, Margins, etc.) and agencies (NASA, FEMA, USGS, and other
agencies). The NCALM ALSM educational program will include: 1) an annual summer
stipend open to a graduate student to provide hands-on experience with ALSM data
reduction at UC-B; 2) annual community workshops to introduce students and
scientists to the opportunities offered by ALSM; 3) the development of parallel
opportunities for both science and engineering research for graduate students at
UF; and 4) the implementation of a visiting scientist/student program.

***