* 0236791
* Development of the Interplay Between Automatic and Control Processes in Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 63,220.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Reading is one of the most complex skills for children to
master but is vital for success in school and beyond (Kintsch, 1998; National
Research Council, 1999; Rayner &amp; Pollatsek, 1989). It consists of decoding
and other skills that have been studied extensively in isolation. Integrative
theories that assemble the various pieces of the reading puzzle are lacking in
the scientific literature (Nist &amp; Simpson, 2000; Winne, 1996). Compensatory-
Encoding Theory (Walczyk, 2000) has been proposed to account for how aspects of
reading that normally function automatically (e.g., decoding) interact with
processes to which readers must attend (e.g., understanding the theme of a
passage). The theory highlights the flexibility of reading and how, as they
mature, readers become more facile at dealing with reading problems. It also
describes the diverse ways readers compensate for poor decoding or other reading
skills that fail. The theory identifies classroom conditions likely to restrict
readers' use of compensatory strategies and thereby lower comprehension. The
purpose of the proposed research is to test predictions of Compensatory-Encoding
Theory in children. Whereas most research on poor decoding highlight its
negative effects on comprehension (see Perfetti, 1985; Rayner &amp; Pollatsek,
1989), this research is expected to reveal that readers at different skill
levels compensate for weak skills or difficult text. Moreover, the research
should reveal how as children age they become more efficient at overcoming
reading problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The theory's predictions will be tested
during a year-long project. The skill profiles of third-graders, fifth-graders,
and seventh-graders will be assessed. Children will also be recorded as the read
passages aloud, followed by literal and inferential comprehension tests. They
will be asked to read under restrictive conditions, such as time pressure, that
will limit their ability to slow reading rate, pause, reread text, or compensate
in other ways to determine their effects on comprehension.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of this Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
major prediction of Compensatory-Encoding Theory is that when reading is
unrestricted, readers will compensate for poor reading skills such that
comprehension is unrelated to reading skill profiles. Under restrictive
conditions, including taking standardized reading achievement tests, readers are
less free to compensate. Consequently, those with poor decoding are likely to
suffer lower comprehension. If this and the theory's other predictions are
confirmed, the broader impact would be to inform how reading instruction takes
place. Beyond a low threshold of skill development, an emphasis on improving
decoding or other skills may be misplaced. Rather, children who comprehend
poorly might better be taught how to compensate for poor skills and difficult
text. The broader impact of the findings would also be to indict time restricted
standardized tests as unfairly penalizing less efficient readers who cannot
compensate freely.&lt;br/&gt;