* 0236149
* Laser Flash Studies of Bacterial Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2003,04/30/2007
* William Parson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2007
* USD 395,478.00

The objective of this study is to improve understanding of the roles of
vibrational motions and relaxations in the initial steps of energy transfer and
charge separation in photosynthetic bacterial antenna complexes and reaction
centers. The work will involve a combination of experimental and computational
approaches. Fluctuations of the fluorescence amplitude, emission spectrum and
anisotropy will be measured over a broad range of temperatures to study the
dynamics of structural transitions of the proteins. Coherent nuclear
oscillations of the stimulated emission spectrum will be measured following
excitation of reaction centers and antenna complexes with femtosecond flashes in
order to explore the flow of energy from one vibrational mode to another.
Reaction centers with mutations of ionizable residues will be studied to probe
how changes in protein vibrations and electrostatic interactions affect the
spectroscopic properties of the bacteriochlorophyll molecules that serve as
electron carriers. In the computational work, molecular dynamics simulations
will be used to study vibrational relaxations in the reaction center and to
identify protein vibrational modes that are coupled to electron transfer. The
vibrational coupling and relaxation dynamics visualized in these simulations
will be used to develop a realistic, density-matrix model of photosynthetic
electron transfer. These studies will increase our understanding of the early
steps of photosynthesis, which are fundamental to virtually all life on earth.
In addition, the results may help to clarify the importance of vibrational
motions and relaxations in other electron-transfer systems such as the
mitochondrial respiratory chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
project will contribute to the education of graduate students in Biochemistry
and the Interdisciplinary Program in Biomolecular Structure and Design (BMSD). A
broader group of graduate students will be exposed to results from the research
in a course on "Optical Spectroscopy in Molecular Biophysics". Undergraduate
Biochemistry, Biology and Chemistry students as well as promising high school
students from underrepresented minorities will participate directly in the
research. Instrumentation constructed as part of the project will be available
to the interested researchers.