* 0236748
* Upgrading of the X-ray diffractometer at Mississippi State University
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Francis Lynch, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2005
* USD 48,825.00

EAR-0236748&lt;br/&gt;Lynch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray diffractometer (XRD)
is a fundamental research tool used by a broad cross-section of researchers at
Mississippi State University. Recent XRD users have come from the Departments of
Geosciences, Plants and Soil Sciences, Chemistry, Biology, Agriculture and
Biological Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Chemical Engineering. The
existing equipment is heavily used through a series of externally funded
projects ranging from soil mineralogy, waste disposal, and precision
agriculture, through sediment and pollutant transfer in aquifers, to studies on
the engineering properties of rocks and sediments in Mississippi and throughout
the Southeast. The XRD is also used in applied and theoretical projects directed
by the Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Experimental Station. Dissemination
of the results of these projects to the general public is a major activity of
the Mississippi State Extension Service, which operates statewide out of the
Plants and Soil Sciences Department at MSU. Experience in the XRD laboratory is
a fundamental portion of several undergraduate, graduate, and distance-learning
"K-12 Teachers in Geoscience" classes. A major concern in the aforementioned
research projects is the long time needed to acquire high-quality XRD spectra.
NSF support will be used to improve the XRD by purchasing a high-efficiency
X-ray detector and monochrometer. These hardware upgrades significantly decrease
XRD analysis time and allow large number of samples to be investigated. Funds
will also be used to purchase a complete Windows-platform X-ray diffraction
database and search/match programs. The software upgrades replace a DOS-platform
software package and will make the XRD more "user (student) friendly" and
accessible to researchers at the University.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;