* 0236146
* 2003 Polar Marine Science Gordon Conference
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

Storm&lt;br/&gt;0236146&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is a contribution toward
support of travel and registration costs for participants in the Fourth Gordon
Research Conference on Polar Marine Science. The conference, scheduled to take
place on 16-21 March 2003 in Ventura, CA and will address the topic of The
Changing Polar Oceans: Impacts of a Changing Climate on Physical, Chemical,
Biological and Coupled Systems. The conference will assess the recently
documented large-scale, interannual changes that have impacted the northern and
southern polar ocean systems, their physical bases, and their impacts on
physical, chemical, biological and coupled systems. Characterization of changes
as oscillations, abrupt shifts or long-term trends will be central to subsequent
discussion. Impacts of the physical changes on upper ocean biogeochemical
systems, such as those involving dissolved oxygen uptake and the pCO2 balance,
will be addressed, as will impacts on benthic-pelagic coupling and the carbon
budget. Use of biological markers from diatoms and Phaeocystis will be discussed
within an interannual change context. Impacts of the changing climate on sea ice
cover, and likely consequences to ice biota and to the exchange of such
substances as CO2 and DMS, will be considered. An attempt will be made to assess
aspects of concurrent interannual changes in broader food web variability. Both
field and modeling results and paleoceanographic reconstruction of past
conditions will be used in the discussions.