* 0236147
* Evolution of Neurotoxin Resistance in Pufferfishes and Relatives: A Comparative Genomic Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Manda Jost, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2008
* USD 445,176.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the deadliest neurotoxins known is tetrodotoxin
(TTX). TTX binds tightly to and blocks sodium channels in muscles, heart, and
nerve causing paralysis and death. TTX is of biological origin and is produced
by a striking variety of animals such as the blue-ringed octopus, the ghost
crab, the California newt, and the pufferfish. In some species TTX is used to
capture prey, in others for defense against predation. Because TTX circulates
freely in the body of the animals that make it, these animals must evolve
insensitivity to their own toxin. Some species of pufferfishes are more toxic
than others, and that higher degree of toxicity is matched, obviously, with
lower sensitivity of the tissues of those species to the toxin. One hypothesis
is that the varying sensitivity of tissues to TTX among these species of
pufferfishes likely resides in variation in the amino acid sequences of the
proteins associated with the sodium channels. This project focuses on evolution
of TTX sensitivity among pufferfishes by way of a mechanistic examination of the
evolution of sodium channel proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of the sodium channel genes, the sequences
of these genes will be examined from the pufferfish genome database. Next, the
genes for three of the six sodium channels will be cloned and sequenced from a
variety of related species exhibiting varying degrees of TTX sensitivity.
Phylogenetic relationships among the pufferfishes are known. In addition, some
related fish with varying degrees of TTX sensitivity, and some unrelated fish
that are very sensitive to TTX will be examined. Sensitivity to TTX will be
determined by measuring the amount of TTX that binds to tissue samples of brain,
muscle and heart. A comparison of the sequences of these sodium channel genes
will be made to identify particular amino acids in the sodium channel proteins
that are different in those species that are highly insensitive to the toxin
versus those that are not. From these data inferences may be drawn to
reconstruct how particular mutations accumulated in the 3 genes during the
evolutionary history of these species. Thus an understanding of how these
genetic mutations influence TTX binding will be gained in the context of current
thinking about how the toxin interacts with amino acids in the pore of the
sodium channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work on the evolution of pufferfish
insensitivity to their own TTX is important for a number of reasons. First, TTX
is classified as a weapons-grade toxin. Understanding how animals protect
themselves against it may help in designing defense strategies against it.
Second, TTX and related compounds are released by marine algae and cause the
"red tide" which has a serious impact on fisheries industries and the marine
environment. This project will help gain understanding about how some animals
can protect themselves against this devastation. Third, because they have small
genomes, the genome of the Pufferfish has been cloned and sequenced so there is
a wealth of molecular data on this species. The present study will take
advantage of that information. Finally, from a theoretical point of view, this
is an intriguing question. Fish are known to have six different genes for sodium
channels, so TTX sensitivity must have evolved more or less simultaneously in
six genes. Understanding how toxin insensitivity evolved in pufferfish will be a
model for how animals respond adaptively on a molecular level to environmental
challenges. Very few studies have developed the mechanistic links between
molecular variation, differential organismal performance, and relative fitness.
The present study has great potential to forge those important links.&lt;br/&gt;