* 0236481
* Acquisition of a Quadrupole ICP Mass Spectrometer for the Department of Geological Sciences and Marine Science Program at the University of South Carolina
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Gene Yogodzinski, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2007
* USD 173,268.00

0236481&lt;br/&gt;Yogodzinski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support
for the acquisition of a quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer
(QICPMS), to be housed in the Department of Geological Sciences at the
University of South Carolina. This project is a collaborative effort among
faculty from the Department of Geological Sciences, the interdisciplinary Marine
Science Program, and the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. The
instrumentation will be used for research in the diverse fields of igneous
processes, chemical oceanography, paleoclimate, and hydrogeology. The broad goal
of this acquisition is to expand the trace element and isotope tracer research
capabilities of the Department of Geological Sciences, and to help build a
critical mass of faculty and students that are interesting in conducting this
kind of research at the University of South Carolina. The requested funds
reflect 70% of the cost of the instrumentation (QICPMS with collision cell) plus
three months of technician support and one month of PI salary. The cost of the
instrumentation includes factory and on-site training by the manufacturer, as
well as two years of service and maintenance beyond the initial one-year
warranty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All faculty involved in this project involve
both graduate and undergraduate students in their research. The
interdepartmental and interdisciplinary nature of this project provides a
significant opportunity to transfer analytical expertise to geology faculty and
students from the chemistry department, and at the same time, create
collaborative opportunities for chemistry faculty and students in the earth and
ocean sciences. In addition to the abundant and diverse research applications
that provide the primary justification for funding this project, use of the
proposed instrumentation will also be integrated into the geology curriculum
through some 300 and 500-level courses in geology and
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;