* 0236561
* 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Jeff MacSwan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2004
* USD 9,000.00

The National Science Foundation supports the 4th International Symposium on
Bilingualism. The symposium will be held at Arizona State University from April
30 to May 3, 2003. The symposium is concerned with the scientific study of
bilingualism, defined as the simultaneous use or representation of two or more
languages by an individual or community. Topics representative of previous
meetings of the International Symposium on Bilingualism include grammatical
development in bilingual children; sociolinguistic and grammatical studies of
codeswitching, or language mixture; bilingual speech processing; language
disorders in bilinguals; sociolinguistic studies of bilingual communities and
migration; child second language acquisition; language policy; language shift;
language attrition/forgetting; and bilingualism in school settings. The meeting
will provides a forum for linguists and other cognitive scientists to
disseminate basic research on bilingualism, receive input from other researchers
on current projects and findings, meet with potential collaborators to discuss
projects of mutual interest, meet with editors and publishers, engage in
discussion of ongoing theoretical and empirical problems, and promote the field
of bilingualism as a specific subfield of linguistic research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bilingualism is a topic of great social and scientific
importance. A large proportion of U.S. citizens identify themselves as
bilingual, and bilinguals are known to exhibit special characteristics of
interest to cognitive scientists as well as to educators and clinicians. Yet
relatively little cognitive research has been done on this population. The
International Symposium on Bilingualism is an opportunity to promote the study
of bilingualism in the U.S. and abroad, and to encourage cognitive science
research in a potentially rich but under-investigated area.&lt;br/&gt;