* 0236209
* Regulation of Germline Stem Cells in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Frank Laski, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

0236209 Laski

The study of stem cells is scientifically interesting and has the potential to
revolutionize approaches to the treatment of diseases. To fully realize this
potential, stem cell biology must first be understood at a deeper level, and
that is what this proposal sets out to accomplish. Dr. Laski's lab has taken a
genetic approach to stem cell research using the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. A mutant with a female-sterile phenotype that has tumorous ovaries
has been isolated. In wild type, oogenesis initiates when a germline stem cell
divides and gives rise to two daughter cells, one remains a stem cell, while the
other becomes a cystoblast. This cystoblast then divides incompletely four times
creating a 16 cell cyst interconnected by ring canals. One of these 16 cells
develops into the oocyte and later into the egg, the remaining 15 become nurse
cells. An ovary is said to be tumorous when these cystoblasts do not
differentiate into 16-cell cysts, creating an ovary with an over-abundance of
stem cells and cystoblasts, and a lack of 16-cell cysts and developing egg
chambers. The tumorous ovary mutant isolated in Dr. Laski's lab has mutations in
two different genes, and the combination of these mutations gives rise to the
tumorous phenotype. These genes are RNA binding protein 9 (Rbp9) and vasa. In
addition to causing the tumorous ovary, it was determined that vasa and Rbp9 are
required for proliferation of the germline stem cells, and in combination with
the gene mei-P26, also function in maintenance of the germline stem cells. These
results are exciting, especially because it sheds new insight into the function
of vasa. vasa is conserved throughout the metazoa and in every animal studied,
including humans, vasa expression is exclusive to the germline. Therefore
finding new developmental functions for vasa in the fruit fly will have
implications for human biology.

To understand the biology of stem cells, it is necessary to understand the
complex interactions between dozens of genes. The proposed experiments will
continue the analysis of mei-P26, Rbp9 and vas. This analysis will build upon
the framework of genes known to be involved in regulatory pathways of stem cell
growth and differentiation, a framework that must be deciphered before a
complete understanding of germline stem cell biology is accomplished.

In addition to the scientific impact, a broader societal impact will also be
achieved by the work proposed in this grant, primarily in the area of scientific
education of minority students, women and undergraduates. The proposed work will
primarily be done by a female postoctoral fellow and a minority graduate
student. Dr. Laski's lab also participates in the UCLA CARE Program, which
recruits minority students from local junior colleges and places them in a lab
where they receive research experience. One of the Dr. Laski's previous CARE
students, Gwen Cabrera, recently published a first author manuscript in the
journal Genesis. This year's CARE student plans to transfer to UCLA next year,
at which time she will work in the Laski lab on a year-round basis helping to
determine how stem cells function.