* 0236154
* A Proposal for the Network Office of the U.S. Long Term Ecological Research Network
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2010
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Todd A. Crowl
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,200,614.00

The LTER Network Office (NET) was transferred to the University of New Mexico in
1997. NET objectives have been to provide basic services to LTER, facilitate
communication among LTER sites and between LTER and the broader environmental
sciences community, promote new technologies, and provide leadership in data and
information management. Since NET moved to Albuquerque, LTER has grown from 18
to 24 sites and the number of associated scientists has expanded from 894 to
more than 1500. This proposal represents a request to renew the LTER Network
Office for the next six years. Five essential NET Service functions that are
central to the operation of LTER would be continued and enhanced to better meet
community needs. Funding is also requested to expand four other focal areas that
are key to broadening the impact of LTER on science and society.

The five essential NET functions supported through this project include: (1)
service to the LTER community (e.g., proposal preparation, accounting, meeting
coordination); (2) computational and communication infrastructure (e.g., e-mail,
database backups, web access); (3) information management and methods
development (e.g., data and metadata standardization, curation and expansion of
LTER Network databases); (4) network development, community outreach and
training (e.g., coordination of the Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics,
OBFS training and database development); and (5) publications and public
outreach (e.g., newsletters, web site, synthesis volumes). Two expanded and
related NET functions are essential to enabling LTER to reach new levels of
understanding of long-term ecological patterns and processes: (6) Synthesis
(e.g., integration and synthesis via working groups, creation of value-added
databases) and (7) Information System Design and Development (e.g., distributed
data networking, data integration tools). Funding is also requested to continue
and broaden the impacts that LTER has on the international scientific community
and environmental education in the United States via: (8) International LTER
(e.g., coordination of ILTER meetings, ILTER publications, informatics training)
and (9) Education (e.g., facilitation of site-based education programs,
workshops). A tenth activity, the implementation of a 21 st Century Strategic
Plan for the LTER Network, would be completed within the first two years of the
NET renewal.

During the next six years, the LTER Network office will continue to facilitate
knowledge advances and understanding within ecology by (1) promoting LTER
communication among sites and throughout the ecological sciences and (2)
disseminating data, information, and knowledge via the web, synthesis and
publications, training, and community and public outreach. New efforts and
resources devoted to synthesis and information system development, international
LTER, and education will significantly broaden the impact of LTER science by
enabling us to better provide integrated and synthetic data and information to
the broader scientific community, students, and policy-makers. In addition, we
will greatly increase our efforts to expand LTER into a global scientific
enterprise via ILTER and expand the reach of LTER education beyond the
schoolyard (i.e., from K-12 to policy-makers to the general public). We will
further expand our efforts to reach underserved groups, incorporating an
enhanced focus on Chicanos and Native Americans.

The revised SOW comprises the ten following sections, arranged to reflect the
organization of DEB-0236154. A revised budget and budget justification accompany
this document. Strategic planning documents will be submitted separately. Each
section of the SOW details activities which will and will not take place under
the revised budget. The requested budget is tied to specific activities, which
in turn are linked to the personnel time needed to complete the activity. The
revised SOW specifically identifies activities that will benefit the LTER
Network, the International LTER Network, the general scientific community, the
education community, the University of New Mexico (UNM), or NSF.