* 0236103
* New NMR/Derivatization Methods for Oligosaccharide Structural Elucidation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Brad Bendiak, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2007
* USD 457,306.00

Complex carbohydrates are a diverse group of molecules found in virtually all
living organisms, and are involved in a wide variety of crucial biological
functions. An understanding of their many roles relies on a detailed knowledge
of their structures. Novel NMR experiments are described that take advantage of
doubly 13 C-labeled acetyl groups after peracetylation of hydroxyl functions,
and are specifically tailored to extract detailed stereochemical and linkage
information in unknown oligosaccharides. The procedures should be generally
applicable to carbohydrates from virtually any source, without requiring 13 C
incorporation into the carbohydrate molecules themselves by isotopic labeling.
These experiments are designed to correlate the frequencies of the newly
introduced 13 C nuclei to sugar ring protons, using several magnetization
transfer/selection methods. These procedures will permit larger oligosaccharides
to be elucidated and will be applied to a series of oligosaccharides derived
from glycoproteins having from 3-15 sugars. These methods will also be important
in the application of NMR spectroscopy to the structural elucidation of many
natural products containing hydroxyl and amino functions. These studies will
enable the stereochemistry of individual sugars in oligosaccharides to be more
effectively determined, permit the assignment of linkages between adjacent
sugars to be markedly improved, enable subspectra of larger oligosaccharides to
be accumulated, and enable more detailed structural information to be garnered
for many natural products.

Carbohydrates are a major source of biomaterials used either directly or
indirectly in many industries, including the food, chemical and polymer
industries. This research will markedly improve their analyses and thereby
provide benefits that foster their industrial use. This research project will be
combined with teaching and training of students. Students will be encouraged to
participate in multidisciplinary research conferences and the results of this
research will be incorporated into courses in a local molecular structure
program. The work will be broadly disseminated through publication, through
participation in national and international meetings, and through the
availability of new NMR pulse sequence software to other investigators in
academics and industry.