* 0236210
* Thiamin Metabolism in Plants: Elucidation of the 4-Methyl-5-(b-hydroxyethyl)Thiazole Phosphate (HET) Biosynthetic Pathway in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* David Shintani, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2006
* USD 375,000.00

Thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP), which is formed through the condensation of two
major intermediates, 4-methyl-5-(b-hydroxyethyl)thiazole phosphate (HET) and
2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate (HMP), is an essential
enzyme co-factor required for the viability of all organisms. While TPP is only
synthesized by bacteria, fungi and photosynthetic organisms, animals and humans
must derive TPP from dietary sources of thiamin. Although plants represent a
major source of dietary thiamin, surprisingly little is understood about most
aspects of its synthesis in plants. This is particularly true for the HET
intermediate of TPP. Most of what is known about HET biosynthesis has been
derived from genetic and biochemical studies in microorganisms where this
compound is derived from different synthetic precursors using different
enzymatic machinery. Although a previous study suggested that HET is synthesized
as described for E. coli, where deoxy-xylulose-5-phosphate (DXP) is a precursor,
the Shintani lab has performed studies showing that plants can synthesize HET in
the absence of DXP. This result suggests that plants may possess an alternative
pathway to HET that exists in place of or in addition to the previously
described "E. coli-like" pathway. The overall goal of this research is to use a
combination of molecular and biochemical approaches to determine the
biosynthetic pathway(s) leading to formation of HET in plants. To achieve this
goal the following research objectives will be performed: 1) Determine the
biosynthetic precursors leading to thiamin biosynthesis in plants, 2) Determine
the role of the plant orthologue of the yeast Thi4 protein in HET biosynthesis,
3) Identify and functionally analyze additional Arabidopsis HET biosynthetic
genes.

Thiamin (Vitamin B1) deficiencies in humans can lead to a condition known as
Beriberi that is manifested by severe neurological disorders and a general
wasting phenomenon. This disease is primarily associated with poverty-stricken
populations of developing countries whose diets subsist primarily of polished
grain products such as polished rice or bleached wheat flour. A sustainable
solution to thiamin deficiencies in humans would be to increase the nutritional
content of staple food crops that endogenous populations of the world commonly
consume. By genetic engineering such crops for increased thiamin, it should be
possible to positively impact the nutritional needs of the global population.
Unfortunately, the major impediment to such an effort is a current lack of
knowledge pertaining to the biosynthesis of thiamin in plants. The increased
biosynthetic knowledge obtained through these studies will be important for the
rational design of crops engineered for elevated thiamin levels for improved
human and animal nutrition.

