* 0236641
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Do Learners Overcome Native Language Interference in Second Language Speech?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Michael Hammond, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2004
* USD 3,679.00

The difficulties faced by second language learners with respect to novel phoneme
contrasts are well-documented and are primarily attributed to the influence of
the native language (e.g., the contrast between singleton /t/ and geminate /tt/
in languages like Japanese and Arabic is difficult for native speakers of
English because /t/ and /tt/ are not contrastive in English). However, little is
yet known about the nature of the evidence that learners can use to improve
their ability to perceive such contrasts. Under the direction of Dr. Michael
Hammond, and with NSF support, Ms. Rachel Hayes will study the acquisition of
second language phoneme contrasts for her doctoral dissertation. The research
involves training monolingual English speakers to perceive novel phoneme
contrasts in a language that is new to them, and then testing participants on
both their ability to perceive the difference between the phonemes and their
ability to learn vocabulary in the new language that contains the contrasting
phonemes.&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant for the fields of speech
perception, second language acquisition, and second language pedagogy. A fuller
understanding of the types of evidence that listeners can make use of to learn
novel second language sound contrasts may ultimately contribute to improved
pedagogical techniques for helping adults overcome their initial difficulties in
perceiving novel second language phoneme
contrasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;