* 0236106
* Grazer-Mycorrhizal Interactions in Tallgrass Prairie:  Effects on Carbon and Nitrogen Partitioning and Sequestration
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Charles Rice, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Russell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 536,000.00

Although mycorrhizal symbioses (mutualistic associations of plant roots and
fungi) are ubiquitous in nature, neither the influences of mycorrhizae on carbon
and nitrogen retention nor theier effects on soil food webs and nutrient cycling
are well understood. This project is seeking to determine: 1) the role of
mycorrhizal symbiosis on C and N sequestration; 2) the impact of belowground
grazers on C and N cycling within the biotic communities; 3) the interactive
feedbacks of sequestered C and nutrient availability on soil biota. Planned
greenhouse and field studies will include experimental manipulations of
mycorrhizal fungi, a belowground grazer community (nematodes), and soil nutrient
availability. Measurements will include tracing C and N flow through the
plant/soil systems and the responses of the soil biotic communities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Undergraduate and graduate students will involved
will likely serve as coauthors of publications. Results will be presented
publicly through via Visitors' Days at the Konza Prairie Biological Station and
via broadcast media research updates on a local public radio station. The
proposed studies will provide needed information on how interactions within the
belowground biotic community impact C dynamics, N availability, and
sequestration of C and N into the soil organic matter, and on the feedback
effects of changes in C and N dynamics on plant-fungal-grazer interactions
&lt;br/&gt;