* 0236741
* Acquisition of a High Precision Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Geochemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2005
* USD 280,000.00

EAR-0236741&lt;br/&gt;DePaolo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of isotope
geochemistry has contributed in important ways to a broad spectrum of studies in
Earth Sciences. Advances in instrumentation are a key component of many research
advances. This project involves the purchase of a new instrument to facilitate
studies that will contribute to our understanding of deep earth processes,
climate change, and earth history. The new design features of the instrument
will allow us to more precisely measure small differences in isotope ratios for
elements like Sr, Nd, Os, U, Ca and Fe. These small isotopic variations provide
important clues about earth processes that cannot be obtained by other means.
The new instrument will be used for geochemical investigations in
biogeochemistry, mantle geochemistry, basalt petrogenesis, silicic magma
systems, granite petrogenesis, crustal growth and structure, geochronology,
ocean paleochemistry, and groundwater and deep sea pore fluid geochemistry.
Anticipated studies include U and Th isotopes in volcanic rocks and
groundwaters, Sr isotopes in zircon, Fe isotopes, and negative ion studies for
elements like Os, Se and B. The new instrument will replace a 14-year-old multi-
collector instrument in the Department of Earth and Planetary Science. The
University of California will contribute about half of the funds for the
purchase. Intellectual merit: The PI has 27 years of experience in isotope
geochemical research, has an extensive record of publication, and has trained
more than twenty Ph.D. students. The Institution has a long record of support of
facilities, and there is sufficient research funding to ensure the
instrumentation will be well used. Broader Impacts: The proposed instrumentation
constitutes a significant improvement to the research and educational
infrastructure at U.C. Berkeley. In the previous 14 years, 20 graduate students
(8 women) 8 postdoctoral fellows (4 women), plus more than 20 visitors,
undergraduates and collaborators have pursued research in the facility that will
house the new instrument. The planned research will benefit society by improving
our knowledge of natural hazards and global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;