* 0236674
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Documentation of the Nadou Language of Hainan and the Reconstruction of Proto-Hlai
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Diana Archangeli, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 08/31/2004
* USD 6,685.00

Under the direction of Dr. Diana Archangeli, and with NSF support, Mr. Peter
Norquest will collect and analyze data for his doctoral dissertation. His
research concerns one endangered language, the Hlai language Nadou, spoken on
Hainan Island, China. The non-Chinese languages of Hainan are in danger of
succumbing to modern Chinese influence, a trend that is true of minority
languages throughout China. The project will document the Nadou language as it
is currently spoken and use it to produce a comprehensive reconstruction of the
words that occurred in ProtoHlai, providing an up-to-date analysis of its sound
system. Files containing the recordings will be posted on a website for public
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reconstruction of Proto-
Hlai will add to current knowledge of the Kra-Dai family to which Hlai belongs.
Kra-Dai is one of the five major language families of Southeast Asia. This
linguistic research will complement research in other fields of human prehistory
such as archaeology and population genetics. The combined use of historical
linguistics, archaeology, and population genetics allows the reconstruction of
history when written records are not available. The findings will increase our
knowledge of Southeast Asian prehistory and provide a deeper understanding of
Southeast Asia from a linguistic point of view. The reconstruction of Proto-Hlai
will also provide valuable data upon which to test current theories of
contemporary languages, and will be a useful reference for Kra-Dai scholars,
field workers in a broader Southeast Asian context, theoretical phonologists,
and typologists.