* 0236465
* SGER:   Explore Feasibility of a Novel Nano Mechanical Machining System-on-a-Chip (SOAC) for Nano Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Ajay Malshe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 09/30/2003
* USD 62,683.00

The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is to explore
feasibility to design, fabricate and test a nano mechanical machining
(mechanism) system-on-a-chip (tool, tool holder and their actuation), a dynamic
scanning probe machining tool, with intention of performing operations such as
drilling, milling, deburring, etc. This novel system-on-a-chip (SOAC) will be
adaptable to scanning probe microscope (SPM) operation platform. Another unique
feature of this innovation is that it will allow rotational motion to the nano
tool tip, unlike mechanisms demonstrated by others, to realize new boundaries of
traditional macro mechanical machine in nano paradigm. In this exploratory
phase, this mechanism will be fabricated using well-established micro electro
mechanical system (MEMS) platform through silicon multilayer fabrication. This
project covers the research and education theme on "Manufacturing processes at
Nanoscale".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important areas which will
impact all sections of nano technology, is the design and development of "tools"
for nano fabrication, machining and manufacturing. The tools for nano machining
can be classified in various ways, but predominantly one can classify them as
(1) tools for wet versus dry process, (2) natural versus intentional
organization, and (3) bottom-up or top-down fabrication. In the proposed
project, we intend to pursue dry processing for intentional organization in top-
down fabrication approach. Based upon today's direction of the field the
findings will immediately impact semiconductor, optical, bio, pharmaceutical,
etc. applications. This project will involve ethnic as well as gender minority
undergraduate and graduate students in leading research projects through
programs such as Carver Project, REU, etc. The PI would continue the proactive
involvement through this project for bigger and better success by retaining and
training minority students for higher education in this exciting and emerging
area. Further, through the education task the PI will provide training to
student on the project, introduce a new interdisciplinary class on
Nanomanufacturing Processes at graduate level, and reach out through lab tours
and creating an informative website "Nanotechnology for Dummies" for non-
technical community and high school students. Moreover, nano science and
engineering, particularly "nano manufacturing" is one of the major areas of
emphasis for the state of Arkansas. The fields of biotechnology, electronics
along with the traditional manufacturing are the major growing sectors in the
state. On this background, the proposed subject area of research is of urgent
academic and technological importance to many small hi-tech industries. The
success of this seed project will enable PI to further establish a complete
research and education program in the field of nanomanufacturing.