* 0236044
* Metabolic Biochemistry of Reductive Dehalogenation in Dehalococcoides and Relatives
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Stephen Zinder, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Nara Gavini
* 03/31/2007
* USD 430,000.00

It is now well established that certain microorganisms can grow by reductively
dehalogenating many halogenated organic compounds, including priority
pollutants, a process termed dehalorespiration. The Zinder laboratory isolated
an organism, Dehalococcoides ethenogenes strain 195, that can dechlorinate the
solvents and pollutants tetrachloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE) to
ethene. This organism was the first isolate from a subphylum of the Chloroflexi
(green nonsulfur bacteria) that includes other organisms implicated in reductive
dehalogenation of chlorobenzenes, polychlorinated biphenyls, and dioxins. Two
reductive dehalogenases (RDs), a PCE RD dehalogenating PCE to TCE, and a TCE RD
dehalogenating TCE to VC and slowly to ethene have been described in strain 195.
The nearly completed genome sequence of strain 195 reveals seventeen open
reading frames potentially encoding RDs, suggesting that it can utilize numerous
other halogenated substrates. The Zinder laboratory has recently shown that
strain 195 can dehalogenate hexa- penta- and tetra-chlorobenzenes. They have
also recently isolated the Alameda strain, an organism related to D. ethenogenes
that conserves energy by dehalogenating the carcinogen vinyl chloride (VC) to
ethene, a process that does not support growth of strain 195. In future studies,
D. ethenogenes and the Alameda strain will be examined for the abilities to
utilize and grow on a broader range of halogenated substrates including further
studies on chlorobenzenes, and tests of chlorophenols, bromophenols,
chlorobenzoates, fluorochloroethenes, dioxins, and PCBs. The expression of the
different RD genes during growth with various chlorinated compounds will be
examined. The RD genes will be heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli or
another readily grown organism, which if functional enzyme is obtained, will
provide large amounts of pure RDs. For the Alameda strain, enough VC and TCE RDs
will be isolated from a relatively easily-grown mixed culture to obtain sequence
information which then can be used to clone the RD genes. These studies will
increase our understanding of the environmentally important process of reductive
dehalogenation and will educate a graduate student, a postdoctoral fellow, and
several undergraduates in microbiology, biochemistry, and molecular biology.

Tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE) are solvents used for dry-
cleaning clothes and degreasing metal parts, and are among the most pervasive
and persistent groundwater pollutants. Dehalococcoides ethenogenes, a novel
organism isolated in our laboratory, is the first organism that can completely
dechlorinate PCE and TCE to the non-toxic compound ethylene. Recently, the
genome of this organism was sequenced, and a preliminary analysis indicates that
it possesses seventeen genes coding for reductive dehalogenase enzymes,
suggesting that it can dehalogenate many more halogenated compounds. This
project will study the ability of D. ethenogenes, and a related organism that
rapidly detoxifies the carcinogen vinyl chloride, to utilize other halogenated
organic compounds, and will determine which dehalogenase genes are expressed
when the organism is growing with different chlorinated compounds. Because D.
ethenogenes is so difficult to grow, its reductive dehalogenase genes will be
moved into a more tractable organism, such as Escherichia coli, so that
sufficient amounts of each dehalogenase will be available for study. These
studies will increase our understanding of the environmentally important process
of reductive dehalogenation and will educate a graduate student, a postdoctoral
fellow, and several undergraduates in microbiology, biochemistry, and molecular
biology.