* 0236344
* Structural Studies on the SSV1 Proteome; an Archeal Virus from an Extreme Thermal Environment
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Martin Lawrence, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2007
* USD 498,044.00

Sulfolobus shibatae Virus (SSV) is a Crenarchaeal virus that exists in extreme
thermal (greater than 80oC) and acidic (pH &lt; 3.0) environments such as the
ones found in Yellowstone National Park. While SSV1 is the best characterized of
any Crenarchaeal virus, the current understanding of these extremely unique
viruses is very limited. Genomic sequence analysis of SSVs and most other
viruses from extreme thermal environments fails to find homologues in the
publicly available data bases for the vast majority of the putative open reading
frames (ORFs). Thus, most of the SSV1 viral proteome, 30 of 34 ORFs, have yet to
be assigned any function, and the roles that these proteins play in the viral
life cycle remains a mystery. Using X-ray crystallography, this project seeks to
identify structural homologues for member of the SSV1 proteome, thus providing
insight into their possible function. The structural studies are being
supplemented by the production of polyclonal antisera for each of these
proteins, with subsequent analysis of their expression patterns and function
with respect to the viral life cycle. Together, these data will begin to provide
an understanding of the SSV1 life cycle at the molecular level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Viruses of extreme thermophiles can serve
as model systems for understanding the biochemistry and molecular biology
required for life at high temperatures, thus this research will help to open a
window onto some of the most fundamental processes of the still poorly
understood Crenarchaeota. The structural biology investigated in this project
will be incorporated in the undergraduate educational activities. Additionally,
this project will provide outstanding training opportunities to students at
different levels, including summer research experience for Native American
students from Montana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;