* 0236877
* CAREER: Roles of Rheology, Chemical &amp; Mechanical Filtration, and Applied Gradient on Injectability of Cement Grouts, Morphology of Grouted Soil, and Improvement in Soil Propert
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Lois Schwarz, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Soil improvement is a central issue to many of today's projects where land is
scarce, good quality materials are in short supply, and developed sites are
often congested or contaminated. Among the many in situ techniques available to
improve soils, permeation grouting is historically the most commonly used in
geotechnical engineering. Traditionally, applications of permeation grouting
involve (a) reducing or controlling seepage through geologic formations and
structures and (b) strengthening soil. More recently, the injection of
cementitious grouts into soil is used to construct in situ barriers to contain
contaminated leachate and to encapsulate hazardous waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Research will focus on cement grouts (both Portland cement-based and slag
cement-based varieties of primarily microfine cement and to a lesser extent
ordinary cement) because they are perhaps the most widely used due to their
economic feasibility, permanence, and inert characteristics. The problem is that
often cement grout cannot be successfully injected, although the grout exhibits
appropriate rheological properties and sufficiently small particles by
traditional filter criteria. Consequently, the issue is why the grout was unable
to be injected as predicted. One of the primary thrusts of the research is to
distinguish the effects of mechanical filtration, chemical filtration, rheology,
and applied gradient on the injectability of cement grout. These factors are
interrelated (some very strongly) and governed by a number of variables. An
extensive series of parametric and phenomenological studies at both the
microscopic and macroscopic level are undertaken to accomplish this objective.
Essential concepts from the fields of cement chemistry and transport processes
will be synthesized to better understand and interrelate the early age
microstructure of a cement grout to its injectability and deposition in the
voids of a soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Emphasis is placed on the role of applied
gradients on the flocculation behavior of the grout and the resulting morphology
of the grout/soil matrix. Cement grouts that exhibit significantly different
chemical and rheological behavior will be injected into one-dimensional and
three-dimensional sand-filled "columns". During the injection process, pressures
will be monitored, grout samples will be collected from various sampling
locations along the length of the column, and effluents will be collected.
Immediately subsequent to grouting, the cement content of the grouted soils will
be assessed to quantify the mass of cement particles deposited in the soil
matrix. The improvement in the engineering properties of permeability and
strength will be determined for hardened grouted soil samples. The pore
morphology of the grouted soil will be studied to correlate the microstructural
behavior of a grout in response to pressure gradients applied during the
injection process with the macrostructural behavior of soil improvement.
Microscopy of both wet grout and hardened grouted soils will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The morphology of the grouted pores will
strongly govern the resulting permeability of the soil and the extent or degree
of improvement will be influenced by (a) the presence of preferential flow
paths, (b) pore interconnectivity, (c) pore size and distribution, and (d)
interfacial pores that may be attributed to the wettability of different pore
fluids and ion concentrations relative to the grout. Possible ways to improve
injectability such as by mix additives, mixing sequence, preconditioning the
soil, or injecting under deaired conditions will be explored. The results from
the variety of injection experiments will be used in the development of models
to reasonably predict injectability and the extent of permeation grouting by
knowledge of both the grout and soil properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;