* 0236737
* Mechanisms of Attentional Selection in Human Visual Cortex
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* David Somers, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 775,000.00

Mechanisms of Attentional Selection in Human Visual Cortex Abstract With
National Science Foundation support, Dr. Somers will conduct a three-year study
to investigate the mechanisms of attentional selection in human visual cortex
using functional MRI combined with psychophysics and computational modeling.
Studies are proposed that will investigate 1) the spatial distribution of
attention under different forms of selection, 2) the role of suppression in
selection and its relationship to facilitation, and 3) the computational
mechanisms by which attention facilitates or suppresses a stimulus
representation in visual cortex. The human mind regularly encounters complex
environments that contain more information than it can process at one instant.
Attention acts as the critical gateway to perception and cognition by selecting
the stimuli that will be processed. The metaphor of the spotlight, selecting a
single contiguous region of space, has long been employed to describe visual
attention (James, 1890). In addition to spatial selection, object-based and
feature-based selection have also been inferred behaviorally. This proposal
seeks to investigate the spatial patterns of modulations these differing forms
of selection can exert on human visual cortex. Using fMRI, we have observed that
under appropriate task demands, the attentional spotlight may be split to attend
to two distinct regions of space simultaneously while leaving the intermediate
region unselected (see preliminary results). The capabilities and limitations in
splitting the attentional spotlight will be investigated in this proposal.
Investigations of how feature-based and object-based attention operate across
space in retinotopic visual cortex are also proposed. Further studies will
investigate the relationship between the spatial limits of attentional
resolution and the processing capabilities of different visual cortical areas.
Attentional selection is a competitive process with winners, the selected
stimuli, and losers, unselected stimuli. It has been argued that selection is
comprised not only of facilitative processes, but also of suppressive processes.
Indeed, attentional suppression of unattended stimuli in visual cortex has been
observed (e.g., Somers et al, 1999). Here, it is proposed to investigate how
suppression acts across space and its relationship to facilitation. Is
suppression purely a passive process (e.g., withdrawal) that results when
attention is directed elsewhere? Or is there an active component to suppression?
Is active suppression required to split the spotlight? Is suppression uniform
across non-attended space or do robust distractors receive targeted suppression?
To what degree does suppression vary with task form and/or task demands?
Attentional selection modulates activity even in primary visual cortex. This
implies that attention directly interacts with low-level, stimulus
representations. What are the computational mechanisms by which attention
selects stimuli without disrupting stimulus encoding in visual cortex? Does
attention primarily modulate the gain (multiplicative effect) of stimulus-driven
responses? Or does attention primarily bias (additive effect) stimulus responses
to give them a competitive advantage in gaining access to cognitive processes?
To investigate these issues a series of parametric fMRI/psychophysical studies
is proposed in which physical stimulus properties will be varied while attention
is directed toward or away from the stimulus. These data will be used to
construct fMRI stimulus response functions both with and without attention and
will allow us to infer the primary computational effect of attention on a
neuronal population. In concert with these experiments, computational modeling
studies will be performed. The modeling will provide a framework to integrate
not only the present experimental results, but also the primate database on
single unit responses in visual cortex. It is expected that the modeling will
refine understanding of selection mechanisms and help to generate future
experimental questions. The broader impact of the proposed studies includes
increased understanding of cognitive brain mechanisms in normal humans. This
knowledge about the relationship between mind and brain will inform future
clinical studies, particularly for populations with attentional dysfunction.
Computational understanding of how the brain implements attention may also aid
design of future computer architectures. This research also offers training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups.

