* 0236473
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Language Styling and Switching in Speech and On-Line Contexts:  Identity and Language Ideologies in Taiwan
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Qing McFatter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2004
* USD 11,854.00

Under the direction of Drs. Keith Walters and Qing Zhang, Ms. His-Yao Su will
conduct fieldwork for her doctoral dissertation. She will compare accent
shifting between standard Mandarin in Taiwan and Taiwan-accented Mandarin, on
the one hand, and language switching between Mandarin and Taiwanese, on the
other, in face-to-face interactions and in on-line environments. She will study
students from colleges in Taipei and Tainan, one in northern and the other in
southern Taiwan. She will record their on-line and face-to-face interactions,
interview them, and collect on-line questionnaire data to see how their
linguistic practices are connected with their identities, language attitudes,
and the sociopolitical context of contemporary Taiwan. The Taiwanese context is
especially interesting for study of identity and language ideologies because of
its unsettled national status in international politics and its politically
hostile, yet economically beneficial, relation with China. This research thus
concerns the complex relations among regional identity, ethnic identity, elite
identity, and national identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
significant in two ways. First, it touches on important themes in
sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology like the construction of identity.
It also incorporates analysis of language interaction on the internet, a
communication medium that has shaped human experiences tremendously but has not
been much used as a source of data. Second, this research will contribute to
better understanding of language attitudes and identities in Taiwan. This should
prove useful to educators and policy makers concerned with the promotion of
bilingual education in Taiwan or the standardization of Taiwanese. This research
will also shed light on how the Taiwanese elite position themselves in relation
to China and increase the general public's understanding of the complexity
involved in the political stalemate between Taiwan and
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;