* 0236060
* Regulation of Shoot Development in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Daniel Nettleton, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2008
* USD 399,964.00

Organ regeneration in plants has intrigued scientists for years because the
developmental fate of regenerating tissue in culture can be controlled by two
simple plant hormones, cytokinin and auxin. At high levels of cytokinin relative
to auxin, shoots are produced, while at high levels of auxin relative to
cytokinin, roots are formed. Shoot regeneration is not only an interesting
developmental phenomenon but also an important commercial process for the
propagation and improvement of plants. Understanding its regulation may help to
solve inefficiencies in shoot regeneration that often impede efforts to improve
commercially significant plant varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies
were conducted in this laboratory using oligonucleotide array (DNA chip)
analysis to describe the global pattern of gene expression that underlies the
shoot development process. More than 8000 genes were analyzed in this study, and
several hundred were up or downregulated among them were genes involved in
hormone signaling and shoot meristem formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
Arabidopsis, some ecotypes (isolates from different geographical locations)
differ in their ability to form shoots under comparable tissue culture
conditions. In the effort to understand the genes that determine the efficiency
of shoot development, a search was conducted for genes (loci) that control the
difference in regeneration ability between one ecotype (Columbia) that
regenerates well and another ecotype (Landsberg) that does not. One major locus
on chromosome 5 was identified, in which the Columbia allele enhances shoot
formation. Two other minor loci were identified on chromosomes 1 and 4.
Landsberg alleles at these loci enhance shoot production. The proposed project
will examine how these loci impact the program of gene expression during shoot
development and whether the major locus on chromosome 5 controls the expression
of a specific set of genes. Oligonucleotide arrays (DNA chip) with over 20,000
Arabidopsis genes will be employed to identify the genes that are differentially
regulated during shoot development by the Columbia or the Landsberg alleles at
the major locus on chromosome 5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
expression level of every gene in the Arabidopsis genome will be assessed in the
two ecotypes to see if any genes show heritable patterns of gene expression
during shoot development. If so, searches will be undertaken for loci
controlling individual genes that show heritable changes in gene expression.
This approach, termed "genetical genomics," treats the expression level of any
gene on an oligonucleotide array as a metric trait and permits one to seek out
genes that control these traits. This represents the first step in constructing
causal pathways of gene expression during shoot development in
Arabidopsis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, it is proposed to identify the
gene(s) at the major locus on chromosome 5 that enhances the efficiency of shoot
development in the Columbia ecotype. This will be done by a process called
"chromosome walking," in which fine-scale gene mapping techniques are used to
pinpoint candidate genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;