* 0236725
* Sufficient Evidence?  Building Certifiably Dependable Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 345,602.00

Blumenthal, Marjory&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0236725&lt;br/&gt;Systems on which the safety
or security of individuals may depend are frequently subject to certification: a
formal assurance that the system has met relevant technical standards designed
to assure it will not unduly endanger the public. Today, certification of the
dependability of a computer-based system frequently relies at least as heavily
on assessments of the process used to develop it or of the qualifications of
those who produced it, as it does on the system's observable properties. While
these assessments can be useful, few would dispute that direct observation of
the artifact ought to provide a stronger kind of assurance than the credentials
of its production methods or producers could hope to do. Yet the complexity of
software systems, as well as their discrete nature, renders them extremely
difficult to analyze unless great care has been taken with their structure and
maintenance. Indeed, where extremely high assurance of specific functions is
required, simple but inflexible hardware components are sometimes used to limit
the damage that essential, but less predictable, software may
cause.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A committee will be formed through National Research
Council nomination and approval processes to examine challenges in producing
dependable software systems in contexts involving certification. The goal of
this study is to identify the kinds of system properties for which certification
is desired, how that certification is obtained today, and, most important, what
design and development methods, including methods for establishing evidence of
trustworthiness, could lead to future systems structures that are more easily
certified. Where these methods cannot be identified, the study would identify a
research agenda that would lead to their discovery. &lt;br/&gt;