* 0236251
* RUI:  Contribution of Retinal Melatonin to Circulating Melatonin and its Importance in Metamorphosis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Mary Wright, College of Our Lady of the Elms
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 214,275.00

This study will examine the ocular secretion of melatonin and the role of this
melatonin in amphibian metamorphosis. The function of the vertebrate eye is not
restricted to vision. Information about the environmental lighting cycle is
conveyed to the circadian system via the eye and, in many nonmammalian
vertebrates, the retina in the eye contributes melatonin to the circulation.
Little is known about the extent of ocular melatonin secretion in amphibians.
The technique of opthalmectomy will be used to determine the relative
contribution of the eye to blood melatonin at different developmental stages in
anuran tadpoles, as well as the relationships between retinal melatonin, thyroid
hormones, and metamorphosis. This project will also examine light/dark cycle
influences on circulating retinal melatonin, the association between retinal
melatonin secretion and the diel rhythms in circulating melatonin and thyroxine,
and whether a compensatory increase in melatonin production occurs after
unilateral or bilateral opthalmectomy in an effort to maintain blood melatonin
levels. These studies should improve our understanding of the role of melatonin
in development and its relationship to photoperiodic influences on
metamorphosis. The findings of this research might have significance as well to
the study of hormone interactions and the role of melatonin in vertebrates in
general. Moreover, these results may contribute to a better understanding of the
environmental factors that affect declining amphibian populations. This project
will be carried out with undergraduate students, to develop their competence and
experience in research and to upgrade their career aspirations. A postdoctoral
fellow who intends to seek a career in college teaching will also collaborate
for one year to acquire experience in combining teaching and research at the
college level. Thus, the project will contribute substantially to the National
Science Foundation's objective of encouraging the integration of research into
undergraduate programs and to advance discovery while promoting teaching,
training, and learning.