* 0236577
* Ecological and Evolutionary Dynamics of Reproductive Diapause in Drosophila Melanogaster
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Walter Eanes, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2006
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this research is to understand the population dynamics of diapause
(reproductive quiescence) in Drosophila melanogaster. This trait is central to
organismal fitness and population dynamics of insects in seasonal environments,
and has been recently shown to be highly variable in this species. The specific
aims are to examine: 1) how the expression of and ability to diapause influence
other aspects of phenotype such as metabolism and physiology, fitness, and
aging; and 2) the genetic architecture of diapause, including potential
identification of those genes responsible for the observed variation in diapause
expression. This research would involve experimentation in the field and
laboratory as well as detailed molecular and genetic analyses.

Diapause in D. melanogaster is an excellent system for investigating how
organisms adapt to environmental variation. Diapause has wide-ranging effects on
other traits including aging, and this research would contribute to the
identification of pathways regulating lifespan. Many agricultural pests
diapause, and information from a model organism could be directly applied and
provide insights into means for population control of pest insects. In addition,
these investigations have bearing on understanding evolution in novel
environments, evolutionary response to climate change, and lipid-mediated life
history tradeoffs in other organisms.

