* 0236959
* Single Cell C4 Photosynthesis:  Control of Cell Organization and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Gerald Edwards, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 456,180.00

Green plants, and therefore, ultimately, all other higher forms of life, depend
on organic carbon derived from CO2 by a light driven process referred to as
photosynthesis. Most plants fix CO2 directly by the enzyme Rubisco, generating a
3 carbon compound, and are called C3 plants. C3 plants show high rates of
photorespiration, a counter-productive process, due to the oxygenase activity of
Rubisco. Some terrestrial plants have evolved a CO2 concentrating mechanism
(CCM) through a 4 carbon pathway; thus called C4 plants, which increases the
level of CO2 at the site of Rubisco, depressing the oxygenase activity. Kranz
anatomy became recognized as a paradigm and major distinguishing feature of
terrestrial plants with C4 photosynthesis, and consists of two biochemically and
anatomically distinct photosynthetic cell types that act coordinately. A dogma
has been established that Kranz anatomy is required for the operation of C4
photosynthesis. This paradigm has now been broken with the discovery that two
different species, Borszczowia aralocaspica and Bienertia cycloptera, that
perform C4 photosynthesis in a single photosynthetic cell, i.e. without Kranz
anatomy. These species exhibit independent, novel solutions for the function of
the C4 mechanism within a single cell through spatial compartmentation of
organelles and photosynthetic enzymes. The intellectual merit of studying these
cells is that they provide the most exquisite model systems with which to probe
regulation of complex structural and functional polarity in a single cell and
will break new ground in our understanding of cellular organization and
photosynthetic carbon assimilation. The proposed work will characterize the
mechanisms that make it possible to achieve C4 photosynthesis in a single cell,
which until the recent discovery of these two species was thought to be
impossible in terrestrial plants. &lt;br/&gt;A combination of cell biology,
biochemical and molecular techniques will be employed to probe the foundations
of development of the single-celled C4 syndrome and the parameters of cellular
organization that make this possible. The information gained will lead to a
greater understanding, and new models, of generation of plant cellular
organization and biochemical polarity. The proposed work will also give us new
insight into requirements for an operational C4 photosynthetic mechanism. This
information will be important to designing strategies to engineer C4-type carbon
fixation into C3 crop species, which has the potential to increase crop
productivity. In addition, these studies will force a re-evaluation of evolution
of the C4 syndrome in plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;