* 0236977
* SGER:   Nanoscale Investigation of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Jeffrey Schweitzer, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 09/30/2003
* USD 80,931.00

Nanoscale Investigation of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction
Analysis &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis (NRRA) has
been applied for the first time &lt;br/&gt;to study cement hydration. Through
the use of this technique, the change in hydrogen concentration on a few
nanometer scale (corresponding to a few unit cells) can be studied as a function
of time during the induction period. Preliminary results have demonstrated that
the surface layer formed during the induction period on the tricalcium silicate
grains (used in this initial study) is consistent with a tobermorite-like
material, based on the absolute value of the observed hydrogen concentration and
the measured thickness of the surface layer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Optimum
beam energy resolution is a critical parameter as the spatial resolution of the
measurement is defined largely by the energy resolution of the incident ion
beam. Therefore, the Dynamitron Tandem accelerator at the Ruhr Universitat,
Bochum, Germany is being used for the experimental studies as this machine has
had extensive work done over the last fifteen years to generate the best
possible energy resolution for ion beams. The hydrogen concentration is obtained
over a depth of a few nanometers at the surface of the grains and can be
measured continuously to a depth of about 2 microns into the grains. An initial
study of the hydration process of tricalcium silicate at 20 oC determined an
induction time of 4.25 hours with a statistical precision of 0.07 hours.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support a detailed investigation of
cement hydration by &lt;br/&gt;applying the NRRA technique. A series of
experiments will investigate the effect of &lt;br/&gt;different parameters on
the hydration process. The analysis of the experimental data will provide clear
insights into the way different parameters, such as temperature, pH, and
starting composition, affect the hydration process. This information will
ultimately be used to improve the formulation of cements for construction and
other purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;