* 0236694
* SGER:  Soft Computing-Based Life-Cycle Cost Analysis of Transportation Infrastructure Investments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Gerardo Flintsch, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2004
* USD 57,804.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) focuses on the use
soft computing for developing practical economic analysis tools to support
transportation infrastructure asset management. The specific objectives of the
research are to: (1) develop an overall framework for the incorporation of soft
computing techniques in the life-cycle cost analysis of infrastructure assets,
(2) formulate a prototype hybrid soft computing algorithm for life-cycle cost
analysis, and (3) compare the algorithm against traditional life-cycle cost
analysis tools using simple examples to assess its practical potential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main concerns surrounding life-cycle cost
analysis (LCCA) is the treatment of the uncertainty and subjectivity in the
physical and economic aspects considered in the engineering economic analysis.
This has been addressed extensively in the literature using probabilistic
approaches. However, since some of the uncertainty is of an ambiguous nature,
soft computing applications are theoretically more appropriate than the
probabilistic methods. Soft computing provides a formal approach for the
treatment of both random and ambiguous uncertainty and thus is expected to yield
more robust, reliable, and stable results. Furthermore, a soft computing-based
LCCA system could facilitate the incorporation of non-monetary factors, which
require subjective assessments, into the analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life-
cycle cost analysis tools modified to treat ambiguity are expected to increase
the efficiency of the infrastructure management process. Although the work will
concentrate on a specific transportation infrastructure asset, pavements, the
research should have a broader impact due to the generalizability of the methods
and algorithms to other types of infrastructure assets and related areas. The
knowledge acquired through the use of these tools will help agencies understand
the technical and economical implications of infrastructure management decisions
and the importance of efficiently managing and renewing the existing
infrastructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;