* 0236317
* High-Resolution Crystallographic Studies Using Synchrotron Radiation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Philip Coppens, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Daniel Rabinovich
* 02/28/2009
* USD 950,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division supports Professor Philip Coppens, Chemistry Department,
State University of New York at Buffalo, for high-resolution crystallographic
studies using synchrotron radiation. The geometry of light-induced metastable
states and highly reactive transient species will be probed using both steady-
state and time-resolved crystallography. The work will contribute to the
understanding of the nature of photoinduced molecular excited states and to
elucidating geometry changes that occur during electron transfer in transition
metal complexes. A second component of the research is the experimental mapping
of charge density distribution in solids and the interpretation of these data in
terms of chemical bonding within and between molecules. The high-brightness of
the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory will be combined with
area detectors to allow rapid X-ray data collection on small crystallites of
dimensions of 50 micron and less. Very low-temperature single crystal techniques
are to be applied for data collection in each stage of the project. The
experimental work is to be complemented by extensive theoretical calculations on
both molecules and solids, using supercomputer facilities available to the
project, and by spectroscopic measurement of the absorption and emission spectra
of the systems under investigation.

X-ray diffraction is well-known as the sine qua non of structure-determining
tools, capable of measuring extremely small changes in molecular geometry.
However, this technique only measures stable structures. This work exploits
innovations that allow x-ray crystallography to determine structural changes in
molecules that occur on fast timescales. Knowledge that is gained about the
interaction of radiation with matter in the solid state will underpin future
applications in materials science and technology. This work involves much
collaboration and provides a unique training ground for young scientists. An
international collaboration with the Slovak University of Technology will
benefit the efforts of both countries to advance research in this area. To aid
in the utilization of the techniques used in this study, software will be
developed and made available to the wider scientific community.