* 0236952
* The Comparative Grammar of Intensional Transitive Verbs
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Richard Larson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2009
* USD 104,410.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Richard K. Larson will conduct
three years of research on the behavior and interpretation of so-called
"intensional transitive verbs" (ITVs), a construction type that addresses the
relation between syntax and semantics. Certain semantic phenomena (e.g.,
intensionality) are known to correlate in English and related languages with
certain syntactic structures (e.g., clausal complements). ITVs challenge this
correlation. This research concerns the hypothesis that the correlation does in
fact hold and that ITVs represent (in effect) a disguised variant of the
expected grammatical pattern. The "disguising effect" is conjectured to arise
from two processes found in natural languages: phonetically null elements and
clause reduction. If this conjecture is correct, careful comparison of languages
in which the principles governing null elements and restructuring are known to
vary should reveal the disguise of ITVs, or else provide evidence that the basic
hypothesis is incorrect. Data on ITVs will be collected from a wide range of
languages, including Chinese, Hungarian, Japanese, Korean, Slovenian, Russian,
and a number of native languages of North America. The PI will work with native-
speaker graduate students, who directly control the target languages, and/or
with professional linguists who have studied them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will bear not only on linguistic theory, but also on
broader issues in the relation between language and thought. A basic question is
how far languages may vary in the ways that they express the same thoughts or
concepts. Are the same ideas necessarily encoded in the same forms (once
disguising effects are stripped away)? Or can there be true variation? This
study will investigate the question of what variation is possible in the
expression of intensional concepts, and so contribute to this wider set of
questions.&lt;br/&gt;