* 0236070
* Environmental Variation, Dormancy, and Rare Plant Persistence in Invaded Habitats
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2003,10/31/2003
* Kathryn McEachern, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2003
* USD 74,303.00

Growing concerns over the persistence of threatened and endangered species have
rekindled interest in one of the classic problems in ecology: how do rare
species persist? Without large populations distributed across heterogeneous
environments, rare species are traditionally regarded as susceptible to
extinction from environmental variability. By contrast, numerous coexistence
models suggest that for species with dormancy, environmental fluctuations may be
essential for persistence in competitive communities. Variable germination and
dormancy allow species to exploit temporal variation to avoid both unfavorable
environments and intense competition. Despite acceptance among community
ecologists that environmental fluctuations may favor coexistence via these
"storage effect" mechanisms, their implications for understanding how rare
plants persist are only beginning to be explored. Better understanding how
dormancy, surrounding community dynamics, and environmental variation influence
persistence is essential to successfully managing threatened populations. This
proposal outlines research to examine how rare annual plants persist in the
highly variable, exotic grass dominated habitats of the California Channel
Islands. With tenfold annual variation in rainfall, and over 15 rare and
endangered annual plants, the island system provides a unique opportunity to
examine how germination biology, environmental variation, and surrounding
community dynamics influence persistence. The research team brings together a
theoretical ecologist specializing in annual plant population models, a field
ecologist with experience studying biological invasions in California herbaceous
systems, and a conservation practitioner working in the Channel Islands National
Park. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is that it will clarify
how dormancy, environmental variation and surrounding community dynamics
influence the persistence of rare annual plants. This is particularly important
considering the increased environmental variation forecasted with climate
change, and the continuing invasion of exotic species. The broader implications
include the training of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students to
work at the interface of models and experiments, and the generation of data
necessary for successfully managing the rare annual plants of the Channel
Islands. Through collaborations with the National Park Service and Nature
Conservancy, the results of this project will be communicated to the general
public and those directly responsible for managing the unique island flora.