* 0236675
* Collaborative Research: Impact of stochastic soil moisture dynamics on vegetation water stress and nutrient cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Ignacio Rodriguez-Iturbe, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2005
* USD 34,918.00

0236675&lt;br/&gt;Rodriquez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In arid and semiarid ecosystems
there is a strong dependence of the rates of evapotranspiration, photosynthesis,
and net carbon assimilation on the soil water content. Conditions of limited
soil water availability lead vegetation into a state of water stress, which, if
prolonged, is responsible for loss of turgidity, wilting and death of plants.
Soil water content also affects nitrogen cycling, due to the direct or indirect
dependence of the processes of decomposition, mineralization, nitrification,
denitrification, root uptake, and leaching on the soil moisture conditions. The
quantity of available nitrogen in the root zone in turn affects vegetation
processes. Thus, through the soil water balance, the hydrological cycle exerts a
significant control on terrestrial ecosystems, in particular in arid and
semiarid environments, where the rates of evapotranspiration, nutrient
mineralization and nutrient uptake are strongly limited by soil water
availability. Even though many physiological and biogeochemical mechanisms
relating water stress and the nitrogen cycle to soil moisture conditions are
understood, a quantitative process-based framework for the analysis and
prediction of how hydrologic processes may impact terrestrial ecosystems is
still lacking. This type of framework is crucial to the enhancement of the
understanding of the effect of climate variability on terrestrial plant
communities and ecosystems. Through a stochastic mechanistic model of the soil
water balance at the daily time scale we have related hydrologic processes
(including evapotranspiration and the intermittent stochastic character of
precipitation) to soil water content and expressed this dependence as a function
of the characteristics of climate, soil, and vegetation. For this project, we
plan to use this framework to investigate the impact of hydrologic conditions on
the soil nitrogen budget. In particular we will: Review data on the nitrogen and
carbon cycles in arid and semiarid ecosystems and at a short (daily-to-weekly)
time scale and identify possible (and sensible) simplifications of the plant-
nutrient relationships. Develop a conceptual framework for the modeling of the
fluctuations in soil nitrogen content driven by soil moisture (and temperature)
dynamics. This framework will be based on mechanistic biophysical models, on a
process-based analysis of the nitrogen cycle, and on a stochastic soil water
balance.&lt;br/&gt;The model will be used to analyze the impact of seasonal and
interannual fluctuations in precipitation on the nitrogen budget of arid and
semiarid ecosystems. The development of this framework will indicate the type of
data that is needed in the testing and validation of high-resolution
biogeochemical models in arid and semi-arid ecosystems. Some data will be
collected at a local field site (Blandy Experiment Farm owned and operated by
the University of Virginia). However, the collection of more extensive (and more
appropriate) data will not be funded by this project but will be part of future
research which we wish to propose to NSF at the end of this ex&lt;br/&gt;