* 0236341
* International Conference on University Collections of Historic Scientific Instruments
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Richard Kremer, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,024.00

The study of historic scientific instruments is one of the fastest growing areas
in the history of science. Researchers increasingly are turning to the material
culture of the laboratory as a way of investigating the practice of science; the
general public is drawn to historic artifacts as a tangible, concrete way of
connecting to our scientific heritage. Until recently, much of the historic
apparatus accessible to scholars and the public could be found only in large
national collections, such as the Smithsonian in Washington, D.C., the Deutsches
Museum in Munich, or the Science Museum in London. Yet in literally dozens of
universities and colleges across the globe, smaller but equally valuable
collections of historic scientific instruments can be found, often located near
the laboratory spaces and archival documents where they originally had been
used. This proposal seeks support for an international conference to uncover and
strengthen these university collections, and to make them more visible to both
scholars and local public audiences. "Mundi Subterranei: Scientific Instrument
Collections in the University" will be held at Dartmouth College in Hanover, NH,
from 24-27 June 2004. The conference will bring together about 100 persons--
curators, scientists, historians, librarians and archivists--who in widely
varying ways are currently caring for university collections of historic
scientific apparatus. Co-sponsored by Dartmouth College and the Scientific
Instrument Commission of the International Union of the History and Philosophy
of Science, the conference will address four issues. First, panels will discuss
practical problems of collection management, creating collection mandates,
organizing and cataloguing collections, storing and handling apparatus, etc.
Second, scholarly papers on collections, individual instruments, makers, and
laboratory practices will be presented. Third, we will discuss ways to make
collections more accessible for teaching and research, both locally and beyond.
Finally, the conference will introduce collection managers to an international
registry of historic scientific instruments now being developed by the
Scientific Instrument Commission (www.isin.org). A concurrent exhibit of
instruments from the Dartmouth Collection will illustrate many of these issues.
University instrument collections offer rich, yet underused resources for
increasing and diffusing knowledge about our scientific past. The Dartmouth
conference will be a pioneering effort to strengthen this infrastructure by
enhancing links, both nationally and internationally, among these collections.