* 0236933
* Migration and Environmental Change: tenure insecurity in a Zambian frontier
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Jon Unruh, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 204,500.00

Migration in the developing world is an important force in environmental change.
Migrants interact with other migrants and with local communities over access to
resources - in particular the land resources needed for food security. Rights in
land (land tenure) play a primary role in affecting how migrants interact with
destination resources and communities, and the resulting environmental
consequences. This research examines the links between deforestation and
migration in Zambia, and focuses on the tenure arrangements that facilitate land
access. With one of the highest deforestation rates in the world and significant
migration underway, Zambia provides a representative case where migration in
Southern province is tied to environmental degradation. The research will
examine how land tenure systems in host communities may lead migrants to clear
areas of forest much larger than needed for immediate farming needs.
&lt;br/&gt;The researchers, an anthropologist and a geographer, will collaborate
with Zambian colleagues to conduct ethnographic research, and integrate the data
with satellite imagery (time series) analysis in order to measure deforestation
rates, and will compare deforestation rates between migrant and non-migrant
areas. During seven months of intensive fieldwork in Zambia, the researchers
will investigate the land tenure rights allocated to migrants by local leaders,
and the perception of this tenure process among migrants, in order to explain:
1) notions of claim among migrants and why they apparently attempt to gain
tenure security through deforestation, and 2) the intersection of claims, land
clearing, and concerns about children's future, given that land tenure systems
(involving land allocation and inheritance) work differently for migrants in the
destination area than they did in the area of origin. Understanding the land
tenure aspects of the migration - deforestation linkage will provide important
knowledge on how migration in the developing world changes the environment, and
to the ongoing development of methodologies that mix remote sensing with 'on the
ground' social science research. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research
include improving our understanding of the policy constraints and opportunities
for managing migration in the developing world. Because all societies have rules
governing property rights, local, national and international policies and
treaties involving migration and development will need to attend to resource
access arrangements that impact food and livelihood security.&lt;br/&gt;