* 0236964
*  CAREER: DNA Elements Involved in Chromatin-Based Gene Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Benjamin Ortiz, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2010
* USD 665,930.00

The theory that the many different cell-types of the body are all derived from
divisions of a single fertilized egg is well described, but poorly explained.
This remarkable transformation is thought to be the result of differential
regulation of the activity of genes constituting an individual's genome. The
result is that each cell-type "expresses" its own array of genes required for
their particular function in the body. Decoding the "rules" that govern when and
where a given gene will be activated or silenced is key to understanding the
basis for organismal development. Linked, non-coding DNA sequences are known to
play a leading role in gene regulation. Innumerable sequences capable of
regulating gene expression have been identified. However, the vast majority of
such sequences do not function well in the natural "packaging environment"
(called chromatin) in which genes normally reside. More recently appreciated is
the emerging role of the regulation of "chromatin states" in determining gene
expression status. However, the connection between regulatory DNA sequences and
the alteration of chromatin states is still unclear. Using highly integrated
research and educational approaches, the proposed research project will
investigate novel DNA sequences that appear to regulate gene expression via the
alteration of chromatin structure. Therefore, this work will help bridge the gap
in the understanding of how chromatin is involved in gene regulation. This will
help bring the field closer to a more complete understanding of the development
of complex organisms, such as ourselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;