* 0236627
* Visual Performance and the Optical Control of Stance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Thomas Stoffregen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* ping li
* 07/31/2007
* USD 299,922.00

People never stand still. Even the most rigid stance includes sways of one to
two inches slowly and subtly back and forth. Movement is necessary for balance.
Balance can be a critical issue for elderly persons and patients with brain
damage. A fall for an elderly person can be catastrophic leading to a broken hip
and lengthy hospitalization. Balance is commonly believed to originate in the
inner ear. However, think of the feelings that can be induced visually in an
Imax theater-vision also plays an important role. So, how do we do things
standing up such as read or use tools? How do postural and non-postural
activities relate to each other? For instance, do they compete do balance and
reading interfere with one another? Or does posture adjust to reading such as
reduced sway that makes it easier to see a text. &lt;br/&gt;With NSF support,
Dr. Stoffregen will conduct studies to examine balance. One goal is to determine
the extent to which there is competition or integration of postural motion with
cognitive activities such as reading. Previous studies primarily examined
postural control as an isolated activity, without consideration of cognitive
activity. Another set of studies examines "Imax effects," effects of optic flow.
These studies examine the extent of control of visual motion over balance,
whether the effect is automatic. Dr. Stoffregen creates situations in which
visual motion that affects balance would aid or hinder performance of a visual
cognitive task. The broader impacts of his research may include ways to prevent
life-threatening falls in the elderly and testing techniques for early subtle
signs of brain damage that affect balance. Other broader impacts concern the
visually based experience of self-motion in general, as in the state-of-the-art
flight simulators used in aviation.&lt;br/&gt;