* 0236793
* Building research capacity and increasing doctoral successes for underrepresented minority students at Tennessee State University
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Decatur Rogers, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2005
* USD 779,918.00

The number of successful ventures to increase underrepresented minorities in
STEM-related doctoral programs is low relative to the total number of such
initiatives in the past. In 1992, for example, a top NSF official stated "In the
past 20 years, the NSF has spent billions on increasing the minority S&amp;E
pipeline, but we have little to show for it." Unfortunately, new data suggest
that the situation may actually have worsened. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mindful of
past lessons-learned, the dual goals of this proposal are to (1) develop and
further enhance competitive research capacity and to (2) increase the production
of underrepresented minority doctoral students at Tennessee State University
(TSU), one of the nations 104 Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs). These HBCUs enroll 17% of African American undergraduates and award 26%
of the bachelors degrees to this group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But most of the
fifteen doctoral granting HBCUs need support to enhance research capacity to
make them more competitive for funding from the National Science Foundation and
other entities. For example, of these 15 HBCUs (three private, 12 public), one
is ranked as research extensive (producing 50 or more PhDs per year) and five
are ranked as research intensive including Tennessee State University. The
doctoral programs at the twelve public HBCU are relatively new with average
outputs of one PhD per year, of which 65% are awarded to African Americans. Most
also lag in technology-based research facilities. None is ranked higher than a
distant 177 out of 615 institutions in research expenditures, 124 out of 1610
institutions in research income, and 168 out of 1610 in graduate student
enrollment. Within this scenario, the primary objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To enhance the competitive research capacity in
interdisciplinary STEM areas at TSU, and to&lt;br/&gt;exploit this new
capability to strengthen the embryonic doctoral program under the TSU
College&lt;br/&gt;of Engineering. This objective is strongly leveraged through
links to the TSU CREST program.&lt;br/&gt;2. To significantly increase the
number of input doctoral candidates and output PhDs
among&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority students in diverse STEM disciplines
at TSU.&lt;br/&gt;3. To integrally fuse education, research, and technology in
all STEM classrooms at TSU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting
from the proposed activity.&lt;br/&gt;A major impact (outcome) from this
proposal will be to help actualize the newly-approved TSU doctoral program in
Computer Information and Systems Engineering (CISE), with its first four
students (two African American) now enrolled under the TSU College of
Engineering; this is a major institutional thrust. Another impact will be to
enhance the quantity and quality of research at TSU with a focus on increased
faculty productivity in collaborative, interdisciplinary areas, the fusion of
academics, research and technology in the classroom, and extensive mentoring of
students. At least 36 graduates students will be supported by this project
toward doctoral tracks, which will directly engage 13 faculty researchers. A
broader national impact is to help ameliorate the systemic shortage of minority
scientists and engineers in this country, especially among African Americans
that comprise 84% of the undergraduate student population at
TSU.&lt;br/&gt;Progress toward these outcomes will be assessed and evaluated
during this project, and the results documented for wide dissemination and
replication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovative project will be jointly
managed through the College of Engineering, Technology and Computer Science
(COETSC) and the TSU Center of Excellence Information and Systems Engineering
(TSU-COE-ISEM) with close coordination with the TSU Office of Sponsored Programs
(OSR) to assure synchrony with long-term institutional goals. Notably, the TSU
COE ISEM, a TSU-research arm that works collaboratively with TSU academic
elements, manages the NSF CREST and NASAs Automated Space Science programs,
generates $4.3M in annual research, produces over 40 refereed publications per
year, supports an intensive mentorship program for undergraduate and graduate
students in a wide range of STEM disciplines, and will leverage the project
support for students on doctoral tracks. These resources provide a baseline to
increase capacity in research and academics, and to significantly increase the
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;