* 0237676
* CAREER: Integrated Structural Biology Approach to Building Atomic Models Of Actin Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2009
* Joanna Krueger, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 03/31/2009
* USD 571,028.00

A cell is able to adopt different shapes and carry out coordinated, directed
movements through its cytoskeleton, a dynamic network of actin filaments; these
cellular activities are regulated by interactions between the cytoskeletal actin
and numerous actin-binding proteins including the archetypal actin-binding
protein, gelsolin. This research will probe the molecular interactions between
actin and gelsolin utilizing a novel approach involving small-angle X-ray and
neutron scattering (SANS) experiments. Small-angle scattering is ideal for
studying the shape and conformation of macromolecular complexes (10 to 1000 kDa)
in solution because the scattering is sensitive to internal electron (or in the
case of neutrons, nuclear) density distribution, thus revealing the size and
shape of the scattering molecule. In SANS, the contrast of individual components
within the macromolecular complex can be manipulated systematically. This unique
technique offers the only available method for extracting structural information
on each protein within a composite of interacting proteins under near
physiological conditions. Using molecular boundary information determined from
neutron scattering experiments on gelsolin:actin complexes, well-constrained
structural models of resultant large macromolecular complexes will be built by
integrating all available biophysical information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Next-generation neutron scattering capabilities can provide answers to
important issues in the biological sciences. While the facilities necessary for
conducting these types of experiments exist or are planned, many biological
scientists who might benefit from this research infrastructure have only limited
experience with neutron scattering instrumentation and techniques. This project
details an educational plan to introduce the practical aspects of using neutron
scattering and contrast variation technologies to provide a structural framework
for modeling the detailed interactions of complex biological systems. The
broader impact of this project will be to develop, educate and increase the user
base of national neutron research centers.&lt;br/&gt;