* 0237418
* Completion and Coordination of Databases of Arizona Vascular Plants at ASU, ARIZ, and ASC.
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Leslie Landrum, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 05/31/2008
* USD 470,291.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Arizona State
University (ASU) under the direction of Dr. Leslie Landrum and colleagues Dr.
Peter McCartney (ASU), Dr. Steven McLaughlin of the University of Arizona
(ARIZ), and Dr. Tina Ayers of Northern Arizona University (ASC) for the
"Completion and Coordination of the Databases of Vascular Plants at ASU, ARIZ,
and ASC." Each University has its own herbarium and together, these herbaria
contain about 673,000 vascular plant specimens, of which about 297,000
collectively represent the most extensive collection of Arizona plants. Although
of great scientific importance, these collections have not been easily
accessible to the public or even the scientific community, as they are housed in
three separate cities and cannot be consulted more than one per day. Students,
teachers or scientists living in remote areas of the state may not be able to
visit them at all. Recently, this problem has been partially solved by providing
specimen data (e.g., scientific name, county and locality of collection, date of
collection, elevation, collector and field number, and notes on associated
species and habitat) for the 88,000 specimens (except for rare and endangered
species) in three databases at a single Web site
[http://ces.asu.edu/explora/main.html]. Many names are linked to photographs of
living plants and/or herbarium specimens, so that one may "visit" the herbaria
and even identify plants through the Web. This grant provides funds to complete
the three databases and geo-reference all specimens that lack that information.
Once all the specimens are geo-referenced, one will be able to efficiently make
dot maps of distribution based on the information in all three databases and
prepare checklists of plants for a particular area. The grant also provides for
the imaging of at least one good herbarium specimen of each species that grows
in Arizona; these will be viewable on the Web and may be used in association
with checklists.&lt;br/&gt;Data from about 191,000 specimens will be entered
into the database and about 233,750 specimens will be geo-referenced, both tasks
being done by student hourly workers, assisted and supervised by herbarium staff
(MS and PhD level botanists). A graduate-student worker will refine and trouble-
shoot Web tools for map and checklist production. About 3000 specimens will be
scanned and added to the ASU image library by student and staff workers. The
Center for Environmental Studies at ASU will maintain the Web sites where
information from all three herbaria can be accessed.&lt;br/&gt;Herbaria are
important repositories of information, but in the past have been used only by a
relatively small group of scientists and advanced students. Now, using modern
technology, Arizona herbaria will become easily accessible to the general
public. Students will be able to construct checklists of plants growing within a
few miles of their homes and view images of these on the Web. Scientists will be
able to construct dot-distribution maps of any species growing in Arizona based
on information in the "living" (constantly up-dated) databases at ASU, ARIZ, and
ASC. These maps can then be compared with maps of climate, elevation, and soil
type to find correlations or even to predict where species may grow but have not
been found so far. Because the botany of many parts of Arizona has not been
thoroughly explored, these predictions will help to direct future research on
the fourth-largest state flora in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;