* 0237026
* Collaborative Research:  Linked Databases and Interactive Key for the Vascular Flora of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Nancy Lederer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 67,847.00

A collaborative grant has been awarded to Colorado State University under the
direction&lt;br/&gt;of Dr. Mark Simmons; University of Colorado at Boulder under
the direction of Drs.&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Ranker and Robert Guralnick; University
of Northern Colorado under the&lt;br/&gt;direction of Dr. Neil Snow; and
University of Wyoming under the direction of Dr. Ronald&lt;br/&gt;Hartman to
produce an online distributed database of collections of vascular plants
from&lt;br/&gt;the Southern Rocky Mountain Region (SRMR) and create an online,
interactive&lt;br/&gt;identification key for vascular plants from the SRMR. The
region covered by this project&lt;br/&gt;includes the entire State of Colorado,
nine counties from southern Wyoming, and eight&lt;br/&gt;counties from
northcentral New Mexico. The SRMR as defined here is a
reasonably&lt;br/&gt;coherent ecoregion based on many shared geological and
biological features, such as a&lt;br/&gt;number of mountain chains of Laramide
orogeny, and many vascular plant species are&lt;br/&gt;restricted to this
region. The SRMR is characterized by a rich diversity of
ecosystems,&lt;br/&gt;ranging from semi-arid grasslands to the east, through
montane pine, subalpine&lt;br/&gt;spruce-fir forests, and alpine tundra in the
center, to canyons and mesas in the west.&lt;br/&gt;Unique wetland and riparian
ecosystems exist on the plains, and nutrient-poor streams&lt;br/&gt;and lakes
are frequent in the mountains. This broad range of ecosystems fosters
a&lt;br/&gt;diverse flora, and is reflective of strong topographic forcings and
steep climatic&lt;br/&gt;gradients. In addition to herbarium specimens at the
Colorado State University&lt;br/&gt;Herbarium, the Rocky Mountain Herbarium, the
University of Colorado Herbarium, and&lt;br/&gt;the University of Northern
Colorado Herbarium, the distributed database will
incorporate&lt;br/&gt;specimens from the SRMR that have been databased at other
regional and national&lt;br/&gt;herbaria.&lt;br/&gt;The interactive key will be
produced using Lucid Professional version 2.1, which is&lt;br/&gt;intended
primarily for use online. Each of the approximately 4,000 species treated
in&lt;br/&gt;the key will have associated windows describing its associated
names, distribution,&lt;br/&gt;voucher specimens, and images. For the specimen
database, a Federation of&lt;br/&gt;Databases that communicate with each other
will be created. The Federation of&lt;br/&gt;Databases will be implemented by
following the specifications suggested by the Digital&lt;br/&gt;Generic
Information Retrieval group. Georeferencing is crucial for the production
of&lt;br/&gt;static or dynamic species maps or atlases and for the import of
data into Geographic&lt;br/&gt;Information Systems. All specimens will be
georeferenced as part of this project. Each&lt;br/&gt;step in the process of
creating linked databases and the interactive key will be&lt;br/&gt;documented.
Clear documentation will also be provided for becoming part of the
initial&lt;br/&gt;database federation to future investigators.&lt;br/&gt;The
specimen database established by this project will document and locate
the&lt;br/&gt;vascular plant diversity that currently exists in this region, and
help track the rate and&lt;br/&gt;magnitude of change in biodiversity patterns
caused by urban development over the&lt;br/&gt;next several decades. It will be
useful for discerning areas of high biodiversity,&lt;br/&gt;determining the
point of introduction and the spread of invasive species,
locating&lt;br/&gt;voucher specimens, and as a coverage in geographic-
information-systems applications.&lt;br/&gt;The educational implications of the
proposal will extend the usefulness of this project.&lt;br/&gt;