* 0237854
* Microbial Observatories:  Diversity of Plant-Associated Diazotrophic Bacteria and Their Distributions Within Specific Vegetation Zones Along an Environmental Gradient
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2009
* Charles Lovell, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2009
* USD 768,750.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Charles R. Lovell and Madilyn Fletcher of the
University of South Carolina (USC) to investigate a group of microorganisms
called diazotrophs. These organisms - also called nitrogen-fixing bacteria -
play a unique role in nutrient cycling by capturing nitrogen gas from the
atmosphere and converting it into forms that can be used by other
microorganisms, plants, and animals. Since nitrogen is an essential nutrient for
all living systems, the activity of diazotrophs is fundamental to life on this
planet. Diazotrophs are extremely diverse, and many are associated with the
roots of plants. Most are poorly characterized, while still more remain
undiscovered. In this work, diazotrophs associated with salt marsh plants will
be characterized to determine the relationships between specific types of
diazotrophs, variations in environmental factors, and different host plants. The
diazotrophs will be identified and their nitrogen-fixing activity will be
assessed using modern genetic techniques. Their association with specific types
of plant roots will be determined using molecular probes and advanced microscopy
methods. In this way, it will be possible to identify new diazotrophic
microorganisms, assess the specificity of their relationships with plants, and
determine their abundance and activity over time and space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen,
diazotrophs can enhance the productivity of both natural and agricultural
systems. The factors that control nitrogen availability and the productivity of
salt marsh systems have important implications for a range of restoration and
conservation efforts. Moreover, an understanding of diazotroph-plant
relationships and the discovery of new diazotrophs may have applications to
agricultural and crop systems, which depend on nitrogen levels in soils. This
project will have a direct impact on student training through providing graduate
student internships and interfacing with the National Estuarine Research Reserve
based at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory (BMFL). The project will also
enhance research facilities and training activities at the BMFL and USC, which
are located in an EPSCoR state.&lt;br/&gt;