* 0237381
* CAREER: Improving Information Access by Learning from User Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Thorsten Joachims, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The project takes a machine learning approach to improving the effectiveness of
information access tools, in particular the retrieval quality of search engines.
The ability to learn enables a search engine to automatically adapt its
retrieval strategy to individual users, to specific user groups, and to
particular WWW sites. A search engine should learn, for example, that a query
for ``Michael Jordan'' issued from a user at cs.cornell.edu is much more likely
to refer to the professor at UC Berkeley than for an average user. Similarly, a
search engine should be able to adapt to collection properties, for example,
that in a particular intranet not the TITLE field, but the H1 headlines contain
the most important information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since explicit user
feedback is rarely available, implicit feedback derived from observable user
behavior is used as the input to the learning algorithms. Such implicit feedback
requires new machine learning methods, since it comes in forms that are
different from the standard machine learning settings. For examples, in search
engines it is more reasonable to exploit clickthrough data as feedback in the
form of pair-wise preferences (e.g. ``for query Q, document A should be ranked
higher than document B'') than as an absolute relevance feedback. The project
analyzes the reliability of implicit clickthrough data, designs and analyzes
learning methods, and evaluates their applicability on an educational database,
providing a service to the scientific community. Beyond this direct
contribution, this technology can be used to improve the performance of general
purpose search engines such as Google and hence has broader impacts beyond the
scientific community. Information on this project is available on the web
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/People/tj/career. The resulting software will be made
available for download.&lt;br/&gt;