* 0237820
* Building Measures of Ideology and Democratic Performance in Western Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Heemin Kim, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/2004
* USD 52,593.00

In established democracies, the process by which citizen preferences are
translated into government policy is supposed to follow a similar pattern.
Citizens express their preferences in elections. This expression of preferences
determines the composition of the parliament and the government. The government
makes policy decisions. Voters react to the policies and their implementation by
expressing &lt;br/&gt;their preferences through votes, and the cycle continues.
At each stage of this process, different types of political institutions, such
as electoral systems, regime types, the modes of coalition bargaining, and the
modes of public policy making, work either to reinforce or to distort the
preferences or ideological orientations in the previous stage. When good
indicators of public opinion, parliament ideology, government ideology, and
government policy are available, the democratic performance of political
&lt;br/&gt;systems can be measured by the congruence between citizen's policy
preferences and government policies. &lt;br/&gt;Many scholars have attempted to
assess democratic performance under different political institutions. Their work
has left room for improvement, however, since the measures of ideology they
employed were available only for a limited number of countries and/or time
periods. Further, determining the democratic performance of political
institutions necessarily entails cross-national comparisons (since different
countries have different institutions) and cross-time comparisons (since
countries may adopt new institutions). It is questionable whether the measures
employed by previous studies allow meaningful cross-national and cross-time
comparisons. &lt;br/&gt;In this investigation, the researchers assess democratic
performance of 25 Western democracies measures of ideology that allow valid
cross-national and cross-time comparisons and that are consistently available
for more countries and/or longer time periods than the existing measures. They
start by utilizing a continuous measure of party ideology for 25 Western
democracies developed earlier and based on party manifestos data compiled by the
Manifesto Research Group. The researchers have already created a yearly series
of voter ideology scores for these countries by combining election results with
the corresponding measures of party ideology. They have also built a continuous
measure of government ideology for 17 countries by taking a weighted average of
party ideology scores, where the weights are the proportion &lt;br/&gt;of total
cabinet portfolios held by each party. They continue this research program by
collecting data for the number of parliamentary seats for each party in each
country in the sample, for the postwar period through the late 90's. This allows
the investigators to build a continuous measure of parliament ideology for
Western democracies by taking a weighted average of party ideology scores, where
the weights are the proportion of total parliamentary seats held by each party.
They also complete their measure of government ideology by collecting cabinet
portfolio data for eight countries for which government ideology scores have not
yet been calculated. &lt;br/&gt;The data set will advance the broader research
goal -- uncovering the impacts of different political institutions on democratic
performance by utilizing measures of ideology and widely available data on
policy outcomes and institutional features in Western democracies. This research
adds to the existing knowledge about the political institutions that best
translate people's preferences into government policy: for example, large or
small electoral districts, proportional representation or single-member
plurality electoral rules, direct or indirect elections (such as electoral
college system), unicameral or bicameral legislatures, parliamentary or
presidential systems, unitary or federal systems, etc. These data will be
valuable to political scientists and policy makers alike. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;