* 0237305
* "Functional Genomics of Obligate Symbionts"
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Serap Aksoy, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2004
* USD 129,119.00

Many insects with a single food source throughout their developmental cycle rely
on beneficial microbes for essential nutrients absent in their restricted diet.
These microbes represent maternally transmitted associations that have coevolved
with their respective hosts for millions of years. The associations are so
intimate that the bacteria have undergone massive genome reductions and have
lost the ability to survive outside their host. Likewise, hosts become sterile
in the absence of these obligate symbionts. Comparative analysis of the genome
of these obligate microbes with their pathogenic relatives can provide important
information on the mechanisms of genome reduction and on the evolution of
different forms of symbiosis. Tsetse flies, the sole vectors of African
trypanosomes, rely on one such obligate symbiont, Wigglesworthia glossinidia for
nutritional provisioning. The genome sequence of Wigglesworthia has recently
been completed and found to be 697,724 bp in size. Genes for the biosynthesis of
various vitamin metabolites, apparently essential for host functions, have been
retained. While this small genome displays many of the features associated with
obligate intracellular organisms, it also bears the hallmarks of parasitic and
free living microbes such as the ability to synthesize a cell wall and complete
flagellum. This project will identify Wigglesworthia genes whose expressions are
regulated by changes in the tsetse host traits including sex, diet and
physiology. It will also investigate genes that may be important in the
transmission of this symbiont to host intrauterine larva. This information will
elucidate the functional significance of the symbiosis. Furthermore, given the
pivotal role of Wigglesworthia in tsetse fecundity, the study may also reveal
targets that can result in novel tsetse control strategies.&lt;br/&gt;For this
study, we propose to identify Wigglesworthia genes whose expression
is&lt;br/&gt;regulated by changes in the tsetse host TMs sex, diet and
physiology. Furthermore, we intend to&lt;br/&gt;explore the potential
associations between tsetse, Wigglesworthia, and the
trypanosome&lt;br/&gt;parasites, and investigate the functional presence of a
complete flagella by the intracellular&lt;br/&gt;Wigglesworthia and its possible
significance in symbiont transmission to tsetse progeny. From&lt;br/&gt;an
applied perspective for vector control, genes important in the Wigglesworthia
transmission&lt;br/&gt;process are excellent target candidates to reduce tsetse
viability. Alternatively, these symbiotic&lt;br/&gt;organisms, which naturally
live in close proximity to trypanosomes, can potentially be used
in&lt;br/&gt;therapeutic approaches to disrupt parasite transmission. These
results have the potential to form&lt;br/&gt;the basis for future studies where
we will begin to either block symbiont expression or interfere&lt;br/&gt;with
their functions in vivo in efforts to reduce tsetse populations. The funds
requested here will&lt;br/&gt;provide education and research training to two
female doctorate students and projects for Yale&lt;br/&gt;University
Epidemiology and Public Health Masters candidates.