* 0237860
* CAREER:  Functional Nanoscale Architectures by Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Colin Nuckolls, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

The project entitled CAREER: Functional Nanoscale Architectures by Self-Assembly
aims to educate students in chemical approaches to nanoscience through an
integration of educational and research objectives. The thrust of the research
is to design new types of monodisperse oligomers of overcrowded aromatics that
can fold themselves into well-defined conformations. The synthesis of these
multimers will be expanded to create monodisperse oligomers 8 to 20 subunits
long. Due to their unique structure these oligomers could provide new motifs for
self-assembly in lipid bilayers and in bulk. These oligomers will be
investigated as one dimensional semiconductors and nanoscale piezoelectric
elements. Integrated within the research plan, is begin to modernize the
chemistry curriculum to have the chemical elements of nanotechnology. Proposed
is an advanced organic chemistry lab for junior level undergraduates that would
use organic synthesis and self-assembly as a tool to teach the concepts of
polymer structure/function relationships, self-assembly/surface patterning, and
liquid crystallinity. Some of the web-based, multimedia modules and nanoscience
laboratories created for undergraduate education will be used to reach
underrepresented groups in New York area high schools.

This project will educate future scientists and engineers through a chemistry
program that integrates both educational and research objectives. The
educational objectives will create web-based, multimedia modules and laboratory
experiments to begin the modernization and revitalization of the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum. Some of the elements used in the undergraduate curriculum
reform will be used to reach underrepresented groups in New York area high
schools. The research objectives in this proposal will train graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research that designs,
synthesizes, and studies new molecules that self-organize into novel structures.
These unique oligomers could act as nanoscale wires, switches, and devices for
energy conversion. This proposal is co-funded by the Division of Materials
Research and the Chemistry Division.



