* 0237946
* CAREER: Application of Fluorescence-Based Tools in Research and Educational Domains - Illuminating Local Ca2+ Signals in Cells and DNA-Based Methods in Local Schools
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Jonathan Marchant, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 06/30/2008
* USD 613,710.00

&lt;br/&gt;A CAREER development grant has been awarded to Dr. Jonathan S.
Marchant of the University of Minnesota to define the regulatory properties of
the inositol trisphosphate receptor. The inositol trisphosphate receptor is an
intracellular protein that controls many events in cellular physiology by
regulating the calcium concentration within the cytoplasm. However, excessive
increases in cytoplasmic calcium are toxic to cells, and dysregulation of
inositol trisphosphate receptor function is implicated in many serious
abnormalities. Dr. Marchant's approach will involve the application of
fluorescent-based methods in the model organism Xenopus tropicalis to define the
behavior of inositol trisphosphate receptors in their native environment. Such
an approach will best provide insight into how these proteins function within
cells in vivo, compared to a less physiological in vitro test-tube environment.
The results from these studies will improve our understanding of how cells
respond - appropriately or inappropriately - to the plethora of drugs, hormones
and neurotransmitters that act through this intracellular signal transduction
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of these research activities
will be realized by translating the fluorescence-based methods routinely applied
in Dr. Marchant's laboratory into the educational domain as an outreach training
program to High School teachers. This outreach program will comprise teacher
training 'refresher' courses supported by practical modules designed for High
School use that illustrate the application of fluorescence-based methods in
molecular, cellular and genomic research. Given the pace of the molecular
genetic revolution, the issue of retraining teachers with a capacity to instruct
students about the societal impact of emerging technologies is a key challenge
for educational organizations and government alike. This project will address
this need through a combination of face-to-face training activities,
distribution of practical resources and a long-term internet based 'bulletin-
board' interface for remote support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;