* 0237878
* CAREER:  Photorealistic 3-D Modeling of Large-Scale Scenes:  Integration of 3-D Range and 2-D Intensity Sensing in a Complete System
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Ioannis Stamos, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 01/31/2009
* USD 427,047.00

The goal of this project is the automated reconstruction of highly accurate
photorealistic descriptions of large-scale 3D scenes with a minimum of human
interaction and increased computational efficiency. Recent developments in
laser-range sensing technology make possible the acquisition of accurate 3D
scans of large-scale scenes. Dense and complex 3D range data-sets along with
high resolution color imagery (ground and aerial-based) will be utilized.
Research will be carried in the areas of range segmentation (in order to handle
the geometric complexity), automatic registration between range and 2D images,
3D modeling, fusion of aerial photography, and visualization. The proposed
research is going to directly affect applications in the areas of urban
planning, urban design, disaster prevention, electronic journalism,
architecture, archeology, historical preservation, and entertainment. The novel
solutions that will be developed will have a direct effect on the educational
agenda of the PI and on his outreach activities. The cross-fertilization between
Computer Science, Geography, and Film and Media departments is another priority.
Finally, collaboration with institutions such as museums, and with companies
concentrated on 3D site modeling and site construction is an essential step for
forwarding this research out of the academic environment.