* 0237013
* Systematics of Fishes of Subfamily Lctiobinae (Teleostomi: Catostomidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2008
* USD 457,264.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEB-0237013&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
grant has been awarded to Drs. Henry Bart, David Hurley, and Royal Suttkus at
Tulane University to study the taxonomy and evolutionary relationships of fishes
in Subfamily Ictiobinae (buffalofishes and carpsuckers). As presently defined,
the subfamily includes seven or eight living species, distributed throughout
eastern North America and Mexico. However, there are problems with the current
taxonomy. Most modern workers consider the group to be much more diverse than
presently recognized. Ictiobines are an important component of large river
ecosystems. They play an important role straining small invertebrates from
bottom sediments and converting these organisms to fish biomass. Ictiobines
(especially buffalofishes, genus Ictiobus) are also important food fishes for
humans in many parts of their range. Historically, they were the dominant group
of fishes in large rivers of eastern North America in terms of overall biomass.
However, their numbers have been declining in recent years due to pollution,
extensive modification of the large rivers they inhabit, and the success of
ecologically similar, exotic carps. Human modification of large river habitats
may be contributing to a problem of hybridization where closely related species
occur together. It will be difficult to address conservation needs of ictiobines
without a good understanding of natural diversity in the subfamily and the
impact of hybridization on this diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators on this grant will examine morphological and genetic variation
within currently recognized ictiobine species. They will formally describe any
newly discovered species, and will provide characters and taxonomic keys to aid
others with species identification. They will sequence portions of the
mitochondrial and nuclear genomes of ictiobines to assess degrees of genetic
divergence, extent and impact of interspecific hybridization, and phylogenetic
relationships among species. Lastly, they will use the phylogenies to examine
morphological evolution and speciation patterns within the group. The project
combines the talents of a senior fish taxonomist with extensive experience in
traditional methods of taxonomic revision, a more junior taxonomist/systematist
familiar with modern systematic methods and data analysis, and a molecular
biologist experienced with the vast array of molecular techniques, including
molecular systematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;