* 0237511
* Rehousing the Molluscan Collections at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Gary Rosenberg, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2006
* USD 465,340.00

A grant has been awarded to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
under the direction of Dr. G. Rosenberg to rehouse the mollusk collection, which
are the oldest and second largest in the United States. Mollusks comprise the
most diverse animal phylum after the arthropods, with more than 100,000 species,
and are abundant in terrestrial, freshwater and marine habitats. Specimens in
the collection document the diversity and distribution of mollusk species
throughout the world and provide direct records of environmental change via
chemicals incorporated in their shells. The collection consists of about 450,000
catalogued lots containing about 8 million specimens, with greatest strength in
shallow-water marine mollusks from the tropical Indo-Pacific and Western
Atlantic and worldwide freshwater and land mollusks, including many species now
threatened, endangered or extinct. The collection contains 12,000 lots of type
specimens from more than 400 researchers. Types are the specimens used in the
naming of species; they serve as standards of comparison for confirming species
identities.&lt;br/&gt; Specimens in the collection are threatened by acid vapors
given off by the wooden interiors of the current storage cabinets. Wood and
other forms of cellulose such as cotton, cardboard, and paper give off acetic
and formic acid. These acids react with the surfaces of the shells, especially
in conditions of high humidity, converting the calcium carbonate matrix to white
crystals of calcium acetate and calcium formate. This destructive process is
called Byne's disease. Byne's disease obscures and obliterates features of the
shells and if left unchecked can completely destroy specimens. Calcium acetate
and calcium formate are hygroscopic, meaning that they absorb moisture from air,
which accelerates the process of the disease. Another threat is glass disease, a
condition that affects the vials in which most of the smaller specimens are
stored. Sodium and potassium oxides in older vials made of soda and potash glass
are also hygroscopic. As the glass absorbs water and carbon dioxide from air,
sodium and potassium carbonates form, both of which are extremely hygroscopic.
The continuing reaction weakens and clouds the glass. The carbonate solution can
cause deterioration of the periostracum, binding proteins within the shell
matrix, and any body remains dried within the shells. Such dried remains are
potentially useful for DNA analysis and need to be preserved.&lt;br/&gt; To
safeguard against Byne's and glass disease, the collection will be rehoused in
modern archival materials. The 243 wooden-interior cabinets will be replaced
with steel cabinets containing aluminum drawers, 320,000 old glass vials with
borosilicate vials, cotton and cork stoppers with polyethylene stoppers, and
390,000 cardboard trays with acid-free equivalents.&lt;br/&gt; The impact of
this work will be to preserve the collection for future research and education.
The collection is used by scientists throughout the world. In the past 10 years,
445 loans totaling 47,000 specimens have been made, and more than 440 scientific
articles have acknowledged use of collection resources. In that same period,
several graduate students and post-doctoral students have received part of their
training working with ANSP's curators of mollusks, and more than 1500 people
have visited the collection, including 358 professional researchers, 88 graduate
students doing thesis research, and more than 1000 members of the general public
who participated in behind-the-scenes tours. Specimens are also exhibited on the
floor of the museum and are loaned to local schools for teaching.&lt;br/&gt;