* 0237400
* In-Situ TEM and SEM Studies of Fundamental Deformation and Failure Processes of Nano-Grained FCC Metals Using MEMS Stages
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2008
* USD 406,000.00

This grant is on a study of the mechanical properties of nano-grained Cu, Al and
Ni using MEMS stages with emphasis on in-situ testing to characterize the
underlying deformation mechanisms that involve dislocation-dominated versus
grain-boundary controlled as small grain sizes are approached. Another objective
is to investigate the failure modes in nano-grained materials since dramatic
changes are expected as the crack tip dimension becomes comparable to the grain
or particle size. Understanding these processes at this length scale are
important if reliable devices and new structural materials are to be constructed
intelligently from these nanoscale building blocks. A major goal of the project
is to use a novel microelectromechanical-based tensile test device that was
designed and fabricated at the University of Illinois to measure the mechanical
properties and to simultaneously observe the operative deformation and fracture
process of two- and three-dimensional nanograin structures. The same device will
be used in both the scanning and transmission electron microscopes, and thus it
will be possible for the first time to directly correlate macroscopic mechanical
properties with deformation and fracture processes in ultra-fine grained
materials as a function of grain size. The aim is to investigate these aspects
in FCC metals such as Cu, Al and Ni. In addition to the experimental studies,
molecular dynamics simulations will be made to predict deformation mechanisms as
grain size is reduced to nanometer size. The model predictions will be
correlated with the experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of
the proposed program will provide the foundation for developing new physical-
based models for predicting the mechanical response of structures and devices
containing nanosized grains and particles. The grant involves graduate student
participation along with outreach program that has been in place at the
University of Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;