* 0237702
* CAREER: Wavelet Analysis of Scale Effects on Subsurface Flow and Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Roseanna Neupauer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 09/30/2005
* USD 160,236.00

0237702&lt;br/&gt;Neupauer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial variability of aquifer
properties affects the movement and spread of contaminants in the subsurface.
Since a complete spatial representation of the heterogeneous aquifer properties
cannot be obtained, predictions of solute movement through porous media contain
uncertainty. An understanding of the spatial variability of aquifer properties
and their effects on flow and transport is essential for making reliable
predictions of solute transport, a necessary component of optimal design of
remediation systems, risk assessment, siting of water supply wells, and others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquifer heterogeneity occurs at multiple scales; however,
measurements of aquifer properties are often made at only a limited number of
scales. These measurement scales may not correspond to the scales that control
subsurface flow and transport. In this study, we will analyze dominant scales of
aquifer properties that affect groundwater flow and solute transport and
identify relationships between dominant scales and physical and chemical
heterogeneity of aquifer properties. Continuous wavelet transforms (CWT) will be
used to extract scale information from data sets of the spatial distribution of
aquifer properties and system states (hydraulic head and solute concentration).
The CWT is a tool that extracts local information at multiple scales. The
technique will be developed and tested using synthetic data sets and numerical
simulations. It will subsequently be used with data from laboratory- and field-
scale flow and transport experiments to identify dominant scales of aquifer
properties; the evolution of dominant scales of system states; and the
relationships between dominant scales, the degree of heterogeneity, and the
effects on solute transport. Knowledge of the dominant scales of flow and
transport and the relationship between them and aquifer heterogeneity will
facilitate more targeted sampling for aquifer characterization and improved
predictions of subsurface flow and transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational goals are to teach students to recognize variability and uncertainty
in physical systems and to perform engineering design and analysis that accounts
for this uncertainty; to improve science and engineering education by
emphasizing the practical applications of engineering and science knowledge; and
to encourage women and underrepresented minorities to consider technical fields.
They will be achieved through exposure to realistic, complex data sets for
analysis and design; practical hands-on activities to accompany lectures; and
outreach activities to promote science and engineering fields to
underrepresented minorities and women. &lt;br/&gt;