* 0237053
* Memory and Hippocampus:  Anaylsis of Retrograde Amnesia
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Robert Clark, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2007
* USD 329,336.00

Robert E. Clark, Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal Number: 0237053&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Proposal Title: Memory and Hippocampus: Analysis of Retrograde
Amnesia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A considerable body of work has been directed
toward understanding how a brain structure known as the hippocampus contributes
to memory function. A phenomenon that has been especially important to this
tradition of work is temporally-graded retrograde amnesia (TGRA). TGRA refers to
the finding that information (memories) learned long before the onset of memory
impairment are often spared relative to information learned more recently. For
example, humans who have sustained damage to the hippocampus, have little or no
memory for facts and events that was learned just prior to their brain damage,
but retain memories that were learned well before the damage. Accordingly,
memory that is initially hippocampus-dependent, gradually becomes hippocampus-
independent. A critical question is how hippocampal activity participates in
this process.&lt;br/&gt;These experiments provide a systematic investigation of
when and for how long the hippocampus must be active to support memory. Using
rats, reversible lesions will be used to selectively inactivate the hippocampus
(by infusing a drug that disrupts hippocampal function without damaging the
neurons). Accordingly, the hippocampus can be turned on or off during different
phases of the learning and memory process. That is, reversible lesions will be
applied during different portions of the learning, retention, or retrieval phase
of memory to determine if and when hippocampal activity is important for memory.
These reversible lesions are created and sustained for long periods of time with
implanted osmotic minipumps (devices that can slowly deliver the drugs to the
hippocampus continuously for many days). &lt;br/&gt;These results will provide
important insights into how hippocampal activity following learning contributes
to the establishment of long-term memory. Clarifying this pattern of memory loss
(TGRA) is critical for understanding how memory is organized and stored in the
brain. The proposed activities will provide research training for graduate
students and post-doctoral students in psychology, cognitive science, and
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;