* 0237922
* CAREER:  Teaching Elementary School Science as Argument (TESSA)
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Carla Zembal-Saul, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 02/28/2009
* USD 579,740.00

Renewed emphasis on scientific inquiry in school science has shifted attention
from science as exploration and experiment to science as argument and
explanation (NRC, 1996, p. 113). Increased interest in argumentation in school
science stems from the potential to engage students in authentic scientific
practices, situate knowledge in its original context, help students learn about
science and scientific practices, and engage students reflective, sense-making
activities that support meaningful science leaning. Unfortunately, argumentation
practices in school science are rare, even more so in elementary school that
high school. The reality is that most beginning elementary teachers have not
learned science in this way and are unlikely to have the subject matter and
pedagogical understandings and abilities needed to support children in giving
priority to evidence and argument as part of their science learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Teaching Elementary School Science as
Argument (TESSA) project is investigating the development of an electronic
learning environment designed to support beginning teachers in learning science
content and learning to teach science. These resources include an argument
articulation component (i.e., tools for assisting prospective teachers in
constructing evidence-based arguments as part of their science learning) and a
teaching science as argument component (i.e., tools that explicitly connect
prospective teachers' science learning experiences to the development of
pedagogical knowledge and abilities for teaching science to children in ways
that give priority to evidence and argument). TESSA resources are being
integrated into science courses and science methods courses for prospective
elementary teachers. In these contexts, we are examining how prospective
teachers use the electronic resources and how the resources mediate
participants' development as they learn to teach science as argument. Results of
these design studies will inform the revision of TESSA resources, as well as
modifications to course assignments and activities. In addition, the project is
investigating two aspects of beginning teachers' learning: (a) how beginning
teachers learn science concepts and learn about science as they engage in
constructing evidence-based arguments, and (b) how beginning teachers learn to
give priority to evidence and argument when teaching science to children. The
differences in foci reflect distinctions in teacher knowledge (i.e., subject
matter knowledge versus subject-specific pedagogy). These learning studies track
beginning teachers over time, from a specialized life science course, to a
science methods course that is part of an intensive, field-based, internship
program, and finally into their first years of teaching. Continued research in
this area will contribute to the development of substantial theory about
learning to teach science as argument and how electronic resources support
teacher development. This work is being undertaken with the assistance of
science education graduate students who are receiving training in both science
teacher education and research methods appropriate for studying teacher
learning.&lt;br/&gt;