* 0237997
* CAREER: Network Modeling and Resource Allocations
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Richard La, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 09/30/2009
* USD 421,063.00

The overall goal of the proposed research is to enable a systematic network
provisioning and dimensioning and resource allocation based on accurate traffic
modeling for diverse traffic with a vision of providing end-to-end QoS
guarantees. The proposed work focuses on four major research thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;
1. Development of stochastic and deterministic traffic models for elastic and
real-time traffic : We will first build faithful stochastic traffic models to
study the interaction between transport layer protocols and active queue
management mechanisms for macro-management of a large number of connections. We
will apply limiting theorems to investigate the asymptotic behavior of the
system with a large number of flows and develop scalable macro-scale models. Our
findings will be used to develop accurate and yet scalable nonlinear
deterministic models to investigate the dynamics of a network with multiple
bottlenecks and to predict the expected performance of flows. We will study the
effects that congestion at one part of network has on other parts of network. We
will also design distributed algorithms to enhance the stability (robustness) of
network in case of instability. &lt;br/&gt; 2. Design of pricing schemes for
between end users and service providers and between domains: We will develop
non-cooperative incomplete information game models and study the end users'
behavior, where users are not assumed to be aware of the precise
utilities/actions of other users and/or network state. Based on our findings we
will design a pricing mechanism that will improve the system efficiency and
fairness. We will generalize the models to cases where the selfish users do not
know their own utilities precisely. We will also model the problem of inter-
domain pricing and service level agreements as a non-cooperative game, where
cooperation may emerge as a result of presence of credible threat or incentive.
We will use both pricing and QoS parameters of service level agreements as
design parameters to induce efficiency among domains and design a distributed
algorithm that will ensure convergence to a desired operating point.&lt;br/&gt;
3. Integration of physical and logical network management: We will propose the
integration of physical and logical network management as a means of providing
improved end-to-end QoS. We will formulate the problem of designing a unified
suite of policies for managing the networks as a Multi-time scale Markov
Decision Process (MMDP) problem. This will allow us to break the complex overall
problem of designing integrated policies into several simpler MDP problems
corresponding to different time scales. We will apply the detailed traffic
models we develop for elastic and non-responsive traffic to predict the expected
performance of a variety of applications as a function of network configurations
and adopted policies. This will be used to design our optimal policies for
different time scales, based on selected performance measures such as throughput
of elastic traffic, packet loss rate and delay of real-time traffic, and a cost
associated with reconfiguration of networks in the form of disrupted service for
some flows. &lt;br/&gt; 4. Wireless link scheduling for end-to-end QoS
guarantees: We will extend the optimization problem framework we have proposed
recently for resource allocation over a wireless link for non-real-time flows.
Using this framework as a starting point we will design an opportunistic
wireless scheduling algorithm for real-time and non-real-time applications,
which exploits channel conditions of the users. Our approach will be based on
multi-objective optimization, which will allow us to efficiently trade-off the
performance of one class for that of the other, based on our detailed traffic
models for both elastic and inelastic traffic. We will first develop a method of
translating the multiple objective functions to a scalar objective function,
which allows the designer to achieve Pareto optimality using the simpler scalar
objective function. The existence of such a scalar objective function and a
mapping has been recently proved by Fleischer. The scalar objective function
will then be used to design a wireless link scheduling algorithm that achieves
Pareto optimality. The selection of actual operating point on the Pareto
frontier will be governed by a set of constraints we impose. This technique will
be extended to other resource allocation problems with multi-objective
functions. Based on the proposed wireless link scheduling algorithm and its
performance, we will investigate the issue of wireless network
provisioning.&lt;br/&gt;