* 0237550
* The Cytoskeleton of the Frog Motor Nerve Terminal
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Elizabeth Connor, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 07/31/2007
* USD 371,997.00

For proper functioning of the nervous system, each nerve cell must assemble the
molecular machinery required for the release of its signal, the
neurotransmitter, at the precise location on its target cell where the signal
can be received and a response produced. This precise structural alignment
between the release machinery of nerve terminals and the reception molecules of
their targets presents a challenge not only for its construction and growth but
also for its upkeep and maintenance. The precision of this organization between
nerve cells and targets is beautifully illustrated at the frog neuromuscular
junction where a linear array of release sites in nerve terminals are separated
by distinct nonrelease domains. Using the frog motor nerve terminal, Dr. Connor
laboratory recently discovered that cytoskeletal filaments including F-actin,
are concentrated in nonrelease domains. The goal is to determine the role of the
cytoskeleton and F-actin in fundamental processes of nerve terminals that may
occur in nonrelease domains: the recycling of the neurotransmitter release
machinery and the stabilization of nerve terminals at their targets. Dr.
Connor's group and collaborators at Stanford University, will use electron
microscope tomography to construct a high-resolution three-dimension map of the
cytoskeleton in nonrelease domains of motor nerve terminals. Such a map will be
a valued resource for all researchers, and will allow the structural
interpretation of a range of experiments that address nerve terminal function.
The investigators will also test whether cytoskeletal elements in nonrelease
domains participate in the recapture of the release machinery after stimulation
of nerve terminals. Finally, the experiments will also be conducted to determine
the role of the terminal Schwann cell in organizing the F-actin in nerve
terminals, and how the F-actin distribution in nerve terminals changes in the
process of developing, regrowing, and breaking connections. This project will
also determine the importance of the cytoskeleton in stabilizing nerve terminals
at their targets. These experiments will provide information critical for our
understanding of the functioning and maintenance of contacts between nerve cells
and their targets. In a broader scope, this project will provide both academic
year and summer opportunities for undergraduates to participate in research.
Further, graduate students will be trained during this project and they will
have the opportunity to mentor undergraduates and present their results at
national meetings.