* 0237683
* Structure and Reactivity of Metal and Inorganic Monolayers on Electrode Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Andrew Gewirth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 08/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-
0237683&lt;br/&gt;Gewirth/Illinois&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project,
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the
fundamental study of electrocatalysis and electrode modification. Work carried
out by Professor Gewirth and his colleagues at the University of Illinois-Urbana
Champaign examines structure-reactivity correlations in the electroreduction of
oxygen, peroxide, and nitrate species at underpotential deposition modified
surfaces. A combination of scanning probe microscopy, surface x-ray methods, and
vibrational spectroscopy methods are being used to investigate these systems. In
addition, the structure of novel adsorbed inorganic oxometallate monolayers are
being probed. This work provides fundamental insight into the mechanisms of
electrocatalysis and electrode modification relevant to fuel cell and battery
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Gewirth and his group at the University of
Illinois-Urbana Champaign are examining the structure and reactivity of metal
and inorganic monolayer electrode surfaces. Using a combination of
spectrosocopic and microscopic methods, the structure and reactivity of metal
modified electrodes are examined for a series of small molecule electroreduction
reactions. In addition, the structure of polyoxometallate monolayers is studied.
The results of this work help to develop an understanding of important fuel cell
and energy storage technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;