* 0237240
* Collaborative Research: Linked Databases and an Interactive Key for the Vascular Flora of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mark Simmons, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 171,830.00

A collaborative grant has been awarded to Colorado State University under the
direction of Dr. Mark Simmons; University of Colorado at Boulder under the
direction of Drs. Thomas Ranker and Robert Guralnick; University of Northern
Colorado under the direction of Dr. Neil Snow; and University of Wyoming under
the direction of Dr. Ronald Hartman to produce an online distributed database of
collections of vascular plants from the Southern Rocky Mountain Region (SRMR)
and create an online, interactive identification key for vascular plants from
the SRMR. The region covered by this project includes the entire State of
Colorado, nine counties from southern Wyoming, and eight counties from
northcentral New Mexico. The SRMR as defined here is a reasonably coherent
ecoregion based on many shared geological and biological features, such as a
number of mountain chains of Laramide orogeny, and many vascular plant species
are restricted to this region. The SRMR is characterized by a rich diversity of
ecosystems, ranging from semi-arid grasslands to the east, through montane pine,
subalpine spruce-fir forests, and alpine tundra in the center, to canyons and
mesas in the west. Unique wetland and riparian ecosystems exist on the plains,
and nutrient-poor streams and lakes are frequent in the mountains. This broad
range of ecosystems fosters a diverse flora, and is reflective of strong
topographic forcings and steep climatic gradients. In addition to herbarium
specimens at the Colorado State University Herbarium, the Rocky Mountain
Herbarium, the University of Colorado Herbarium, and the University of Northern
Colorado Herbarium, the distributed database will incorporate specimens from the
SRMR that have been databased at other regional and national herbaria. The
interactive key will be produced using Lucid Professional version 2.1, which is
intended primarily for use online. Each of the approximately 4,000 species
treated in the key will have associated windows describing its associated names,
distribution, voucher specimens, and images. For the specimen database, a
Federation of Databases that communicate with each other will be created. The
Federation of Databases will be implemented by following the specifications
suggested by the Digital Generic Information Retrieval group. Georeferencing is
crucial for the production of static or dynamic species maps or atlases and for
the import of data into Geographic Information Systems. All specimens will be
georeferenced as part of this project. Each step in the process of creating
linked databases and the interactive key will be documented. Clear documentation
will also be provided for becoming part of the initial database federation to
future investigators. The specimen database established by this project will
document and locate the vascular plant diversity that currently exists in this
region, and help track the rate and magnitude of change in biodiversity patterns
caused by urban development over the next several decades. It will be useful for
discerning areas of high biodiversity, determining the point of introduction and
the spread of invasive species, locating voucher specimens, and as a coverage in
geographic-information-systems applications. The educational implications of the
proposal will extend the usefulness of this project. The interactive key will be
of great value at the college level for plant identification and plant
systematics classes. The project will also have an educational outreach
component at the secondary school teaching level based on the production of a
Teaching Key. The Teaching Key will be an interactive key to the 200 most common
vascular plant species in the region.

