* 0237379
* Conference Support: North American Summer School in Logic, Language and Information at Indiana University
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Lawrence Moss, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2004
* USD 17,590.00

The National Science Foundation supports the North American Summer School in
Logic, Language, and Information (NASSLLI), to be held at Indiana University,
June 17-21, 2003. The summer school features 12 courses. The instructors are
prominent junior and senior researchers from the US and Europe. NASSLLI was held
for the first time at Stanford University in 2002; a sister school, the European
Summer School in Logic, Language and Information (ESSLLI) is held annually. The
overall areas of the school are some of the more technically sophisticated areas
of linguistics, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and related fields.
At the same time, the ESSLLI and NASSLLI schools teach applied areas of logic.
In short, they are mainly concerned with cutting edge subjects that are both
technically demanding and in a broad sense applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
target audience for NASSLLI is graduate students, recent PhDs, and established
researchers in the relevant fields. Some of the courses are for beginners, and
others are for more specialized audiences. In most cases, the courses go beyond
standard topics. Usually they concern topics that are only taught at a few
institutions. So the summer school experience is formative for many young
people. This will contribute to NASSLLI's becoming a prominent institution in
the areas of computational linguistics, formal syntax and semantics, logic, and
related areas of computer science. NASSLLI 2003 will attract 90-100
participants. In addition to the main courses, the school also features a
session of student papers and evening lectures directed at everyone in the
university community.&lt;br/&gt;