* 0237845
* CAREER: Research in Algorithmic Theory of Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Qi Cheng, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Self-assembly is the process by which simple objects &lt;br/&gt;spontaneously
assemble into complexes. &lt;br/&gt;It is expected to ultimately become
&lt;br/&gt;an important technology at the level of atoms
and&lt;br/&gt;molecules. The development of researches in
programmable&lt;br/&gt;self-assembly is reaching the stage that we
have&lt;br/&gt;to understand it mathematically in order&lt;br/&gt;to take full
advantage of this new tool.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to study
&lt;br/&gt;the computational aspects of self-assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project includes: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Solving concrete problems in
the Tile Assembly Model,&lt;br/&gt;including but not limited
to&lt;br/&gt;finding an approximation algorithm for the Minimum&lt;br/&gt;Tile
Set Problem (MTSP)&lt;br/&gt;and characterizing the shape
languages.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Exploring different modelings of self-assembly,
which&lt;br/&gt;will give a more accurate abstraction of &lt;br/&gt;the
experimental results and will reflect the massive parallelism &lt;br/&gt;in
molecular/DNA computing.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Studying the connections between
&lt;br/&gt;the algorithmic self-assembly and the classical theory&lt;br/&gt;of
computation, especially the communication theory&lt;br/&gt;and the resource-
bounded Kolmogorov complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
integrate teaching activity &lt;br/&gt;into the research of self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will offer graduate level courses in
&lt;br/&gt;molecular computing and closely-related fields such as
&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, and introduce the research&lt;br/&gt;to undergraduate
and graduate students in general theory courses.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
adopt the active learning techniques in teaching.&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
the project will contribute to understanding&lt;br/&gt;the engineering power of
self-assembly, and to disseminating&lt;br/&gt;the current research information
to students as well.&lt;br/&gt;