* 0237921
* CAREER: Extracting Patterns from Medical Image Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Vasileios Megalooikonomou, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2009
* USD 431,422.00

CAREER: Extracting Patterns from Medical Image Databases

The goal of this career development plan is to build an education and research
program that will focus on the discovery of patterns and relations between
anatomy (structure) and function through the effective and efficient analysis of
large repositories of medical images and other clinical data. Medical centers
almost everywhere today are facing an interesting challenge in analyzing the
huge volumes of image and associated clinical data collected daily as part of
several ongoing studies. By focusing on the regions of interest (ROIs), the
approach uses novel techniques to extract their most discriminative features and
uses them in classification and similarity searches. New representations of the
information content of medical images are also provided. Statistical and data
compression techniques are employed to facilitate the retrieval of similar ROIs.
Information theoretic tools are used to relate complexity of function to that of
structure. Moreover, spatial data mining tools are developed to efficiently
discover associations between image data and non-image (functional) data. The
approaches have applicability to medical images from a wide range of modalities
(e.g., mammography, angiography, CT, MRI, fMRI, confocal microscopy, etc)
showing normal and abnormal conditions of various structures. Information about
the function of structures related to various medical conditions is extracted
from clinical assessment. Finding similarities and differences between image
data of a given new subject and previously seen subjects will assist the
correlation of this information with clinical assessment of function, pathology,
or response to drugs. It is expected that this work will be widely used within
the medical imaging community to facilitate advances in both diagnosis, and
treatment, and to provide new insight into the relation of anatomy and function.
The project will provide an excellent resource for graduate work in data mining,
data compression, multimedia databases, and other areas. The goal of the
educational plan is to provide students with a solid theoretical background and
practical experience on data mining and its applications in medicine, promote
interdisciplinary learning, and enable the training of a more versatile type of
scientist. The basic components of the teaching and education program will be
made readily available to students and researchers. Results can be found at the
project's Web site (http://www.cis.temple.edu/~vasilis).