* 0237258
* CAREER:  Educational Program in Neuromuscular Biomechanics and Uncovering the Neuromuscular Biomechanics of Dexterous Manipulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Francisco Valero-Cuevas, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 09/30/2007
* USD 409,000.00

0237258 Valero-Cuevas This five-year CAREER Development project establishes the
foundation for interdisciplinary education and research in neuromuscular
biomechanics at Cornell University. The project develops two objectives: (a)
uncover the neuromuscular biomechanics of dexterous manipulation; and (b)
integrate engineering and neuroscience into an interdisciplinary educational
network.

Dexterity is defined in the engineering sense of being able to perform stable
dynamic manipulation. Research objectives focus on using engineering science to
rigorously characterize dexterous manipulation, and to distinguish between the
relative contributions of passive and active biological elements of the hand to
stabilize manipulation. To achieve these goals, an integrative and
interdisciplinary approach will combine nonlinear dynamics, robotics,
biomechanics, and neurophysiology in a unique manner. Three specific
investigations are proposed: (1) Analyze human dexterous manipulation
experimentally using bifurcation theory. (2) Characterize brain and muscle
activity during dexterous manipulation using functional MRI and
electromyography. And, (3) use a computer biomechanical model of a multi-digit
hand to predict the limits of dexterity with and without neural activity, and
test these limits using a robotic manipulator.

Understanding the neuromuscular biomechanics of dexterous manipulation in humans
will revolutionize understanding of biological motor function, aid in the
diagnosis and treatment of hand impairment, and greatly expand the capabilities
of robotic hands. The PI's previous work established a theoretical, computer
modeling, and experimental foundation for the neuromuscular biomechanics of
static force production of individual digits. This foundation will be expanded:
(1) by using nonlinear dynamical analysis (to enable the use of reduced order
models) to study the transitions from dynamical stability to instability in this
complex system and (2) by integrating cerebral, muscular and biomechanical
measurements in the context of a comprehensive computer model of multi-digit
manipulation. The understanding gained from studying the human hand will be
instrumental to improving dexterous manipulation in humans (clinical
applications) and machines (robotic manipulators).

The educational objective is to develop an interdisciplinary educational network
that integrates engineering and neuroscience, which will have a broad impact on
bioengineering education. The educational methodology will promote discovery in
neuromuscular biomechanics among a diverse population spanning from high school
students to practicing researchers and clinicians. Education and research will
be integrated by: 1) Creating an undergraduate and graduate educational program
in neuromuscular biomechanics to improve and broaden the engineering curriculum,
2) Actively promoting opportunities for high school and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups to become involved in neuromuscular biomechanics
research and 3) advocating the importance of engineering concepts and methods to
researchers and clinicians in neuroscience, motor control, hand therapy, and
hand surgery.