* 0237634
* CAREER:  A Trigger System for Discovery Physics at the DZero Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Harold Evans, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 09/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This CAREER proposal requests support for the development of a new calorimeter
trigger system to allow the D0 experiment at the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory to take full advantage of its discovery potential. Run 2 will provide
a new era of exploration and potential discovery at the energy frontier. The
expanded capabilities of the detectors and the accelerator will allow the direct
study of one of the most pressing issues in all of particle physics: the origin
of mass. Within the Standard Model of particle physics, the Higgs field provides
a means of generating particle masses and spontaneously breaking the symmetry of
the electroweak interaction. Precision measurements performed over the last
decade have confirmed that something akin to the Standard Model process of mass
generation must exist, but the Higgs boson, the physical manifestation of the
Higgs field, has yet to be observed. Seeing it and measuring its properties
would be an important step in our understanding of the fundamental structure of
nature and should point the way toward a larger theory of which the Standard
Model is only a part. Achieving the ambitious goal of discovering the Higgs
boson is currently only possible at the Tevatron, provided that the amount of
data delivered to the experiments is increased by an order of magnitude over
that originally anticipated for the current run. This requires larger
interaction rates resulting in increased detector backgrounds, and will force
the experiment to be far more selective in the events written to permanent
storage for analysis.

Additionally, funds are requested for a new initiative that would involve
Columbia liberal arts students in the important dialog between scientists and
the general public through a summer internship with the Fermilab public
relations department. Education and outreach activities also include training
the next generation of physicists through participation of graduate and
undergraduate students in research projects. Just as importantly, though, it
also involves strengthening the understanding of current research by the general
public. This latter goal can best be achieved by involving non-scientists in the
process. Among the enthusiastic and articulate group of students in the "Physics
for Poets" class the PI teaches at Columbia, there is an excellent source of
people who are interested in science but approach it from a liberal arts
background. He proposes to take advantage of the unique perspective of these
students by creating an internship to involve several students per year in the
outreach work done at Fermilab.