* 0237256
* Studies of Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Matthew Platz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,115,450.00

This project targets high energy, short lived, reactive molecules for study. The
molecules of interest are generated by photolysis of synthetic precursors and
the stable products of their chemical reactions are identified. Through UV-
visible and infrared spectroscopic studies at time scales ranging from
nanosecond to picosecond, complemented by Density Functional Theory
calculations, four main objectives will be targeted. The rates with which
photochemically generated reactive intermediates lose heat to solvent will be
measured, and possible rearrangements to more stable isomers as they cool will
be explored. New reactive intermediates will be probed by nanosecond time
resolved flash photolysis of precursors at 77K. Specific solvation of carbenes
in coordinating solvents will be examined. Carbenoids and nitrenoids derived
from the reactions of carbenes and nitrenes with salts will be characterized by
both time resolved spectroscopy and by chemical reactivity
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program continues support for the research of Professor Matthew S.
Platz of the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State University. Professor Platz
creates and studies interesting highly reactive and short-lived molecules.
Although such molecules are of basic scientific interest, they have much
practical value in making larger molecules. They are also used by biochemists to
attach small probe molecules to larger ones such as proteins, by materials
scientists and in industry as photoresists and in lithography. Students working
on this project will be educated to become problem solvers who will eventually
apply their skills to solving problems in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries and in academe.