* 0237135
* CAREER:  Designing Effective Teams in the Engineering Classroom for the Enhancement of Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Michael Riley, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2009
* USD 643,418.00

The research objective of this career-development project is to develop,
&lt;br/&gt;test and validate a model of effective teaming for the engineering
classroom. The goals of the model are to facilitate teamwork in the classroom;
to measure individual growth when learning a subject and learning how to work in
a team; and to measure teamwork effectiveness. The primary goal of the education
component of the project is redesign engineering management courses; develop a
new cross-listed undergraduate/graduate course on the principles of group/team
dynamics; develop and implement faculty training workshops on the application of
the model; and the development of interactive web training modules to provide
ongoing tutorials on problems and issues encountered by teams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to a plea from employers for engineering
graduates prepared to &lt;br/&gt;work in teams and redefined program outcomes
from the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET), more teaming
activities are being incorporated into the engineering classroom. To build on
her previous work, the PI has developed her plan to analyze the nature of
teamwork in the engineering classroom, develop a measure to assess teamwork and
use that measure to investigate methods of promoting team development.
Pennsylvania State University, the National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators
Alliance (NCIIA) and the PI.s own University of Nebraska-Lincoln will make their
engineering students available for data collection. The proposed model is novel
because it will focus on both the individual.s and the team's mastery of
effective teaming constructs. The activities will strengthen the ability of
engineering educators to fully prepare students to utilize teams in science,
mathematics, engineering and &lt;br/&gt;technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;