* 0237782
* CAREER: Semantic Web-Interoperation versus Security
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Csilla Farkas, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The focus of this project is to develop models and technologies for prevention
of security threats via illegal inferences in semantically enhanced
semistructured information. XML and RDF data has been increasingly used for
storing and exchanging information, thus enabling Internet users to access and
integrate large amounts of data intelligently. This large-scale data
integration, especially when supported with ontologies, may pose significant
security and privacy threats. Therefore, security methods and tools need to be
developed to prevent security violations. To provide information assurance in
the context of Semantic Web several issues - technological, managerial, and
legal - need to be addressed. This project focuses mainly on technological
issues to provide information confidentiality and privacy, and makes several
novel contributions: (1) Web data that can express context-based and semantic
requirements; (2) comprehensive study of the security implications for illegal
inference capabilities on semistructured data; and (3) both defensive and
offensive security models are considered in Semantic Web security. More
information about the project is available on the project web site
(http://www.cse.sc.edu/research/isl). In addition to theoretical research, the
developed models and technologies will be implemented and tested on real data.
The prototypes will be evaluated based on scalability, efficiency, and level of
assurance. Broader impact of this project lies in providing data security on the
Web and a wide range of Web applications, with a guarantee of information
confidentiality. Research and educational activities are tied together to
increase the security awareness of students and community. In addition, seminars
and Web sites to increase cyber-security awareness of middle and high school
students will be developed, aiming to reduce the number of cyber crimes
exploiting juvenile users.