* 0237272
* Computerization of Newly Acquired Tropical and Subtropical  Mollusk Collections at the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Fred Thompson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2007
* USD 224,383.00

A grant has been awarded to the Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH,
University of Florida) under the direction of Drs. Paulay and Thompson to
curate, database, and make available online several important mollusk
collections received in the past decade. These include the research collection
associated with the curatorial and research staff as well two major relinquished
collections from the University of Miami and Tulane University. These
collections have been the source of &gt;100 publications, hold &gt;500 primary
types, and are in demand by the research and conservation communities as well as
by amateur shell enthusiasts. Currently FLMNH has the 7th largest mollusk
collection in the US and after the completion of the proposed project will grow
to an estimated 420,000 catalogued lots, all available online. In addition, all
station data from past FLMNH-based surveys will also be georeferenced, so that
at least 150,000 of the lots available online will have associated coordinate
data. The collection is already among the largest in the world for Neotropical
and Southeast Asian land snails and tropical west Atlantic mollusks. The
proposed additions share the emphasis of the existing collection on the regional
fauna, as well as Neotropical, Southeast Asian and tropical insular land snails,
and reef-associated mollusks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to properly house, georeference and database the acquired collections to
assure their conservation, availability and utility. Approximately 92,300
specimen lots (each comprised of one to many specimens), that have been
accessioned but have remained inaccessible to workers, will be curated. Ongoing
biodiversity inventories and donations will also be curated. Each lot will be
unpacked, housed in archival containers and associated data entered into the
collection database, including coordinates of collecting locality, which will be
looked up if not indicated on the specimen label. Specimen labels will be
generated and each lot housed in the formed collection. Data associated with
each lot will also be made available over the internet through FLMNH's web site
as well as through international networks such as "The Species Analyst" and
"Life Mapper". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The greatest significance of this project
will be the development of one of the largest biodiversity resources in the
world for the Mollusca, the second largest phylum of animals after the
Arthropoda. The immediate impact of this project will be a 29% increase in
online records at the second largest internet-accessible mollusk database in the
world, together with the availability of 150,000 georeferenced lots, potentially
the largest georeferenced resource on mollusks. The project will substantially
increase the size, availability and utility of FLMNH's already large mollusk
holdings. The FLMNH Malacology will become one the largest university-based
mollusk collection in the world and the support for curation of the newly
acquired collection will act to both attract and train students in systematic
malacology and biodiversity studies. The proposed project will involve students
to as great an extent as possible as Curatorial Assistants which will afford
students the opportunity to engage in curatorial and systematic work while
earning a salary, and also exposes them to the workings of an active research
group at the museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;