* 0237726
* CAREER:    Improved Service Through Improved Logistics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2010
* Ann Campbell, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Barton
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award presents research
and education goals for three themes in the area of logistics being used in a
variety of ways to improve customer service, for example by making it more
reliable, convenient, or faster, while at the same time creating higher profits
for the vendors. These three themes are: 1) Reliable service through vendor
managed inventory. Under a vendor managed inventory policy (VMI), a consumer
allows a vendor to set the timing and quantity of deliveries in exchange for
more reliable service. The research focuses on improving solution methodologies
in terms of efficiency and quality and extending solution methodologies to
include practical complexities, such as customers being served from multiple
depots. These efforts involve creating new decomposition schemes and using
mixed-integer programming and vehicle routing heuristics to solve the resulting
subproblems; 2) Consumer direct through dynamic routing and pricing. Providing
the convenience of goods delivered to the front door often comes at a high
price. The research focuses on creating technology for order delivery based on
dynamic routing and scheduling algorithms and using incentives to influence
customer behavior during order capture; and 3) Express delivery through time
directed hub location and allocation. Promising faster delivery times is
beneficial for customers and can create a competitive advantage. Faster delivery
times may be achieved by improved hub location and allocation choices in hub-
and-spoke networks. The research focuses on analyzing the complexity of the
embedded optimization problems and algorithm development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These three themes represent interesting and challenging
research areas and provide a firm foundation for a career in logistics. VMI
requires innovative approaches to handle size and complexity of real-life
instances. Consumer direct involves dynamic decision making under uncertainty,
an increasingly important issue. Time sensitive hub location and allocation
introduces new models with many applications. Material from these themes will be
used to create teaching materials for courses at both undergraduate and graduate
levels, including a collection of interactive case studies, which will be made
publicly available. The activities of this project will impact society by the
project's very nature: the improvement of customer service.