* 0237621
* CAREER:  Implementing and Assessing Human Animation in Pedagogical Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2003,05/31/2009
* Robert Bodenheimer, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2009
* USD 428,558.00

The overall objectives of this project are to (1) create more effective
pedagogical agents by incorporating novel methods of figure animation into them,
and (2) rigorously assess the performance of these agents in K-12 classrooms.
The research is divided into two components. The first component will develop
and integrate a system for stylistically variable low-level motion
specification, both full-bodied and facial, into the high-level cognitive
components of a pedagogical agent. The particular pedagogical agent that will
serve as the research infrastructure is called a ``teachable agent.'' The second
component of the research will deploy the system in K-12 classrooms as each
stage is developed, and conduct controlled multi-method studies to assess the
influence of the animated agent on learning-related outcomes. The significance
of the proposed work is its potential to improve the education of children,
particularly in the domain of science. Additionally, controlled studies on the
value of animated pedagogical agents in the area of K-12 education are rare.
These studies should further the scientific understanding of the
components&lt;br/&gt;of compelling animation, and result in a broader
understanding of the proper role of graphics and animation in learning systems.
An interdisciplinary course in computer science and education is being co-
developed for the web and will be co-taught with faculty from the field of
education. Finally, by introducing education as an important application of
graphics and animation, the plan is to broaden the appeal of computer science to
those who are traditionally under-represented.