* 0237954
* CAREER: Animation Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 440,500.00

Animation databases are repositories of animation models and motion sequences.
This research project's goal is to develop content-based retrieval and related
techniques for animation databases. These techniques include partial fuzzy query
resolution, animation model/motion comparison, animation sequence segmentation,
prediction/resolution of collisions, and handling multiple animation formats. An
animation authoring toolkit is being developed with the help of these
techniques. The functionality of this toolkit is to aid in generating new
animation sequences by reusing existing models and motion sequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project on are in the fields
of sign language, medical care (animated instructions for patients, say, in
physical therapy), education material preparation, and scientific visualization.
For instance, a speech-to-text system is being integrated with this toolkit. The
purpose of this integration is to aid in generating sign language animations
(based on spoken sentences) for persons challenged with hearing disabilities.
Also, some of the techniques being developed (e.g., prediction/resolution of
collision) are useful in areas such as robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational goals of this project are to:&lt;br/&gt;Train graduate and under-
graduate students from different disciplines (especially Arts &amp; Humanities)
in the research and development of animation databases. &lt;br/&gt;Involve K-12
teachers and students in using the animation authoring toolkit for preparation
and understanding of educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project are being disseminated through courses on
&lt;br/&gt;animation/multimedia databases, through a website
http://www.utdallas.edu/~praba/animdb.html/, publishing of research papers, and
by making the animation toolkit available to public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;