* 0237296
* Correlated Electron Transport in Mesoscopic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Leonid Glazman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

0237296&lt;br/&gt;Glazman&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in the area of mesoscopic physics. Research focuses on the low-energy
properties of mesoscopic interacting electron systems and on finding the
relations between these properties and the electron transport characteristics of
such systems. Electron transport in quantum wires, quantum, and mesoscopic
conductors containing magnetic impurities will be studied. The project has three
parts. The first part is devoted to the effect of magnetic impurities on the
low-temperature conductance of mesoscopic metals. Interaction of itinerant
electrons with the magnetic impurities causes relaxation of electron energy and
phase, and thus affects the conductance. The rate of relaxation may be
controlled by a magnetic field which polarizes impurity spins. The effect of
partial spin polarization on the conductance will be studied. The second part of
the project explores the properties of interacting one-dimensional electron
systems beyond the Luttinger liquid model. This extension of theory is needed
for the accurate description of a number of observable phenomena. This part also
considers the Coulomb drag between two weakly-coupled quantum wires and electron
tunneling into a quantum wire in the presence of a magnetic field. Calculation
of the drag resistivity requires accounting for the dependence of electron
velocity on momentum; this dependence is left out in the Luttinger liquid model.
A magnetic field causes the Zeeman splitting of the electron spectrum, which
results in finite-bias maxima in the differential tunneling conductance. To
describe this effect, one also needs an extension of the Luttinger liquid model.
The third part of the project explores the possibility of observing a violation
of the Fermi-liquid behavior in a quantum dot device, a violation that is
characteristic of a symmetric multi-channel Kondo problem. Here the role of
inevitable deviations from the symmetry will be considered. Special emphasis
will be placed also on finding ways to detect the non-Fermi-liquid behavior by
studying the electron transport through such a device. This research will
require a variety of condensed matter theory techniques, including diagrammatic
expansions, renormalization group theory and Fermi liquid theory of the Kondo
effect, the use of exactly solvable one-dimensional models, and the bosonization
technique.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work include education and the
contribution to a base of knowledge that may form the foundation of future
device technologies. This work supports the education of students and post-
doctoral research associates in modern methods of condensed matter theory and
nanoscale materials. The project involves the study of fundamental physics of
novel systems and materials (nano-wires, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes) which
are potential elements of future electronic technology.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education
in mesocopic and nanoscale physics. Research focuses on the effect of electron-
electron interactions on low-energy properties in low dimensional systems and on
the electron transport properties of such systems. Electron transport in quantum
wires (one-dimensional), quantum dots (zero-dimensional), and mesoscopic
conductors containing magnetic impurities will be studied using advanced methods
in theoretical condensed matter physics. The combination of low-dimensionality
and electron-electron interactions in these materials and nanostructures can
lead to novel electronic states that differ remarkably from those of macroscopic
materials. Broader impacts of this work include education and the contribution
to a base of knowledge that may form the foundation of future device
technologies. This work supports the education of students and post-doctoral
research associates in modern methods of condensed matter theory and in
nanoscale materials. The project studies the fundamental physics of novel
systems and materials (nano-wires, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes) which are
potential elements of future electronic technology. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;