* 0237331
* CAREER: Efficient Resource Allocation and Control in Mobile Wireless Networks with Multimedia Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Symeon Papavassiliou, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 428,424.00

The explosive growth of the Internet and the continued dramatic increase for all
wireless services are fueling the demand for increased capacity, data rates,
supported multimedia services, and support for different Quality of Service
(QoS) requirements for different classes of services. Wideband CDMA (WCDMA) has
been proposed as a key air interface technique for third generation (3G)
wireless systems, and will continue to be adopted as a strong candidate for 4G
systems that will provide differentiated services to multimedia traffic. With
the capability of dynamically varying user channel rates, WCDMA systems can
provide more flexibility in bandwidth allocation. Although the out-coming new
radio technology will bring more bandwidth at air interface, if not managed
properly, the bandwidth resources will not meet the requirements of future
users. In order to address the overall problem of offering efficient and
effective wireless multimedia services that meet the users' QoS (Quality of
Service) requirements in mobile wireless networks we plan to provide an
integrated solution by investigating the various involved problems from two
different levels and angles which are aligned with the two main elements
associated with the networks under consideration: wireless nature and mobility.
Specifically, given the strict multimedia user requirements, in order to satisfy
the main objective of this proposal of designing efficient wireless resource
allocation methods we first remove the traditional assumptions of infinite
number of users and fixed packet lengths, and analyze the wireless system
performance under a more general and realistic case with finite population of
voice and data users, finite buffers and variable packet length for data users.
Given the wireless nature of the environment under consideration and the
variations in the channel capacity, an efficient data rate scheduling scheme
that adapts to the changing channel condition is investigated in order to
maximize the weighted system throughput. An adaptive compensation technique is
also employed in order to guarantee the fair allocation of resources among the
competing users despite of the variation of channel capacity. Furthermore in
order to deal with the issue of mobility and congestion in mobile wireless
networks and their impact on the users' QoS, we study the enhancement of
admission control and handoff process by introducing and investigating the
following additional dimensions: flexible advanced bandwidth reservation and
reconfiguration to optimize the bandwidth utilization especially when services
with flexible QoS are supported; integration of pricing and admission control to
maximize the users' total utility and alleviate or minimize the network
congestion; design of a mobile agent based system to provide a flexible and
comprehensive framework to implement these management processes and schemes. The
proposed educational plan includes: undergraduate and graduate teaching;
introduction of new courses; graduate student advising and mentoring;
undergraduate project supervision; participation in an outreach program;
lectures at local technical high schools; and finally, enhancement of existing
laboratory infrastructure and facilities. Among the objectives of the education
plan is to create an attractive research and educational environment in which
both graduate and undergraduate students alike can collaborate and work together
in order to learn and discover. Furthermore NJIT has a significant presence of
minority and women students (~40% and ~18% respectively) and it is expected that
some of these students will have the opportunity to contribute to this project.
Finally I expect that the proposed plan will allow me to continue to expand on
the already established international dimension of my career-development.