* 0237884
* CAREER: Adaptive Resource Management in Highly Dynamic Real-Time Systems with Physical Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Marco Caccamo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 02/28/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Caccamo 0237884

This CAREER project is a combined research and educational project in the area
of resource management for highly dynamic real-time systems with physical
constraints. The new millennium heralds the convergence of communication,
computing, and intelligent control of the physical environment. The rapid
advancement of computing and wireless technologies will enable us to employ
cooperative real-time nodes that must operate without human intervention. These
nodes frequently reside in hostile environments for accomplishing tasks ranging
from space monitoring and surveillance to environmental protection. Under this
challenging vision, there will be an extensive deployment of highly dynamic and
physically constrained real-time node, connected together through communication
networks. This project is aimed at the development of new resource management
techniques for dynamic, constrained real-time systems.

The research follows four avenues: 1) Collaborative scheduling: Distributed rate
adaptation and collaborative resource reclaiming techniques are explored to
mitigate the effects of higly dynamic workloads in a distributed system with
tightly-coupled real-time collaborative tasks running on different nodes. 2)
Prioritized medium access control (MAC) with rate-adaptive messages: Traditional
MAC protocols are not suitable for real-time nodes collaborating through
wireless networks because messages exchanged inside the network are largely
periodic and need guaranteed bounded delay. This research considers how to
prioritize access to guarantee bounded delay, and how to implement distributed
rate adaptation. 3) Power management: The research explores how to exploit the
predictable schedule of the wireless channel as an effective way to limit power
consumption using sleep mode. 4) Template design: Off-line template design will
be explored for managing multiple physical constraints such as energy and
thermal bounds in real-time CPU and network resource scheduling.

The broader impacts of this CAREER project are both technical and educational.
The theory and techniques developed in this project will have a broad impact, as
they enable a wide spectrum of critical real-time applications. The educational
goals of the project are to transfer the research results to undergraduate and
graduate courses, industry-sponsored workshops, and the national security and
commercial sectors. The educational plan is aimed at providing undergraduate and
graduate students knowledge and skills to ensure their technical leadership in
the real-time community. This plan is realized by revising an existing
undergraduate course and introducing a new graduate course, as well as
developing widely-available Open Source toolkits and curriculum materials for
research and educational use.