* 0237654
* CAREER:     Sparse Spatial Reasoning for High-Throughput Protein Structure Determination
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Christopher Bailey-Kellogg, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Edwina L. Rissland
* 03/31/2005
* USD 162,420.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. The research will
develop new methods for analyzing the structure of protein molecules,
interpreting spatial data sets containing significant noise and sparse
information content. Despite many experimental and computational advances,
traditional structure determination protocols remain very difficult, expensive,
and time-consuming. Consequently, in order to increase the throughput of
structure determination, researchers are pursuing minimalist techniques that
provide much less structure information much faster; examples include mutation
studies, indicating at which positions amino acid substitutions significantly
affect the protein's function; cross-linking mass spectrometry, providing crude
proximity information for some positions in the protein; and electron
microscopy, elucidating the protein's surface/volume at relatively low
resolution. These minimalist experiments then place more burden on associated
algorithms for experiment planning and data interpretation.

This project pursues new theory, representations, and algorithms to address data
interpretation and experiment design problems in domains characterized by sparse
spatial data. A significant component of the research is the case study
application of minimalist protein structure determination. The education plan
addresses the need to build bridges between computer science and the life
sciences in order to attack problems of this combined computational-experimental
kind.

A spatial reasoner will be developed, leveraging key problem structure to
efficiently and effectively plan and interpret experiments. It will represent
data, models, and biophysical knowledge with multi-level, multi-dimensional
topological and geometric objects and constraints. This representation will
allow algorithms to match features of data and models, overcome problems of
noise and scarcity by uncovering consistent feature sets, target clarifying
queries in response to conflicts, and plan additional experiments. This approach
will thus support closed-loop integration of modeling and experiment --
experimental evidence will trigger evaluation of model features and even
optimization of models themselves, while model analysis will trigger specific
data interpretation questions and even new experiments.

The education component of this project brings together students from computer
science and the life sciences to train them for interdisciplinary computational
biology research. Additional and revised coursework, to be developed in
conjunction with the Computer Science Department and Computational Science and
Engineering program at Purdue, will combine advanced computational techniques
and biological applications. The training will provide life science students
with the necessary algorithmic background and computer science students with the
necessary exposure to and experience with motivating biological problems.
Research opportunities, course projects, and other learning opportunities will
further involve students in the many challenging and fascinating biological
problems requiring advanced computational techniques.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early career-development
activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an academic leader of
the twenty-first century. The research will lead to scientific contributions in
the structural and functional understanding of biomolecular machinery. The
challenges faced in developing, applying, and extending algorithms for this
application will lead to core contributions in reasoning about physical systems,
where many similar tasks in planning, modeling, predicting, and controlling face
similar problems with sparse, noisy spatial data.