* 0237699
* CAREER: Learning Agents in Dynamic, Collaborative, and Adversarial Multiagent Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Peter Stone, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2009
* USD 517,425.00

This project aims to enable multiple intelligent agents to learn to act both
individually and in coordination with one another towards individual and/or
common goals in real-time, noisy, collaborative and adversarial environments.
The approach taken will be to study complete agents in specific, complex
environments, with the goal of drawing general lessons from the specific
implementations. Fundamental research will be conducted in four main areas.
First, multiagent reinforcement learning will be scaled up to handle larger and
more complex problems than has been previously possible. Second, new state
representations suitable for learning will be proposed and&lt;br/&gt;tested.
Third, game theoretic approaches to improving agent performance by predicting
the responses of other agents will be investigated. Fourth, strategies for
learning autonomous bidding&lt;br/&gt;agents will be developed and tested.
Application domains will include: robotic soccer, both in simulation and with
real robots; and autonomous bidding agents in multiple realistic
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;The rich simulation environments to be used for this
research are ideal substrates for teaching students about complete intelligent
agents, including perception, cognition, and action. The educational goals of
this project include leveraging the appeal of these domains to students into
challenging, exciting, and instructive undergraduate and graduate courses.