* 0237596
* CAREER: Low-cost Arrayed Gas Sensors Using Inkjet-printed Organic Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Vivek Subramanian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

In recent years, there have been some initial demonstrations of organic
transistor-based gas sensors. These initial demonstrations have established that
sensors using different organic active layers show different responses to
different odors and gas-phase toxins. While individually these sensors do not
offer much specificity, they may potentially be arrayed to form an electronic
nose, offering high sensitivity and selectivity to a wide range of analytes, in
a manner analogous to a dog's nose. In particular, it may be possible to form
ultra-low cost sensors suitable for such cost-sensitive applications as
distributed environmental monitoring and content monitoring of food and
pharmaceutical packages. This may be achieved by fabricating the entire organic
sensor array using a low-cost printing technology on a low-cost flexible
substrate. Such a technology will usher in an era of unprecedented public
safety, reduced product wastage, and proactive environmental protection since
the sensors may be deployed in ubiquitous sensor networks due to their extremely
low cost and flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this proposal, the
investigators will develop the device and materials technologies necessary for
an arrayed sensor system, and will use these to demonstrate an integrated low-
cost electronic array offering high sensitivity and specificity. Specifically,
they will develop a manufacturing technology for forming these sensors on low
cost plastic substrates entirely using inkjet printing. Diverse families of
active layer materials will be arrayed to form high specificity sensor arrays on
low-cost plastic substrates, ensuring low cost while simultaneously providing
high specificity and sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An undergraduate and a
graduate student will be involved in performing this work. The interdisciplinary
nature of this work will further the knowledge base of both students. In
particular, the mentoring of the undergraduate student will be emphasized
through critical review programs and experimental design and metrology
tutorials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this proposal will also be used
in a University-sponsored high-school outreach program. High-school students
will be invited to visit the laboratory and to gain hands-on experience with
inkjet-based circuit fabrication. This will increase the level of interest in
science and engineering among local high-school students. Furthermore, the
investigators will devote much effort to enabling transfer of the technology to
researchers in industry and other academic groups through publications, web-
based technology dissemination, and industrial interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of the educational component of this
program focuses on the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority
groups. The PI will travel regularly to the eastern and southeastern United
States to meet with minority students at HBCU's to advise on opportunities for
advanced studies in EECS at Berkeley. A representative from BGESS (the
organization of the Black Graduate Engineering and Science Students at UC
Berkeley) will accompany him to facilitate this. This activity will be used to
substantially increase the enrollment and retention of underrepresented groups
in EECS at Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;