* 0237267
* Improvements to the Kansas State University Ornithology Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Brett Sandercock, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 02/28/2006
* USD 40,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sandercock at Kansas State University to
make&lt;br/&gt;improvements to the Kansas State University Ornithology
Collection. The Ornithology&lt;br/&gt;Collection currently contains 1172 round
skins, 188 mounts, 30-40 spread wings, and 20-30&lt;br/&gt;nests that are a
representative sample of the avifauna of the Great Plains ecoregion.
The&lt;br/&gt;collection holdings are valuable because they include many bird
specimens that were collected in&lt;br/&gt;Kansas during the late 1800s and
early 1900s, including two specimens of the now extinct&lt;br/&gt;Eskimo Curlew.
The goal of this project is to conserve and improve the resources of
the&lt;br/&gt;Ornithology Collection for use in undergraduate teaching and
public education.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are threefold. First,
an urgent need of the Ornithology&lt;br/&gt;Collection is improved storage
facilities. The study skins are currently stored in wood
frame&lt;br/&gt;cabinets that are at least 30 years old and not airtight. Mounts
are currently housed in wooden&lt;br/&gt;display cabinets that were salvaged
when the collection was moved to Ackert Hall in 1969. A&lt;br/&gt;majority of
the direct costs of this grant (56%) are for new museum storage cabinets that
will&lt;br/&gt;ensure that the collection will be protected from insect damage.
Second, another major need of&lt;br/&gt;the collection is cataloguing of the
existing specimens. The long-term goal for this collection is&lt;br/&gt;to
transfer or exchange older specimens of potential research value to major
natural history&lt;br/&gt;museums, such as the nearby Museum of Natural History
at the University of Kansas. To&lt;br/&gt;facilitate transfers, the contents of
the Ornithology Collection will be inventoried into an&lt;br/&gt;electronic
database that will be made available on the Internet. A portion of the direct
costs&lt;br/&gt;(35%) will be used to hire and train three undergraduate
curatorial assistants to complete this&lt;br/&gt;task. Last, a final need for
the collection is acquisition of new materials to replace
older&lt;br/&gt;specimens of research value. The remaining direct costs (9%) are
for curatorial supplies to&lt;br/&gt;prepare and store new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;This project is scientifically important because it will
make the museum holdings of the&lt;br/&gt;Kansas State University Ornithology
Collection available to the scientific community for the&lt;br/&gt;first time.
Access to study skins will be of greatest value to researchers conducting
retrospective&lt;br/&gt;analyses of museum specimens, but the collection also
contains valuable specimens that will fill&lt;br/&gt;gaps in historical sampling
efforts. The project will have broader impacts by
offering&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive training in the techniques of museum curation
to three undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;The resources of the Ornithology
Collection also serve an important role in undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;education and
outreach programs for the public. Museum specimens are regularly used
as&lt;br/&gt;teaching materials in three core undergraduate courses in the
Division of Biology: Principles of&lt;br/&gt;Biology (Biol 198), Organismic
Biology (Biol 201) and Ornithology (Biol 543). Avian&lt;br/&gt;specimens are
also an important resource for public outreach programs coordinated by
the&lt;br/&gt;Division of Biology. Mounts and study skins will be used in
permanent exhibits in Ackert Hall,&lt;br/&gt;in displays for annual open house
events at Kansas State University, in displays for field trips
of&lt;br/&gt;grade school students from the Riley Town school district, and in
environmental education&lt;br/&gt;programs for K-12 students and teachers at
nearby Konza Prairie Biological Station. Long-term&lt;br/&gt;conservation of the
museum holdings will benefit local communities in northeast Kansas.