* 0237415
* CAREER:     A Unifying Interior-Point Approach to Sensitivity Analysis and Reoptimization in Conic Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Emre Alper Yildirim, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 05/31/2007
* USD 264,237.00

The primary objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to develop a unifying framework to study sensitivity analysis of
convex optimization problems in conic form and reoptimization after a data
perturbation. The emphasis will be on the use of interior-point methods with the
following goals: (1) obtaining provably reliable information about sensitivity
analysis of a large class of optimization problems with a very modest
computational effort and (2) developing reoptimization strategies that take
advantage of the information gained by solving the original optimization problem
with provably better worst-case complexity estimates. In both cases, the
theoretical work will be incorporated into efficient, state-of-the-art
optimization solvers. In addition, applications of convex optimization in
various areas will be investigated. The main focus here will be on the design,
analysis, and implementation of efficient algorithms for problems arising in
computational geometry and discrete optimization. The educational component of
this project includes reworking the graduate nonlinear optimization course,
starting a nonlinear optimization seminar, introducing new graduate courses, and
writing a textbook on recent advances in sensitivity analysis. The work on
sensitivity analysis will lead to an innovative approach that will accurately
characterize the behavior of an optimal solution under perturbations in a fairly
large class of optimization problems, thereby avoiding possible costly mistakes
due to the use of mostly inaccurate sensitivity information provided by today's
commercial solvers. This work is likely to lead to further insight into
convergence issues in interior-point methods. The development of effective
reoptimization strategies will help to design and implement faster algorithms
for a wide variety of optimization problems that require solutions of closely
related subproblems. These algorithms include branch-and-bound methods,
sequential quadratic programming algorithms, and decomposition methods to solve
structured large-scale optimization problems. Application of continuous
optimization techniques in computational geometry and discrete optimization will
widen the domain of problems for which efficient algorithms can be
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide significant
enhancements to the value of interior-point methods by enabling their use for
the purposes of sensitivity analysis and reoptimization, two areas of immense
practical importance that were previously considered to be the shortcomings of
such methods. Collaborations with researchers in computational geometry and
discrete optimization will lead to synergy among different disciplines. The
ideas resulting from this project will be disseminated in a timely manner
through publications, software development, and participation at national and
international workshops and meetings. Graduate students will be involved through
seminar participation and dissertation research with the researcher. New
developments will be integrated into courses taught at both undergraduate and
graduate levels.