* 0237633
* CAREER: Directional Multiresolution Image Processing: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Minh Do, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/2009
* USD 406,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0237633&lt;br/&gt;Minh N. Do&lt;br/&gt;U of Illinois @ Urbana
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enormous growth of visual information in
digital form has produced an urgent need for more powerful and effective image
processing applications. At the foundation of many of these image processing
tasks is an efficient representation that can capture significant image
information using a small description. Recently, it has become evident that the
commonly used separable extensions from one-dimensional transforms, such as
Fourier and wavelet, are not necessarily best suited for images. There is strong
motivation to search for more powerful schemes that can capture the intrinsic
geometrical structure that is key in pictorial information. Achieving this step
will lead to fundamental advances in a number of areas in image
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves developing new "true"
two-dimensional representations that can deal more effectively with typical
images having smooth contours. The focus is on the development of directional
and multiresolution image expansions using non-separable filter banks, in much
the same way that wavelets were constructed from filter banks. In essence, the
investigator pursues non-separable extensions of wavelets and multiresolution
techniques so that they can capture the directional information -- an important
and unique feature of multidimensional signals. In parallel, newly developed
image representations are explored in a variety of applications, where
substantial improvements over current methods are expected. The educational part
of the project maximizes the benefits of the research results and recent related
discoveries through: designing a new course to teach fundamental processing
methods that were&lt;br/&gt;specially developed for multidimensional signals;
developing computational toolboxes and reproducible experiments to train
students using these methods proficiently; and exposing students to well-
designed projects to gain hands-on experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;