* 0237365
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequencing and Comparative Analysis of Acidobacterium Capsulatum and Verrucomicrobium Spinosum
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2006
* John Heidelberg, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 1,100,000.00

Dr Naomi Ward, Dr Karen Nelson, and Dr John Heidelberg of The Institute for
Genomic Research (TIGR) have been awarded a grant to sequence the genomes of the
bacteria Acidobacterium capsulatum and Verrucomicrobium spinosum. These
organisms are representatives of the acidobacteria and verrucomicrobia groups,
which, due to their widespread distribution and relative abundance in soil and
water, are attracting growing interest from microbial ecologists. Acidobacteria
appear to be sensitive to chemical changes in their environment (i.e. addition
of fertilizers to soil) and may serve as indicators for soil nutrient levels.
There is evidence that verrucomicrobia may be key participants in the methane
cycle and hence indirect contributors to global warming. In addition, some
verrucomicrobia are involved in symbiotic relationships (partnerships) with
other organisms such as nematodes, in which the bacteria appear to manipulate to
their own advantage the ratio of males to females produced. Other
verrucomicrobial symbionts defend their ciliate host from predators by shooting
out a specialized harpoon-like structure. To date, there are no completed genome
sequences from members of these two groups. The goal of the project will be to
identify genes present in the genomes of these two organisms, and assign a
function to the genes. The sequencing approach will involve a so-called random
shotgun strategy, in which the DNA is broken into fragments and the DNA sequence
of the fragments determined randomly. The resulting individual sequences will be
assembled into one piece using computer software that recognizes overlaps
between the different sequences. Any gaps left in the sequence will be filled in
to produce a complete molecule. Comparisons can then be made with existing
genomic databases, to identify the genes present. &lt;br/&gt;The results of this
project are expected to have far-reaching impacts on the scientific community,
firstly because the sequence data will be made publicly available through the
TIGR Website, and secondly because the groups represented by these two organisms
are of interest to virtually all researchers working to determine the microbial
diversity of soil and water. These researchers can use the sequence information
to formulate hypotheses about the distribution and ecological role of these
bacteria. The sequence data will also serve as a resource for those researchers
seeking to understand the symbiotic relationships of verrucomicrobia. This is a
Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative program between
the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;