* 0237825
* CAREER: Functional Genomic Analysis of Germ Cell Development and Regeneration in Planarians
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Phillip Newmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2008
* USD 679,256.00

0237825 Newmark

The specification of primordial germ cells is the first step required for the
successful propagation of sexually reproducing species. In spite of the
biomedical and evolutionary implications of understanding how the germline is
formed and how totipotency is established and maintained in germ cells, we are
far from understanding these processes in detail. In the best-studied
invertebrates and many vertebrates, germ cells are specified by maternally
supplied, cytoplasmic determinants. In mammals, however, germ cell specification
proceeds epigenetically, requiring inductive interactions. The mechanisms
linking these different modes of specification remain unclear. The research
outlined here will investigate the epigenetic specification of germ cells using
planarians- classic subjects of regeneration studies- as a model. Planarians can
regenerate complete organisms from tiny body fragments; their germ cell lineage
displays similar plasticity. Planarian germ cells form from adult stem cells
only when the flatworm attains the appropriate size. This research will utilize
genetic differences between wild-type sexual planarians and an asexual strain
that lacks all reproductive structures and reproduces by transverse fission.
Expressed sequence tags will be generated from the sexual planarians, and
microarray analyses will identify genes expressed preferentially during sexual
reproduction. The cell types in which these genes are expressed will be defined
by automated in situ hybridization. Functional assays using double-stranded RNA
will be used to identify genes required for germ cell specification and
differentiation. These experiments will provide insight into the mechanisms by
which germ cells are specified via inductive interactions and the extent to
which these mechanisms have been conserved evolutionarily.

The educational component of this proposal includes science outreach to local
elementary school students. Planarians will be used in demonstrations that will
reinforce many of the key biological concepts that elementary school students
are expected to master. The demonstrations should also provide students with a
sense of the curiosity and wonder that drive scientific research. A new graduate
core course in cell biology will be developed; this course will be taught from
an experimental perspective, highlighting readings from the primary literature
and emphasizing critical thinking skills. Finally, to increase the scientific
literacy of students from the humanities and social sciences, a new course will
be developed, using news media coverage of biotechnology as a framework for
teaching basic concepts of biology.