* 0237644
* CAREER: Towards Unifying Database Systems and Information Retrieval Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jayavel Shanmugasundaram, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 326,750.00

The goal of this research project is to develop techniques for the unification
of database systems and information retrieval systems. The main benefit of this
approach is to provide a general data management solution for both structured
(database domain) and unstructured (information retrieval domain) data. This
goal is achieved by (a) using the XML data model to capture structured, semi-
structured, and unstructured data, and (b) supporting both database-style and
information retrieval-style queries over XML data. The specific components of
the research project are (1) supporting ranked keyword search queries (i.e.,
information retrieval style queries) over a mix of structured and unstructured
XML data, (2) supporting complex structured queries (i.e., database style
queries) over semi-structured XML data, and (3) integrating the above two
components into a unified data management system. The research ideas are
implemented using a prototype database system, evaluated using real and
synthetic data sets, and the resulting software is made publicly available.
These results will have broad impact in applications to commercial data
management systems. Additional information on this project can be obtained from
the web site http://www.cs.cornell.edu/database/XML/XML.htm. This research also
lays the foundation for the education plan, where the goal is to develop a new
curriculum that presents unified data management concepts (as opposed to the
standard practice of teaching largely unrelated courses on database systems and
information retrieval systems). This goal is achieved by developing new
undergraduate and graduate courses dealing with the management of both
structured and unstructured data.