* 0237971
* CAREER: Linguistic Control of Mobile Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2008
* USD 399,980.00

When humans instruct each other h w to carry out particular tasks,nly a limited
number of&lt;br/&gt;tokenized (linguistic)instructions are used.In contrast to
this,classic control theory speci .es&lt;br/&gt;a control action to be carried
out at each time instant.But,in a number f applications,such&lt;br/&gt;as semi-
autonomous service robots for industrial and domestic use,intelligent
appliances,and&lt;br/&gt;communication constrained embedded and/or teleoperated
devices,the control procedures have&lt;br/&gt;a natural,linguistic .avor.The
interpretation here is that linguistic control instructions
specify&lt;br/&gt;particular modes f peration rather than explicit control
values.&lt;br/&gt;The verall objective f this CAREER-prop sal is t develop and
disseminate rational meth-&lt;br/&gt;ds for understanding how continuous
devices,such as mobile rob ts,should be controlled using&lt;br/&gt;computer
generated,linguistic inputs.In particular,it will be studied how these
instructions&lt;br/&gt;should be de .ned,selected,and coded in rder to minimize
the number of bits transmitted from&lt;br/&gt;the computer t the rob t,while
guaranteeing that the system meets its speci .cations.F r this,&lt;br/&gt;an
information theoretic approach t control theory will be developed,serving as a
useful tool&lt;br/&gt;not nly for source coding of control signals,but also for
describing how symb lic instructions&lt;br/&gt;should be interpreted and perated
n by the continuous systems.Questions concerning what&lt;br/&gt;sensors and
actuators to use in a given rob tic application can be addressed quite
elegantly&lt;br/&gt;within this framew rk as well.&lt;br/&gt;The development of
this program will serve as a foundation for a teaching and research
career&lt;br/&gt;in electrical and computer engineering,with particular emphasis
n control theory and rob tics.&lt;br/&gt;In particular,the e .ort will be
focused n the following key areas:&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid Models: Control theoretic
models will be developed for bridging the gap between the&lt;br/&gt;continuous
(the device dynamics)and the discrete (the linguistic control inputs).The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;models will give the symbolic inputs a clear,control
theoretic interpretation,at the same time&lt;br/&gt;as the expressive p wers of
di .erent sets f control inputs can be made explicit.&lt;br/&gt;Complexity
Measures and Coding Theory: A complexity measure,corresp nding to
the&lt;br/&gt;number of bits needed for c ding a particular control
procedure,will be proposed.Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;by establishing probability
distributions ver the set f control modes,optimal c ding
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;can be derived.&lt;br/&gt;Multi-Modal and Multi-Agent
Control Design: Strings of appropriate control modes will&lt;br/&gt;be
constructed that make the systems meet given speci .cations while keeping the
descriptions&lt;br/&gt;short.F r this we will design control laws that use the
available sensory data in an e .cient&lt;br/&gt;way.These results will be
extended t multi-agent control where formation maintenance
and&lt;br/&gt;obstacle avoidance should be achieved while minimizing the inter-
agent communications.&lt;br/&gt;Educational Plan: Due t the multidisciplinary
nature f the proposed w rk,the under-&lt;br/&gt;graduate control curriculum will
be modi .ed and tw senior level undergraduate courses will&lt;br/&gt;be included
in the curriculum at the Georgia Institute of Technology.A multi-agent rob
tic&lt;br/&gt;testbed where b th human and computer generated inputs can be used
as a basis for the motion&lt;br/&gt;control will furthermore be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;1