* 0237335
* Microbial Observatories:  Collaborative Research: Microbial Diversity and Function in the Permanently Ice-Covered Lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2009
* John Priscu, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2009
* USD 360,184.00

Grants have been awarded to Drs. J. Priscu (Montana State University), M.
Madigan (Southern Illinois University), B. Lanoil (University of California -
Riverside) and S.Giovannoni (Oregon State University) to study prokaryotic
organisms within the permanently ice-covered lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys,
Antarctica with the objectives of identifying and characterizing novel organisms
and elucidating those aspects of their genome and metabolism that are critical
to understanding their role in biogeochemical cycles. The study will use
molecular tools in concert with conventional and high throughput culturing
techniques to define representative prokaryotic groups responsible for the
contemporary geochemical gradients that exist in these lakes. The McMurdo Dry
Valleys form the driest and coldest ecosystem known on Earth and has, until
relatively recently, been thought to harbor little life. A primary reason for
establishing a Microbial Observatory for these lakes is to understand not just
how the environment controls the diversity of organisms, but also how diversity
itself controls the functioning of ecosystems. The McMurdo Dry Valley lake
systems lend themselves to answering this question in a unique way. Given the
isolation, the lack of higher life forms, and the evolutionary history of these
lakes, they offer a unique experimental arena to search for novel microorganisms
and study the interplay of microbial diversity and ecosystem function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will be significant to the growing
bodies of literature in biodiversity, biotechnology, geobiology, polar ecology,
and astrobiology. The investigators will work with existing and proposed new
programs to archive the phylogenetic and physiological data collected during the
study so that all interested can access it easily through the Internet. Strong
linkages will be made with the highly visible education, outreach and human
diversity programs supported by the NSF Office of Polar Programs and the McMurdo
Long Term Ecological Research station, yielding a project that will have a broad
impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;