* 0237664
* Career:  Crystal-Chemical Relationships of Correlated Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Julia Chan, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2009
* USD 525,000.00

This project is focused on the synthesis and structural characterization of
intermetallic heavy fermion superconductors. It is our goal to correlate
magnetic properties with rare earth cations, main group, transition metals, and
crystal chemical relationships. Through cooperative efforts between Louisiana
State University (LSU), Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL), high quality samples will be produced and characterized, and detailed
magnetic and transport measurements will be made. The training of undergraduate
and graduate students will emphasize carrying out investigations ranging from
basic sample preparation all the way through to measurement techniques and data
interpretation. A community education outreach program will involve high-school
science teachers working in the PI's lab during the summer. This will allow
these teachers to experience research and the scientific method in action making
a very positive impact on local physical science education. In addition, LSU
students will perform chemistry demonstrations in K-12 school
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at the exploration of
the rewarding boundary between crystallography and the systematic study of
structure-dependent properties such as superconductivity and magnetism in rare
earth intermetallics. With the combination of synthesis, characterization, and
measurements of properties of new materials, this research will create a basic
understanding of the interplay of superconductivity and magnetism allowing the
tailored design of new materials useful for information technology. Students
will measure magnetic and electronic/ transport properties of polycrystalline
and single crystal materials at Louisiana State University (LSU) gaining a
broader and more diverse scientific background as they collaborate within the
LSU scientific community and national laboratories. LSU students will also
perform chemistry demonstrations in East Baton Rouge K-12 schools. In addition,
a high school teacher will perform research in the group and return to the
classroom during the academic year with new scientific perspectives, as related
to new materials for information technology.&lt;br/&gt;