* 0237578
* CAREER:    From Designed Molecules to Functional Materials and Innovative Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Francisco Raymo, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2007
* USD 496,295.00

This research program addresses the design of molecules which will permit the
development of functional materials and devices. Fluorescent and photochromic
compounds will be embedded into solid polmer matrices. The resulting molecule-
based materials will be integrated into device configurations designed to
execute logic operations relying exclusively on optical inputs and outputs.
These solid-state all-optical logic gates will process multiple optical signals.
Electron deficient surface coatings will be assembled from electroactive and
fluorescent building blocks. The resulting molecule-based materials will
recognize and immobilize electron rich substrates at solid/liquid interfaces,
providing new avenues for sensor development. Students will be trained in the
multidisciplinary fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology through a combination
of lecture and laboratory investigations. A research forum for regional colleges
and a research opportunity program targeting minority students will provide
cohesiveness and foster exchanges and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program, Professor Francisco Raymo, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Miami, is exploring the preparation of molecule-based materials
and devices. Professor Raymo is developing new strategies for all-optical multi-
channel signal processing which will complement current optical fiber
technology. He is also preparing novel materials designed to permit facile
detection and recognition of selected molecules, forming the basis of new sensor
technologies. Professor Raymo is training students, both in the laboratory and
in the lecture hall, in the modern techniques and concepts of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. In addition, he is bringing research opportunities to minority
students and coordinating multi-institutional exchanges and collaborations.