* 0237337
* Beyond the Bottleneck: New Initiatives in Invertebrate Paleontology at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Kenneth Johnson, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2006
* USD 225,999.00

A grant has been awarded to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
under the direction of Dr. K. Johnson to improve the access to significant
collections of Pleistocene marine fossils from the west coast of North America.
The Department of Invertebrate Paleontology at the Natural History Museum of Los
Angeles County (LACMIP) maintains over three million specimens, which constitute
the fifth largest invertebrate fossil collection in the United States. This
includes the world's largest collection of Cenozoic fossil molluscs from the
Pacific Rim. However, the Department was severely impacted by fiscal crises
during the early 1990s, and the collections were poorly maintained and available
only on a limited basis for the past ten years. Few resources were available to
effectively improve the condition of the collections or to accommodate an
increasing backlog of curation projects and new accessions. This situation has
changed in the past years, and the Natural History Museum has increased its
support of Invertebrate Paleontology by funding two new positions in the
department and providing for the purchasing of new equipment. This project
represents the first part of a long-term initiative by the Department to improve
the visibility, accessibility, and usage of these important collections. A
curatorial assistant will be hired to manage a team of students and volunteers
to incorporate large new accessions into the departmental collections. The new
collections are currently not accessible for study. Additional storage cabinets
will be purchased to incorporate several large orphaned collections into our
existing range. These orphaned collections include fossils from the Late
Cenozoic deposits of the Pacific Coast of North America and have been acquired
from academic institutions as well as the personal collections of avocational
paleontologists. The collections need to be unpacked, cleaned, sorted, and
rehoused in archival-quality storage units. When combined with our existing
Pleistocene collections, the new accessions are significant for their size and
their potential research impact. As this work is accomplished, a digital catalog
of the collections will be compiled and published on the World Wide Web. Public
awareness of the collections will be improved by the development of a new
general audience on-line guide to the invertebrate fossils of the Los Angeles
area. A large proportion of the material was collected from rocks that are no
longer exposed due to continuing urban development in the Los Angeles Basin,
including world-class Pleistocene deposits from the Palos Verdes Peninsula. The
Pleistocene (1.6 million to 12 thousand years ago) is also known as the Ice Age,
and was an epoch characterized by repeated cycles of global cooling and warming.
Using the preserved record of Pleistocene marine life, paleontologists are able
to understand how ecosystems respond to global environmental change. The
collections at LACMIP are the most extensive available database to address this
important question for marine ecosystems on the Pacific Coast of North America,
and these critical data will be made accessible to the public and the scientific
community.