* 0237706
* CAREER:  Understanding the Complexities of Animated Content
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2010
* Ronald Metoyer, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 02/28/2010
* USD 517,672.00

CAREER: Understanding the Complexities of Animated Content Abstract

As immersive graphics environments become more viable as useful training and
education tools, we must be able to understand animated content well enough to
provide naive content creators with the ability to create compelling synthetic
scenes. This understanding requires that we answer the following questions. How
do we create characters that perform natural motions based on high-level
direction? How do we direct synthetic characters at a high level? How do we
structure interactive spaces for spatial and temporal interactions between
humans and synthetic characters?

To answer these questions, we will conduct research in the following areas:
motion capture re-sequencing, character interfaces and character programming. We
will restrict ourselves to a particular domain and build an interactive space in
order to study the above research questions. We have chosen quarterback training
for the sport of American football as the specific problem domain for the
following reasons. Quarterback training requires compelling 3D content in order
to produce convincing training situations. Quarterback training is a physical
task and involves spatial and temporal interaction between the coaches and
players (where players include the real quarterback and the synthetic
characters). Game preparation requires time-critical training content creation.
Quarterback training requires use by domain experts (coaches and players) who
may be naive computer users. We have access to domain experts in quarterback
training through the Oregon State University football program.

Our research will result in algorithms for generating natural motion from
motion capture data based on high level input, guidelines for classifying
character interaction techniques, and methods for directing characters within
the interactive space. We plan to evaluate our research through various
quantitative measures and usability studies to determine the quality of content
and the ability of naive content creators to create and interact with the
content within our interactive space framework.

