* 0237459
* Completion of a Database of Oregon Vascular Plant Specimens in the Oregon State University Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Scott Sundberg, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 381,890.00

A grant has been awarded to Oregon State University under the direction of Dr.
A. Liston. This grant will allow the Oregon State University Herbarium to
complete the databasing and georeferencing of its estimated 156,500 fern,
gymnosperm, and flowering plant specimens collected in Oregon. With 3900
vascular plant species, the Oregon flora represents approximately 20% of the
plant species found in the United States. The OSU Herbarium is the principal
institution devoted to the documentation and study of Oregon's diverse flora.
The OSU Herbarium collection encompasses 125 years and the entire state,
providing comprehensive chronological, taxonomic and geographic coverage of
Oregon plants. Data sharing with local, state, regional, and national efforts
will be facilitated by a complete database of Oregon vascular plant specimens.
The specimen database is used in a wide range of applications, including 1) the
taxonomic study of the North American and Oregon floras; 2) documenting the
occurrence and status of rare and endangered plants; and 3) documenting the
distribution and spread of invasive plants. &lt;br/&gt;For each specimen,
complete label data will be captured, providing taxonomic, locality, habitat,
and collecting information. Each locality will be provided with latitude and
longitude, allowing voucher-based mapping of all Oregon vascular plants. The
specimen database and maps will be readily accessible via the internet. The OSU
Herbarium specimen database will be useful to the management of plant diversity
on federal, state, and private lands. Nearly 60% of Oregon's land is federally
owned. US Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, and other resource managers
throughout the state rely on plant taxonomic and distribution data provided by
the OSU Herbarium. The specimen database and online maps will greatly enhance
the accessibility of this information. Citizens and educators at all levels are
interested in the plant diversity of Oregon, but most do not have access to the
resources of the herbarium. The accessibility of label information and
distribution maps will provide new opportunities for the general public,
educators, and their students to increase their knowledge of Oregon's plants.
Approximately 16 undergraduate students will be employed in curatorial, data
entry, and georeferencing tasks associated with the project. These students will
gain experience in collections procedures, specimen curation, and data entry.
The OSU Herbarium is used by 10 courses taught in the Department of Botany and
Plant Pathology. The specimen database will enhance and provide new
opportunities for students enrolled in these courses. &lt;br/&gt;