* 0237562
* CAREER: Development of an Integrative Seed Biology Program
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Hiroyuki Nonogaki, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 05/31/2009
* USD 607,890.00

The goal is of this project aims is to establish a new, creative innovative
research and education program for seed biology. This program The Integrative
Seed Biology Program will consist of a new research project initiative on
elucidation of the mechanisms of seed germination and development of a new
curriculum for undergraduate and graduate teachingeducation.

The research in this program will focus on the biochemical and molecular
mechanisms of seed germination. Since the balance between the embryo growth
potential and the resistance of the endosperm determines whether the radicle
emerges, the research will focus on embryo- and endosperm-specific physiological
events and the interaction between these two tissues. Tomato seed, which is a
model system for germination research, and the seed of a model plant,
Arabidopsis, will be used in this project. In these species, the endosperm must
be weakened for germination to occur. In tomato seeds, endo beta mannanase is
involved in endosperm weakening. The promoter of tomato germination-specific
mannanase will be isolated using genome walk PCR and BAC library screening and
analyzed using the beta?-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene. Since the mannanase
gene is gibberellic acid (GA)-inducible, the GA-response motif(s) in the
promoter will be determined by deletion analysis. In addition, as the
germinative mannanase is expressed exclusively in the micropylar region of the
endosperm (endosperm cap), the DNA motifs that are associated with this tissue-
specific expression will be identified. This information will yield insights on
how a specific gene is expressed at a specific location at an appropriate stage
of development. A second area of research will identify the embryo-specific
factors involved in germination in tomato and Arabidopsis seeds. Abscisic acid
(ABA) inhibits germination but not endosperm weakening. Therefore, ABA is
thought to affect the embryo and block germination. The embryo-specific factors
that are suppressed (or enhanced) specifically by ABA will be isolated using the
subtraction PCR method and their roles in seed germination identified.

The educational part aspects of this program includes developing and
undergraduate and graduate course in seed biology. TIn these classes will
explore, basic phenomena in seed biology and recent outcomes fromcurrent
breakthroughs in seed research. will be introduced in common terms, using many
original slides. A seed biology web site will be created for public education.
This site will serve as an international portal to the integrated seed biology
resources and education activities for the public.

