* 0237065
* Investing in Multidisciplinary University Activities through Hawaii EPSCoR
* O/D,EPS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* James Gaines, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Denise Barnes
* 09/30/2006
* USD 8,995,525.00

The University of Hawaii has proposed a plan for Research
&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure Improvement (RII) with the overarching theme of
&lt;br/&gt;"Biodiversity in an Integrated Environment". The project involves the
&lt;br/&gt;collaboration of the University of Hawaii campuses at Manoa and Hilo.
&lt;br/&gt;The effort will be directed at three research thrust areas that are
&lt;br/&gt;consistent with the state's commitment to a research agenda that
&lt;br/&gt;targets responsible stewardship of its island ecosystems:
evolutionary &lt;br/&gt;genetics, ecosystems, and information technology for
environmental &lt;br/&gt;research. The research agenda will focus on Hawaii's
native and &lt;br/&gt;introduced invasive species and consider the impact of
human activities &lt;br/&gt;on ecosystem functionality and biological diversity.
Hawaii &lt;br/&gt;investigators will use new molecular and technical approaches
to study &lt;br/&gt;timely and substantive environmental research questions. A
partnership &lt;br/&gt;with Kamehameha Schools will enable researchers,
educators and students &lt;br/&gt;access to land of tremendous diversity for
enriched research and &lt;br/&gt;educational experiences. An Environmental
Information Technology &lt;br/&gt;Research Network will be established to store
and retrieve spacial &lt;br/&gt;data that can be used to model ecosystem
processes throughout the &lt;br/&gt;Hawaiian Islands and serve as a central
clearinghouse for biological &lt;br/&gt;resource
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii's RII effort will strengthen and increase
interactions and &lt;br/&gt;collaborations among researchers within the state as
well as with US &lt;br/&gt;mainland researchers and integrate research in
biodiversity with &lt;br/&gt;educational and outreach activities. K-12 students
and teachers will &lt;br/&gt;interact with university researchers in field work
designed to increase &lt;br/&gt;math and science interest and learning in
Hawaii's youth, particularly &lt;br/&gt;Native Hawaiian students. Infrastructure
support will also include &lt;br/&gt;funding of faculty and student travel,
start-up funding for new &lt;br/&gt;faculty, "seed funding' to promote
competitive collaborations among &lt;br/&gt;investigators and support for
research experiences of community college
&lt;br/&gt;students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;