* 0237377
* CAREER: Regulation of Spinal Cord Development by Hox10 Paralogous Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Ellen Carpenter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 624,998.00

Hox genes are expressed in many parts of vertebrate embryos and provide basic
information required to organize the body plan of the developing embryo. The
experiments that Dr. Carpenter's laboratory will perform focus on how Hox genes
organize the developing nervous system. They will look at three different Hox
genes, Hoxa10, Hoxc10, and Hoxd10. These three genes are expressed in the lumbar
spinal cord. This part of the spinal cord receives sensory information from the
lower part of the body and innervates the muscles of the rear limbs. Previous
studies have shown that when these Hox genes are mutated, lumbar spinal-cord
development is abnormal. In particular, mice carrying mutations in Hoxd10 walk
abnormally, suggesting that changes in spinal-cord organization are reflected in
behavioral changes. The PI's current studies will look at how these three genes
regulate some of the basic aspects of spinal-cord development. Hox genes are
thought to regulate when and where cells divide and how they become "specified,"
or assume different identities. These types of activities are very basic
functions required for embryonic development. Initially, the PI will look at the
production of different cell types in the spinal cord in animals carrying
mutations in these three genes. It is expected that if Hox genes regulate cell
division there will be changes in the location and number of cells produced in
the spinal cord when these genes are mutated. Motor neurons in the lumbar spinal
cord will be examined, as they are very important for spinal cord function.
Changes in their development might cause some of the behavioral changes that
have been described in Hoxd10 mutant mice. In addition, "downstream" genes that
are regulated by one of these genes, Hoxd10, will also be examined. Hox genes
are thought to control how different populations of cells are "specified" by
turning off or turning on downstream genes. Identification of the particular
genes that are turned off or turned on will explain how information provided by
Hoxd10 is translated into the specification of different types of cells.
Finally, the functions of the downstream genes will be examined by looking at
when and where these genes are expressed in the developing spinal cord.
Together, these approaches will provide information on how the three Hox10 genes
regulate some of the fundamental aspects of spinal-cord development. For the
education component of this project, the PI will design and mount a Web site for
investigation and self-query on topics in developmental neurobiology. These
topics are offered at both the graduate and undergraduate level at UCLA, so this
Web site will serve a wide variety of students. If successful at UCLA, this Web
site will be made available to neuroscience instructors at other institutions.