* 0237039
* Workshop on the development of a Tsunami Scenario Simulation Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Harry Yeh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 09/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0237039, Harry Yeh, University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;"Workshop on the
development of a Tsunami Scenario Simulation Program"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
action is to provide support for a workshop, be held in September 2002 in
Seattle, WA, to discuss the development of a collaborative research plan for
comprehensive and integrated scenario simulations for tsunami hazard mitigation.
The simulations include tsunami generation, propagation, runup/rundown motion,
warning transmission to the general public in the affected areas, evacuation and
rescue simulations, human behavior simulations, and short-term and long-term
societal and environmental impact simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the scenario simulation exercises is to give researchers an awareness and
experience of all aspects of tsunami science and hazards planning. In setting up
and running the simulations, and in evaluating the results, critical problems
will be identified for improvement in each specialized area and in the
interaction between disciplines. The exercises will provide a valuable common
background from which to forge and maintain coherence in the broadly
distributed, multi-disciplinary tsunami hazard mitigation community. In
addition, the integrated, highly visual character of the simulations will be of
great value for K-12 education on tsunami hazards, and for general public
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulation exercises will include physical
models, numerical models, informatics (the study of the structure, behavior, and
interactions of both natural and artificial computational systems), human
behavior models, communication simulations, and other exercises that will
integrate the tsunami source with its eventual effects on communities and the
environment. This activity is by nature a multi-university, multi-community, and
multi-disciplinary effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is not to
determine specific tsunami mitigation measures for specific coastal towns and
cities. Instead, the objective is to set up a fully integrated scenario for a
hypothetical situation (which could be based on an existing real coastal
community) to be investigated by researchers from a wide variety of disciplines,
working to solve a common problem from different viewpoints. The outcome will
provide the participants, sponsors, and coastal communities with valuable
experience, lessons learned from the model event, and will enhance and maintain
further research collaboration for tsunami hazard reduction. Involvement in the
scenario simulation, and work on the common problem, will lead each researcher
to interact closely with researchers in other specialized areas. The researchers
will obtain a broader picture for tsunami research, and identify critical
problems and linkages to be examined for improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcome from of the workshop will be a comprehensive research plan for the
earthquake engineering and hazards planning communities, in particular for those
investigators who deal with tsunami hazard prediction and mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;