* 0237999
* Collaborative Project: A GIS Database for Studying and Visualizing Tethyan Plate Collisions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Shuhab Khan, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 97,353.00

0237999&lt;br/&gt;Khan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative geoinformatics
project will involve a team of researchers at the University of Illinois -
Chicago (Flower, EAR-0238199), Houston (Khan, EAR-0237999), Missouri (Sandvol,
EAR-0238199) and SUNY-Buffalo (Sultan, EAR-0237481). The team will build an
interdisciplinary GIS database (TETHYS) as a tool for studying plate collision
responses in the Tethyan belt. TETHYS will reside at the University of Illinois
Supercomputer Facility - hub of StarTap, a high speed (155 Mbps) peering point
for national and international research network traffic. This arrangement will
accommodate the projected need for high-speed database queries, high-speed
networking and advanced visualization expertise. The database will include
digitized geological maps, structural indicators, geodetic data, remote sensing
data, sample-based major and trace element abundances, radiometric ages,
isotopic abundances for ophiolites, ultra-high pressure metamorphic rocks,
collision-related magmatic bodies, and seismic data pertaining to mantle and
crustal fabric and structure. On completion of the construction phase, the
TETHYS GIS webserver will become a node of the national GEOscience Network
(GEON); an ongoing initiative committed to creating solid earth geoscience
cyberinfrastructure linking multidisciplinary geoscience data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;