* 0237037
* CAREER: Signal Processing for Practical Data Communication over the Doubly-Selective Wireless Channel
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Philip Schniter, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2009
* USD 399,770.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0237037&lt;br/&gt;Philip Schmiter&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapidly evolving global information
infrastructure includes broadband wireless communication as a key component.
Communication technology of the future will need to operate at the data rates,
at high carrier frequencies, in high mobility situations, and under high levels
of co-channel interference, all while maintaining reliable data transmission
using small and inexpensive components. The fundamental challenge for future
wireless technology stems from the harsh characteristics of the wireless
propagation channel.&lt;br/&gt;In specific, reflections from objects in the
physical environment induce rapidly changing echo patterns which make it
difficult for the receiver to recover the transmitted information without error.
Especially challenging are doubly-selective channels, i.e., channels which echo
or blur the transmitted information significantly in both the time and frequency
domains. Since, these characteristics arise when high-rate information streams
are propagated at high frequencies in highly mobile environments, the success of
future wireless applications hinges on our ability to communicate information
reliably over the doubly-selective channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates practical signaling, detection, and estimation strategies for
spectrally-efficient broadband data communication over doubly-selective wireless
channels. Orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, known for its advantages
in time-non-selective fading, is used as a starting point in the
&lt;br/&gt;study of practical data detection and channel estimation methods.
Extending these ideas, the investigators focus on non-orthogonal multicarrier
signaling schemes which are specifically designed to optimize detection
performance under receiver complexity constraints. &lt;br/&gt;