* 0237783
* CAREER: Flexible, Ultra-Thin, Packaged Antennas and Arrays for Next Generation Wireless Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Mohammod Ali, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 04/30/2009
* USD 412,000.00

0237783&lt;br/&gt;Ali&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
research is to investigate, fabricate, and evaluate flexible, ultra-thin,
packaged antennas and arrays for future generation wireless applications. Such
antennas and arrays will be needed for use in wireless microsensors for pathogen
and bio-agent detection, in E-911 (emergency 911) integrated ultra-thin,
lightweight, mobile phones for location identification, and in wearable, ultra-
thin, multi-functional wireless devices for the police, firemen, and ambulance
personnel to ensure enhanced "homeland security." Flexible, ultra-thin, packaged
antennas will also play an important role in the development of miniature,
ultra-thin GPS (global positioning system) and RFID (radio frequency
identification device) modules for implantation under the skin of the terminally
ill (Alzheimer patient) and the disabled to pinpoint their locations and monitor
their condition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current state of the art in antenna
research does not address the challenges associated with flexible, ultra-thin,
packaged design which include narrow bandwidth (due to reduced thickness),
degradation in pattern and polarization (due to proximity to metals and
displays), and loss in gain (due to proximity to lossy materials). Fundamental
research is required to understand the basic properties of a wide variety of
antenna configurations both prior to and after packaging/embedding in order to
target and address issues such as, design for broader bandwidth, higher gain,
optimum pattern coverage, and good axial ratio (for circularly polarized
antennas). To realize these goals, a variety of antenna configurations including
non-traditional resonant and non-resonant slots, ultra-thin patches, and PIFAs
(planar inverted-F antennas) will be fabricated and studied primarily on
flexible substrates (thin-film flexible polymers and liquid crystal polymers
(LCPs)) both prior to and after packaging/embedding. Antennas will also be
investigated on uniquely modified printed circuit boards to significantly reduce
thickness without sacrificing performance. Novel, ultra-thin, circularly
polarized antennas will be explored for operation in E-911 integrated mobile
phones, in wearable devices, and in implanted GPS and RFID modules. Antennas
will be studied using full-wave electromagnetic simulation prior to fabrication.
Upon fabrication they will be characterized for input impedance, pattern, and
gain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will bring forth fundamental advances
in knowledge and innovation on miniature, ultra-thin, packaged antennas and
arrays for future generation wireless devices, which will directly benefit the
U.S. economy. The findings of this research will be disseminated through
seminars given in local libraries, articles published in technical and non-
technical literature, web-based databases, CD-ROMs, and through conference
presentations. The proposed project will significantly enhance capabilities for
research in microwave engineering at the University of South Carolina (USC) and
provide the basic infrastructure required to obtain future competitive federal
grants and to educate and train qualified microwave engineers. The major thrusts
of the educational component of this proposal for the next several years will
include the development of (1) a senior-year undergraduate/graduate level
microwave engineering laboratory course, (2) a graduate course on microwave
active and passive circuit design, and (3) the reorganization of a graduate
course on "Antennas and Radiation" to make it equally suitable for
undergraduates. This project will actively involve undergraduates, high-school
students, and middle and high school teachers, female and underrepresented
minorities by making their research experiences exciting, fun, and rewarding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;