* 0238315
* CAREER:  Fundamental Lower Bound and Tradeoff Problems in Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Jun Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 07/31/2009
* USD 420,691.00

In this research the PI will investigate the fundamental tradeoff, lower bound,
and impossibility results in important areas of computer networks. Such results
are important since they typically end the vigorous search for a better
algorithm that does not exist, or lead to provably optimal algorithms. They will
also help clarify the fundamental issues and structures of the problem domain
under study. Obtaining such results is challenging because they require a deep
understanding of the domain knowledge and a solid background in theoretical
computer science.

In the beginning, the PI will focus on lower bound and tradeoff results in two
main areas: (1) packet scheduling, and (2) peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. In the
research on lower bound problems in packet scheduling, the PI plans to extend
the accomplished tradeoff results between delay bound and computational
complexity to a much stronger and more practical computational model. The PI
will also look into the complexity of establishing other QoS guarantees such as
bandwidth, jitter bound and short-term fairness. Finally, the PI will study the
complexity needed to exactly track the GPS (General Processor Sharing) clock,
and/or to approximate GPS time within a certain error range. In the research on
lower bound problems in P2P networks, the PI plans to continue his research on
the tradeoffs between the routing table size and network diameter in P2P
networks, and answer the fundamental research questions such as "what is
tradeoff between the fault-tolerance overhead of the P2P routing algorithms and
their routing efficiency?." In addition to investigating lower bound and
tradeoff problems in these two areas, the PI will apply the insights and
expertise obtained to other areas of networking such as application-level
multicast and mobile computing.

The goal of the proposed project is not only to advance research on theoretical
and foundational aspects of networking, but also to educate and prepare graduate
as well as undergraduate students for identifying, characterizing and answering
such theoretical questions. The PI observes that there is limited coverage of
such issues in the conventional networking curriculum. To fill this gap, the PI
will actively take part in synergistic educational activities including
curriculum development, course teaching, student mentoring, and professional
skill development.

Since the proposed work on lower bounds and tradeoffs is fundamental research,
it has the potential to significantly impact the networking field in multiple
dimensions. First, such results delineate feasible "regions" in which an
algorithm can achieve with given assumptions. Second, during this process, it
significantly clarifies the issues and structures of the problem, which may lead
to new problems to solve. Finally, in cases where existing algorithms are not
yet optimal, the tradeoff research guides researchers to find algorithms that
are better or optimal. Although the proposed research is theoretical in nature,
it has important applications to real algorithms and protocols, and constitutes
a fundamental contribution if successful. The broader impact of the work
includes the PI's sustained outreach efforts to broaden the participation of
under-represented groups (HBCU institutions) in research and education, and to
engage undergraduate students in theoretical networking research.

