* 0238787
* PECASE:  A Systematic Approach in Determining Material Surface Properties that Promote Stem Cell Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Treena Livingston, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/28/2009
* USD 406,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: A Systematic Approach in Determining Material
Surface&lt;br/&gt;Properties that Promote Stem Cell
Differentiation&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Foundation @ NJIT, New Jersey Institute
of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal details an integrated research
and educational plan centered on the development of a tissue engineering and
biomaterials program in the department of Biomedical Engineering at New Jersey
Institute of Technology. The research component investigates a systematic
approach in evaluating biomaterials as potential scaffolds for cell based
therapies and integrating these concepts in new undergraduate and graduate
courses in biomaterials and biocompatibility and principles of tissue
engineering, respectively. The goal is to also develop a program that will have
an impact on increasing the number of underrepresented groups in the field of
engineering and science by introducing concepts to high school students from
underrepresented minority groups and training high school teachers of all girl
schools interactive approaches to teaching engineering to their
students.&lt;br/&gt;The emerging technology of tissue engineering has the
potential of becoming the therapy of choice for the regeneration of a number of
damaged or diseased tissues and organs. The approach is to use cells, instead of
drugs, to treat various diseases or disorders. At the forefront of investigation
is the use of stem cells because of their ability to differentiate into various
cell types and thus, promote the regeneration of the damaged or diseased tissue
of interest. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotential cells that are
capable of differentiating along several lineage pathways. MSCs, which are
obtained from adult bone marrow and expanded in culture, are believed to be
valuable as a readily available and abundant source of cells in the tissue
engineering field. However, for treating damaged or diseased connective tissues,
such as large bone fracture, osteoarthritis, tendon and ligament injuries, and
spinal cord injury, MSCs must be combined with an appropriate scaffold material
that promotes attachment and differentiation. For this technology to advance
into clinical application, the development of improved scaffold materials is
needed. The goal of this research program is to investigate in a systematic
fashion the optimal surface properties and characteristics of materials that
promote stem cell differentiation. &lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and
others have demonstrated that MSCs, when combined with bioactive ceramic
scaffolds induce bone formation in large, long bone defects. However, complete
repair and return of mechanical function of the long bone is limited due to the
brittle nature and/or poor remodeling of the ceramic material. Other synthetic
and natural biomaterials with improved mechanical and degradation properties
have been investigated in in vitro experiments as potential scaffolds for the
MSCs, but once implanted, MSCs fail to induce bone repair. Therefore, the
objectives of the proposed research are two-fold. First, this study is designed
to gain a clearer understanding of the mechanism by which calcium phosphate
ceramics promote MSC differentiation and synthesis of new bone tissue by
examining the effect of surface properties (e.g. chemistry and topography) and
ion dissolution/reactions in influencing how stem cells adhere, the morphology
they assume, and subsequent differentiation. These fundamental studies will
further advance the development of improved materials for stem cell induced bone
regeneration. Second, as an extension of this work, a novel study examining
polymeric materials that have well defined surface properties and/or
architectures that modulate stem cell morphology will be investigated. As a
function of cell shape, stem cell differentiation into cell phenotypes of bone,
cartilage, and adipose tissue will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;