* 0238028
* CAREER: A Robust Fully Decentralized Read/Write File System
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Robert Morris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2009
* USD 410,773.00

The core of this proposal is the design and implementation of Ivy, a fully
decentralized read/write file system built from untrusted network storage. Ivy
will act as a case study in a larger effort to explore how to build robust and
trustworthy systems from unreliable and mutually-distrustful components. The Ivy
project will further network research by providing a challenging test case for
DHTs and overlay networks.

Ivy will itself demonstrate new levels of availability and security, and will
provide a powerful new platform to support distributed collaboration. The
motivating application for Ivy is collaboration among distributed groups of
users. The users might be cooperating in writing a document, maintaining a web
site, or developing software. Such collaboration is often awkward with current
technology, especially if the different users are in different organizations, or
if their organization has insufficient financial or technical resources. For
example, cooperating people in different companies, or in different government
agencies, often have to resort to e-mail to exchange updates to shared
documents. The reason that this happens is that a more sophisticated solution
would typically require all participants to place undue trust in each other or
in some central entity. For example, if a distributed group of collaborators
decide to share a single NFS file server, then they must all trust whoever runs
it to keep it reliable and secure, and they may also have to have a formal
financial arrangement in order to pay for the server. The group members would
have to trust each other to update shared files in a responsible way, and
(equivalently) to keep their hosts secure against outsiders breaking in and
modifying shared files. If the participants have any degree of mutual distrust,
a conventional file server won't be appropriate. Such a group would like to
enjoy the illusion of a reliable central file server, trustable to control
updates by any member, without having to trust or rely on any single system
component or user.

Ivy will explore this theme in an extreme form, viewing the Internet as a
location-transparent data store rather than as a communication system. The main
obstacles to realization of this vision are the unreliability and
untrustworthiness of Internet nodes. Thus Ivy's design has two main concerns:
avoidance of single points of failure, in the form of either critical components
or critical data structures; and achieving integrity with untrusted
participants. The core of Ivy's design is that it keeps all information in per-
participant logs. Participants append update operations to their own logs, and
scan the other participants' logs to determine the current state of the file
system. Ivy stores and replicates the log records in the DHash peer-to-peer
block storage system, so that a participant's log is available even when the
participant is not. This use of logs greatly aids both elimination of single
points of failure and dealing with untrusted participants. The fact that each
log has a single writer makes log data easy to authenticate. It also means that
Ivy need not use locks internally, since it has no directly shared mutable data
structures; this eliminates both reliability and trust problems in the case of
an unresponsive lock holder. The presence of the logs offers the potential of
recovering from accidental or malicious damage, by ignoring suspect logs or log
entries.

This proposal has intellectual merit as both systems and algorithmic research.
The Ivy system will provide a unique combination of standard read/write file
system semantics, complete decentralization, high availability, and arms-length
trust relationship among participants. The work will also drive research into
algorithms that turn untrusted and unreliable components into systems with well-
defined reliability and security properties. This is an aspect of distributed
systems that is facing new and exciting challenges with the advent of Internet-
wide systems.

This proposal will have broad impact by involving both undergraduates and
graduate students at MIT. The work contains a number of sub-projects suitable
for students at both levels; as a result these students will learn how to design
and build practical distributed systems out of untrusted components. The PI is
currently developing a graduate-level course in distributed systems. Initial
work on Ivy has already influenced revisions in the course structure and formed
the basis for new lab assignments.