* 0238168
* CAREER: Genomic Analysis for Rates and Patterns of New Gene Originations in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Manyuan Long, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2008
* USD 964,155.00

In this project, Dr. Long investigates the rates and patterns of new gene
origination in the model organism Drosophila (the fruit fly) by using
experimental and computational genomic analysis in research and teaching.
Previous investigations have revealed a number of young genes with peculiar
evolutionary features, which include the rapid emergence of novel expression
patterns, accelerated rates of evolution, and an asymmetrical distribution of
new gene donor sequences within the Drosophila genome. This project initiates a
large-scale effort to explore gene originations via recent (within 10 million
years) retroposition events in Drosophila genomes. (1) The investigator will
measure the rate of new gene origination via retroposition by undertaking a
genomic screen of recently evolved genes in the D. melanogaster subgroup species
using an approach integrating genomic analysis and molecular evolution. He will
identify recently retroposed genes in the D. melanogaster genome by means of
genomic hybridization experiments and computational analysis of D. melanogaster
genome sequences. (2) He recently observed in his laboratory the first pattern
of new gene origination, asymmetric retroposition. New autosomal genes that
retroposed from X-linked parental genes are more common than are new X-linked
genes that retroposed from autosomal parental genes. (3) He will investigate
divergence in function of new genes by examining their tissue-specific
expression patterns using DNA microarrays and other RNA analysis techniques. (4)
He will train young researchers at different levels, including undergraduates,
graduates, and postdoctoral fellows, to meet the urgent needs in the field. He
will enhance the education of undergraduates at selected small midwestern
colleges by giving lectures on evolutionary genomics at the colleges and
providing summer research projects in his laboratory to two students from these
schools each year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will add significantly to
the understanding of one of the most basic phenomena of biology: how do new
genes and coding portions of genomes evolve? Not only does this work promise to
enhance our knowledge base, the large number of new genes identified will also
provide a valuable resource for the further study of evolutionary genomics.
Furthermore, this project will train young scientists, including undergraduates,
in the broad issues of evolutionary genomics&lt;br/&gt;