* 0238285
* CAREER: Document Image Degradation Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2010
* Elisa Barney Smith, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2010
* USD 429,920.00

Abstract 0238285 CAREER: Document Image Degradation Analysis Elisa H. Barney
Smith Boise State U

Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is used to convert documents from images to
text form. This allows the documents on the WWW, in company archives or for
government intelligence gathering to be searched for content. The documents that
are heavily degraded by printing, scanning, photocopying and faxing may be
easily readable to humans, but the recognition accuracies are very low requiring
human intervention. Understanding the image degradations introduced by printing
and scanning can lead to improvements in OCR. Instead of training the computer
to recognize characters by providing it with a large variety of examples of
characters under different degradation situations we will develop a more
effective method based on understanding the degradation and being able to
estimate the degradation characteristics for each document.

To improve the performance of OCR, the PI proposes to model the nonlinear
systems of printing, scanning, photocopying and FAXing. A calibrated model can
predict how a document will look after being subjected to these processes and
can be used to develop products that degrade text images less. Once
statistically validated, researchers will have the confidence to use these
models. Estimation of the parameters to these models from a short character
string allows continuous calibration to account for spatially-variant systems.
These models and parameters will be used to partition the training set based on
modeled degradations and match the appropriate partition to the test data at
hand to improve OCR accuracy. This technical side will be combined with an
educational component to develop an introduction to engineering course for
education majors so they may understand, appreciate and educate all K-12
students about how math and science are used in engineering.

