* 0238486
* CAREER:  High Quality and Efficient Rendering of Discrete Primitives for Interactive Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Baoquan Chen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 01/31/2008
* USD 420,959.00

Over the past decades, most of the previous graphics and visualization systems
are polygon based. However, with the advent of scientific simulations and
advanced biomedical and industrial acquisition devices, more and more objects of
unprecedented size are produced with discrete samples as natural
representations. In this proposal, the PI will generalize image resampling
theory to describe the fundamental resampling problem of graphics rendering.
Guided by this theory, practical approaches to performing high quality and
efficient resampling will be designed and further applied to the rendering of
various discrete objects, including 2D image warping, volume rendering, and
point-based rendering. The developed theory will also used to guide the design
of new point-based representation, so that discrete primitives as well as
polygons can be rendered in a unified rendering system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly designed algorithms will be validated and
disseminated through application to mainly two real-world applications that the
PI has already been collaborating on. The volume rendering algorithms will be
used to visualize large simulations, in areas such as aerodynamics,
astrophysics, and chemical contamination dispersion. The point-based modeling
and rendering algorithms will be used to build point-based models from modern
laser range scans and ultimately provide an interactive system for digital
architecture design. This validation and dissemination are achieved by pursuing
a vigorous education plan, undertaking a number of complementary initiatives:
(1) developing new graduate and undergraduate courses at the University of
Minnesota; (2) developing educational software for teaching; and (3) other
activities including organizing workshops and tutorials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The algorithms coherently designed
using the resampling theory represent improved rendering techniques for
scientific visualization systems by delivering higher quality and better
efficiency. The proposed research is well built upon the PI's solid knowledge
and extensive experience with image and volume resampling and antialiasing, as
well as accelerated volume and polygon rendering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed career development plan will not only advance the state-
of-the-art of scientific visualization and computer graphics, but also make
significant contributions to many other research fields which are facilitated by
advanced scientific visualization, besides the ones being used for methodology
validation and dissemination during the course of this project. Possibilities in
these fields will likely open, stimulating even more applications of the
technology than originally conceived. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;