* 0238858
* CAREER:  Challenging the Structure-Function Relationship of Nitrifiers and Nitrification in Activated Sludge Using Molecular Biology and Mechanistic Modeling Tools
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Daniel Oerther, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2009
* USD 453,746.00

0238858 Oerther The primary research goal of this NSF CAREER proposal is to
reduce required sludge ages for successful nitrification in activated sludge
systems. The primary educational goals are to integrate modeling of biological
treatment systems with existing molecular biology courses taught at the
University of Cincinnati and to conduct a preconference workshop on molecular
biology and modeling tools at the Water Environment Federation Technical
Exposition and Conference (WEFTEC). This research and education plan expands the
ongoing efforts of the Principal Investigator (PI) to develop and demonstrate
novel approaches to bridge the gap between engineers and ecologists by
challenging the hypothesis that, increased diversity among nitrifying
microorganisms reduces required sludge ages for nitrification in suspended
growth activated sludge systems with mechanistic models and to transfer these
technologies to practitioners. Intellectual Merit. Successfully bridging the gap
between function-based engineering and structure-based microbiology represents a
fundamental crosscutting challenge that must be addressed before the results of
molecular biology tools can be fully integrated with environmental engineering
practice. Based upon his interdisciplinary education, including degrees in the
biological sciences (B.A.) as well as environmental engineering (B.S., M.S.,
Ph.D.), the PI is uniquely qualified to meet this challenge. The PI's
multidisciplinary approach to the optimization of nitrification and the
integration of state-of-the-art research techniques into the undergraduate and
graduate curricula fit with the institutional goals of the University of
Cincinnati and the five-year plan of the Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering. Broader Impacts. The PI has a strong history of supporting women
and minority researchers in his laboratory through the Women In Science and
Engineering (WISE) program, Rowe Center for Women in Engineering of the College
of Engineering at UC. Four of his current seven students are women and three are
minority. The CLSM described in the proposal will dramatically enhance the
research and teaching infrastructure of UC by providing the first CLSM facility
on the main (non-medical) campus. The proposed WEFTEC pre-conference workshop
represents a first effort to transfer molecular biology tools from academia to
environmental engineering practitioners.