* 0238529
* CAREER: The Adaptation of Plant Development to Environmental Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Jocelyn Malamy, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 01/31/2008
* USD 625,000.00

0238529&lt;br/&gt;Malamy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant survival depends on
adaptation to adverse conditions. Harnessing the plant's own complex machinery
for adaptation to environment stresses has tremendous potential as a strategy
for improvement of crop yields and extending the geographical range for crop
growth. One plant adaptation mechanism is to optimize organ number and location
in accordance with the availability and distribution of resources. Despite the
importance of this developmental response, the molecular mechanisms that
underlie morphological adaptation are essentially unknown. The Principal
Investigator has found that the development of lateral roots in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana is dramatically repressed by mild drought stress, providing
a model in which to study adaptation. To this end, her lab has isolated lateral
root development (lrd) mutants that are defective in this response. Based on
wild-type and mutant studies, they have defined the LRD pathway that directs
root system adaptation. Key feature of the pathway are: (1) the plant hormones
abscicic acid (ABA) and auxin (IAA) play critical opposing roles in mediating
the pathway; (2) lrd mutants show aberrant phenotypes in several ABA-mediated
responses, including a marked tolerance to dehydration; and (3) the ERECTA gene,
which encodes a putative shoot-specific receptor protein kinase, plays an
essential role in the osmotic repression of lateral root formation. Based on
these findings, the researchers will characterize the function of the LRD and
ERECTA genes in adaptation, and study the role of hormone accumulation and
localization in the LRD pathway. The long-term goal of the project is to learn
how to use a plant's innate ability to adjust to environmental stress for crop
improvement. The Principal Investigator's interest in innovative approaches to
solving the worldwide problem of food deficit has also led her to design a
course to expose students to this complex problem. The course is designed to
allow upper level undergraduates from many disciplines to become personally
invested in issues of global importance such as famine and unequal distribution
of food. Working with a multi-disciplinary team of instructors, students will
learn about the biological, political and economic issues involved in world
hunger and discuss possible solutions. A key part of this course will be the
involvement of students in research projects conducted by the instructors, and
the opportunity to continue this research beyond the scope of the class. Such
early awareness and involvement in this global problem will hopefully influence
students in their career choices, guiding them into areas which will generate
further knowledge and progress in providing adequate food to afflicted
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;