* 0238570
* CAREER: Effective Methods for Finding Software Errors
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Dawson Engler, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Software reliability is one of the most important problems in
computer&lt;br/&gt;science. A single operating system error can crash the
machine. A single&lt;br/&gt;security hole can compromise the integrity of the
entire system or, as&lt;br/&gt;software and its errors is replicated, the
integrity of entire networks.&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on practical
techniques to effectively find large&lt;br/&gt;numbers of such software errors.
Initial results are promising: the&lt;br/&gt;approach has found hundreds of
security holes and thousands of serious&lt;br/&gt;errors in the Linux operating
system, as well as in large
commercial&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research centers on using
static analysis to find errors in source&lt;br/&gt;code. It uses two main
techniques: (1) metacompilation (MC) to check&lt;br/&gt;correctness rules (such
as ``a call to the lock() function must be paired&lt;br/&gt;with a call to
unlock()'') and (2) belief analysis to infer such
rules&lt;br/&gt;automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metacompilation uses
programmer-written, system-specific static checkers&lt;br/&gt;to find software
bugs. Because these extensions can be written by&lt;br/&gt;system implementors
themselves, they can take into account the ad hoc&lt;br/&gt;(sometimes bizarre)
semantics of a system. Because they are compiler&lt;br/&gt;based, they also get
the benefits of automatic static analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Belief analysis:
A major obstacle to finding program errors in a real&lt;br/&gt;system is knowing
what correctness rules the system must obey. These&lt;br/&gt;rules are often
undocumented or specified in an ad hoc manner.&lt;br/&gt;Belief analysis
automatically infers such checking information from&lt;br/&gt;the source code
itself, rather than the programmer, thereby avoiding&lt;br/&gt;the need for a
priori knowledge of system rules. It works by analyzing&lt;br/&gt;source code to
infer what programmers believe to be true and checking&lt;br/&gt;these beliefs
for contradictions. For example, if a call to ``lock()''&lt;br/&gt;is paired
with a call to ``unlock()'' 1000 times and not paired once,&lt;br/&gt;this is a
good indication that the code believes these calls must be&lt;br/&gt;paired, and
that the single deviation is an error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
also involve an educational component. The most&lt;br/&gt;significant feature
will be heavily involving undergraduates in research.&lt;br/&gt;Empirically,
doing so helps them think creatively, independently, as&lt;br/&gt;well as
pushing them to go much deeper than a typical class.&lt;br/&gt;