* 0238131
* Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 652,501.00

CSTB will convene an expert committee to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
wireless technology and application trends and their implications for spectrum
management and policy. The committee will seek broad input and produce a report
with consensus findings and recommendations. This project will be grounded in
technical expertise but examine the interplay among technical, economic, and
policy issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The committee will deliver a final report
18 months from its first meeting that would provide analysis, conclusions, and
recommendations based on input gathered during the study and committee expertise
and deliberations. The final report will be subject to NRC review procedures and
would be prepared in sufficient quantity to ensure its distribution to the
sponsors and other relevant parties in accordance with NRC policy. The report
will be made available to the public without restriction. It will be posted on
the World Wide Web as well as distributed in printed form. Briefings to key
people in government, industry, academia and the nonprofit sector are
anticipated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project will
flow from its examination of an arena for research--wireless communications--
that is poised for growth. It will characterize trends and illuminate
opportunities for new R&amp;D activity. Because the project will relate
technical possibilities to economic concerns and legal/regulatory options, it
will also speak to opportunities for social science research. The broader
impacts of the project will also derive from its interdisciplinary character.
The project will leverage the technical insight of the committee and its
analysis to improve the quality of policy analysis in the wireless arena
(spectrum management and related policy), which will affect the public.s ability
to benefit from wireless innovations and economic competitiveness associated
with production and uses of wireless technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;