* 0238108
* CAREER: Ferroelectric Heterostructure Integration With GaAs Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Jamie Phillips, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 01/31/2008
* USD 406,000.00

0238108&lt;br/&gt;Phillips&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER program explores the
integration of ferroelectrics with semiconductor optoelectronics to advance
device performance levels and to introduce new functionality for optoelectronic
integrated circuits (OEIC). The integration of the unique functionality of
ferroelectrics into semiconductor optoelectronics could revolutionize device and
OEIC engineering. The objective of this program is to enable the integration of
ferroelectrics with optoelectronics through research activities, and to prepare
and train future scientists and engineers in optoelectronics through educational
and outreach activities. This program will provide a greater understanding of
the physics of ferroelectrics on compound semiconductors and their potential
impact on optoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivations: Ferroelectrics
offer unique physical properties including spontaneous polarization,
pyroelectric, piezoelectric, and electro-optic properties. These properties
offer a variety of ways of controlling electrical and optical behavior that are
advantageous for optoelectronics. Semiconductor heterostructures and the use of
quantum electronic confinement have been successful in providing the tools
necessary to realize OEICs, though they do not possess the intrinsically strong
electro-optic properties, index of refraction contrast, and polarization
properties of ferroelectric oxide materials. The integration of ferroelectrics
on compound semiconductors would have a tremendous impact on optoelectronics,
enabling optical sources, modulators, detectors, and electronics integration
with increased levels of performance and new
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research: The research activities of this
program will consist of four tasks: integration of ferroelectric materials with
GaAs, multilayer structures and thin films with compositional gradients,
polarization and electro-optic properties for use in optoelectronics, and
integration of ferroelectric thin films with optoelectronic devices. Each task
will progress towards the end goal of successfully inserting ferroelectric thin
films with strong electro-optic and polarization properties into edge-emitting
and surface-emitting integrated laser-modulator devices. The research in each
task area will make a significant scientific contribution and provide a basis
for the investigator to continue future research as a leader in the field. The
research efforts will advance the field of OEICs through ferroelectric
integration, and will provide new optoelectronic engineering possibilities
through ferroelectric/semiconductor
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teaching: Educational activities will be
formally integrated in this program through the revision of an undergraduate
semiconductor device course and introduction of a graduate course on multi-
functional oxide materials and devices into the electrical engineering
curriculum. The course modifications and additions will focus on improvement of
teaching and learning through use of existing educational resources at the
university. Teaching activities will be further integrated through mentoring of
graduate and undergraduate students participating in the research efforts of the
program. This program will include outreach activities to encourage
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering through cooperation with university societies and through
implementation of optoelectronics demonstrations for local elementary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The integrated research and
educational activities will serve to advance optoelectronics integration
technology, which will impact fields enabling the information age such as fiber-
optic telecommunications, data storage and processing, and optical computing.
These efforts will also establish a foundation for the PI and the department to
lead further research and education in ferroelectric/semiconductor integration
for optoelectronics. Outreach efforts are expected to promote diversity in
future optoelectronics engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;