* 0238545
* SBIR Phase II:   Novel Ultrasensitive Gas Chromatography (GC) Detector with Highly Specific Response to Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Paul Jarski, DAKOTA TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2006
* USD 646,078.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance
commercialization of an aromatic-specific laser ionization detector (ArSLID).
The photoionization detectors (PIDs) that are widely used as gas chromatography
(GC) detectors and hand-held organic vapor analyzers form a natural basis of
comparison for the ArSLID concept. The ArSLID uses a high repetition rate pulsed
laser instead of a vacuum ultraviolet lamp to create molecular ions. The
prototype ArSLID built and tested in Phase I is approximately 10-times more
sensitive, has ten-times shorter response time, and is several orders of
magnitude more selective toward aromatic hydrocarbons than any commercially
available PID. The linear dynamic range is at least 5 orders-of-magnitude. The
ArSLID is also immune from interferences by water vapor or oxygen. Technical
improvements planned for Phase II include improving the resolution by 4 bits and
correction for variations in the laser pulse repetition frequency. Features will
be added to facilitate easy integration of the ArSLID with existing GCs. Another
focus of Phase II will be applications development to show the versatility and
value of ArSLID. The Phase I work, which emphasized GC detection, will be
expanded to HPLC detection, which opens up tremendous opportunities in the Life
Sciences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aromatic-specific detector will
find a wide range of applications as the detector for gas chromatography, high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), general vapor monitoring, and
specialized environmental techniques. Of these, the HPLC detector has the
greatest commercial potential as a highly sensitive, low cost alternative the
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;