* 0238760
* CAREER:  Correlation, Coherence, and Disorder in Nanoscale Devices and Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Joel Moore, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award combines research on electronic properties of low-dimensional
systems with educational activities for both university students and the wider
community. The research projects involve new phenomena which emerge when
electrons are so tightly confined in one or more directions that their motion in
these directions is quantized. Such confinement is realized both in artificial
nanostructures, such as quantum dots, and in complex materials, such as carbon
nanotubes and cuprate superconductors. The research will focus on three areas.
The first research area concerns the strong electronic interactions in small
"artificial atom" quantum dots and in single-molecule devices. The principal
investigator (PI) will study interaction effects on multiple coupled spin and
charge degrees of freedom in quantum dot systems, and the appearance of strong
electron-vibrational coupling in molecular devices. The second research area is
quantum phase transitions with disorder in two dimensions. The PI plans to study
diluted quantum antiferromagnets and quantum effects in percolative
superconductors. These projects are related to the PI's continuing work on
superconductor-insulator transitions and quantum Hall transitions. The third
research area is the quantum coherence of Cooper pairs, spins, and excitons. The
PI will study the effective limits on coherent behavior in strongly interacting
electronic systems such as superconducting devices and exciton gases. These
research directions are expected to have an impact on technology in the
relatively near future. Quantum dots have already been commercialized in
applications such as optical tagging of biomolecules, and molecular devices and
offer a possible route around the size limitations of silicon electronics.
Quantum phase transitions are of fundamental interest in theory of condensed
matter and occur in technologically important materials. Quantum coherent
electronic devices like the SQUID are already in use for applications such as
functional MRI. The educational component of this CAREER proposal involves
course development, graduate and undergraduate student supervision within the
university, and outreach to high school students and others outside the
university. Educational initiatives include a new journal club for graduate
students, new course material related to nanoscience and nanotechnology, and
public lectures on this exciting and fundamental field of physics. %%% This
CAREER award combines research on electronic properties of low-dimensional
systems with educational activities for both university students and the wider
community. The research projects involve new phenomena which emerge when
electrons are so tightly confined in one or more directions that their motion in
these directions is quantized. Such confinement is realized both in artificial
nanostructures, such as quantum dots, and in complex materials, such as carbon
nanotubes and cuprate superconductors. The research will focus on three areas.
The first research area concerns the strong electronic interactions in small
"artificial atom" quantum dots and in single-molecule devices. The principal
investigator (PI) will study interaction effects on multiple coupled spin and
charge degrees of freedom in quantum dot systems, and the appearance of strong
electron-vibrational coupling in molecular devices. The second research area is
quantum phase transitions with disorder in two dimensions. The PI plans to study
diluted quantum antiferromagnets and quantum effects in percolative
superconductors. These projects are related to the PI's continuing work on
superconductor-insulator transitions and quantum Hall transitions. The third
research area is the quantum coherence of Cooper pairs, spins, and excitons. The
PI will study the effective limits on coherent behavior in strongly interacting
electronic systems such as superconducting devices and exciton gases. These
research directions are expected to have an impact on technology in the
relatively near future. Quantum dots have already been commercialized in
applications such as optical tagging of biomolecules, and molecular devices and
offer a possible route around the size limitations of silicon electronics.
Quantum phase transitions are of fundamental interest in theory of condensed
matter and occur in technologically important materials. Quantum coherent
electronic devices like the SQUID are already in use for applications such as
functional MRI. The educational component of this CAREER proposal involves
course development, graduate and undergraduate student supervision within the
university, and outreach to high school students and others outside the
university. Educational initiatives include a new journal club for graduate
students, new course material related to nanoscience and nanotechnology, and
public lectures on this exciting and fundamental field of physics. ***