* 0238340
* CAREER:  Realizing the Potential of Wireless Adhoc Networks Through Holistic Resource Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Saswati Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The proposed research is directed towards developing networking solutions for
ubiquitous computing - which has the promise to open up many new applications
leading to an overall improvement of productivity at our homes and offices and
would result in a better quality of life. The networking challenge is to design
seamless, high quality wireless adhoc communication among a large number of
small inexpensive computers. These nodes are expected to self-organize into
networks capable of discharging complex computing and communication
functionalities which lead to acute resource limitations. The constrained
resources are bandwidth, power and buffer memory. Furthermore, the dynamic
nature of the topology and the geographical separation of nodes require
distributed control. The proposed research seeks to provide the desired quality
of service to users in spite of the resource limitations. We note that
bandwidth, memory and power are interdependent resources. The coupling is due to
the fact that the temporary scarcity of one can be compensated by leveraging the
availability of another. This interdependence can be exploited to design a
comprehensive management scheme, for power, memory and bandwidth, which
significantly enhances the traffic carrying capability of wireless networks. The
next key observation is that in ubiquitous computing individual nodes are idle
most of the time, but must handle occasional bursts of activity. The traffic
handling capability increases many-fold if idle resources of the neighbors are
leveraged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to design an optimal
distributed control framework which uses local observations and partial
information of the resource requirements and availabilities at other nodes to
attain (a) an efficient and comprehensive utilization of individual resources
and (b) a judicious usage of others idle resources when the individuals
resources are not sufficient. The resulting protocols are expected to be robust
to variations in networking traffic and dynamic topological changes on account
of mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will promote the training of high
caliber students to fill the expanding need for capable scientists and engineers
in the information technology field. Undergraduates will be involved in wireless
research through creative design projects. The design projects will target adhoc
applications of societal significance such as adhoc networking of vehicles e.g.,
cars for preventing low-visibility related accidents. Supervision of doctoral
research will be a core component of the overall
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall education mission of the home
institution (University of Pennsylvania) will be furthered through the design of
two new courses in the wireless area at undergraduate and graduate level, and
introduction of seminars and industry collaborations. The outreach activity will
motivate women towards careers in engineering. The specific plan is to reach out
to women students by participating in (a) girl scout activities as group
leader/mentor and (b) local IEEE student branches, society of women in
engineering (SWIE) and synergistic activities in local community colleges,
involve them in innovative projects and subsequently proactively hire women PhD
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;