* 0238174
* CAREER: Signal Processing Research in Ultra Wideband Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Zhi Tian, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2009
* USD 405,409.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;0238174&lt;br/&gt;Zhi Tian &lt;br/&gt;Michigan Tech
Univ.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the recent release of the Ultra Wideband (UWB)
signal spectral mask by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in 2002, UWB
has emerged as an exciting technology whose ``time has come'' for commercial
wireless communications, and local area networking. Conveying information over
Impulse-like Radio (IR) waveforms, UWB comes with uniquely attractive features:
low-power-density carrier-free&lt;br/&gt;transmissions, ample multipath
diversity, low-complexity baseband transceivers, a potential for huge increase
in capacity, and the capability to overlay existing RF systems. However, to
bring the potency&lt;br/&gt;of IR to fruition, UWB research and development has
to cope with formidable challenges that include: high sensitivity to timing the
reception of ultra-short pulses, mitigation of fading propagation effects with
pronounced frequency-selectivity, low-complexity constraints in decoding high-
performance multiple access protocols, and the strict power limitations imposed
by the desire to minimize interference between UWB communicators, and co-
existing RF systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses timely signal
processing issues arising in UWB communications, with focuses on: (1) The
development of optimal and low-complexity sub-optimal timing epoch estimators
along with metrics to assess their performance, and influence on the bit error
probability and throughput of UWB systems. (2) The derivation and convergence
analysis of low-complexity near-optimal soft-decision based multiuser detectors,
and multi-channel equalizers for UWB multiple access protocols. (3) The
investigation of overlay issues, modulation schemes, coding, decoding, and
interference suppression algorithms to enable UWB spectral mask compatibility,
and co-existence with other wireless services. (4) The deployment of multiple
transmit-receive antennae to improve performance of low-complexity decoding,
timing estimation, and multiuser detection. The outcome of this research will
impact the basic theory, design, and deployment of forthcoming multiple access
UWB wireless systems.