* 0238426
* CAREER:  Nitrogen Assimilation in Marine Algae:  Evolution, Physiology, and Educational Opportunties
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Deborah Robertson, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2009
* USD 564,413.00

The assimilation of nitrogen into amino acids is a key process regulating the
growth and productivity of photosynthetic organisms. The regulation of nitrogen
assimilation has been studied extensively in vascular plants and cyanobacteria;
however, only limited information is available concerning the evolution and
regulation of these pathways in eukaryotic algae. The term "algae" is used to
describe diverse lineages of photosynthetic organisms, many of which arose
through independent secondary endosymbiotic events (symbioses between
photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic eukaryotes). The incorporation of
symbionts into host cells increased the genetic diversity on which natural
selection could act and is assumed to have contributed significantly to the
metabolic diversity observed in extant algal lineages. The independent
endosymbiotic origin of photosynthetic lineages further suggests that enzymes
involved in carbon and nitrogen metabolism may have arisen through different
evolutionary processes (e.g., gene transfer versus gene duplication) and that
regulatory pathways, which were established following the endosymbiotic events,
may differ among lineages. The enzyme glutamine synthetase (GS) is essential for
ammonium assimilation and glutamine biosynthesis in all organisms and is the
enzymatic link between carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Multiple forms of GS are
expressed in photosynthetic eukaryotes and the isoenzymes are compartmentalized
in either the cytosol or chloroplast. The goals of this research program are to
(1) expand our knowledge of the evolution of nitrogen assimilation in
photosynthetic eukaryotes by examining the molecular evolution of GS in diverse
algae lineages, (2) identify and characterize the physiological functions of GS
isoenzymes in the diatom Skeletonema costatum, and (3) to examine the cellular
processes that regulate GS expression in S. costatum. Diatoms are a species-rich
group of organisms that contribute significantly to oceanic primary productivity
and global biogeochemical cycles. This research will contribute to our
understanding of mechanisms regulating nitrogen assimilation in photosynthetic
eukaryotes, processes governing algal growth and oceanic productivity, and the
evolution of metabolic pathways. The work will provide a framework for future
studies using emerging genomic and bioinformatic tools to understand the complex
and interacting pathways coupling carbon and nitrogen metabolism in
photosynthetic organisms. The common thread woven throughout this project is
that mentored research experiences improve knowledge generation and acquisition
skills, develop critical thinking skills, and increase self-confidence in
learners at all levels. This project uses several pedagogical approaches to
provide new opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students, and science
teachers from local public schools to participate in research-based learning
activities. As part of Clark University's mission to establish partnerships with
the Worcester community, this project provides summer research opportunities for
middle- and high-school science teachers. This research alliance provides
discipline-based training for teachers and a forum for the discussion of
effective teaching practices for grades K-16. In addition, the PI will develop a
new inquiry-based course in physiological ecology that offers investigative and
cooperative learning experiences to undergraduates who may not have pursed
mentored research opportunities. The integrated research and teaching program
illustrates the PI's commitment to a career aimed at the multi-disciplinary
study of algal physiology and evolution, to the development of innovative
science curricula, and to community education.

