* 0238492
* CAREER: A Multi-Level Approach to Malicious Mobile Code Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2010
* Giovanni Vigna, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* carl landwehr
* 06/30/2010
* USD 399,946.00

Mobile code can be defined as executable content that is transferred to a remote
environment and executed there automatically. Attacks from malicious mobile code
can be detected by analyzing the information associated with the execution of
code and identifying malicious behavior. This analysis process is called
intrusion detection while the process of collecting the necessary information is
called auditing.

Unfortunately, most systems that support code mobility provide no auditing
mechanisms or are able to produce only incomplete information about the activity
of mobile code.

To overcome these problems, a multi-level approach to malicious mobile code
detection is proposed. The approach relies on the instrumentation of the
different components of the mobile code execution architecture to gather
complete information about the actions of the mobile code. The events collected
at different abstraction levels are used as input to multi-stream intrusion
detection analysis. The intrusion detection process uses both fusion and
correlation techniques to detect attacks and perform proactive response
procedures that limit the impact of an attack. In particular, the research
focuses on the containment of the spread of worm applications.

The results of this research will be used both to retrofit existing systems and
to secure future applications. In particular, in the near future mobile code
will become a fundamental mechanism for the upgrade and management of mobile
devices, as IP connectivity is brought to the millions of cellular phones in use
today. The use of multi-level intrusion detection will provide techniques to
protect both the infrastructure and the user terminals against malicious mobile
code.

