* 0238200
* CAREER:  Evolvable Hardware Neuromorphic Computational Devices for Sensing and Control
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2009
* John Gallagher, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 05/31/2009
* USD 481,580.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. The research portion
of the work will develop a single, general Evolvable Hardware (EH) framework
that allows for the creation of self-designing, self-configuring computational
devices usable across a variety of application areas. EH seeks to create self-
designing computational machines, especially those capable of exploiting design
principles outside of conventionally understood engineering techniques, and
self-configuring devices capable of automatically adapting as a problem domain
changes. The generality of the framework will be demonstrated by using it to
evolve devices to address problems drawn from several traditional computer
science areas.

The research plan focuses on the development of a general framework for the
evolution of practical neuromorphic computational devices as well as the
development of specialized VLSI chips to embody those devices. The framework
will be applied to generate novel neuromorphic devices to address problems in
control (jet engine combustion stabilization) and pattern recognition (active
sensing for machine olfaction). By combining evolutionary learning and analog
neuromorphic computing on the same chip, the project aims to deliver controllers
that can adapt and improve while in service.

The education plan for this project is based on the idea that professional
practice requires both a strong command of theory and the skill to apply theory
to solve problems of practical import. As such, engineering practice is best
learned with the assistance of a mentor who can provide both theoretical
knowledge and practical coaching. The educational activities are geared toward
fostering mentor/student relationships among faculty, graduate students,
undergraduate students, and members of the general public outside the university
community. These activities will be designed to integrate research into the
undergraduate and graduate curriculums, to encourage students to pursue advanced
degrees in computer science and engineering, and to educate the general public
in the advantages of supporting computer science and engineering research in
general.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early career-development
activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an academic leader of
the twenty-first century. The research will have broader impacts in addition to
the educational benefits. Self-designing computational machines would be of
enormous value both as tools in their own right and as generators of new design
principles to be exploited by humans. Self-configuring devices would be
invaluable in autonomous situations where they needed to remain in service for
long periods of time or in environments where human adjustment was not
practical. This research aims to establish the generality of the Evolvable
Hardware framework, to provide immediately useful computational devices, and to
expand basic scientific knowledge.