* 0238470
* CAREER:  Distributed Multi-Objective Optimization for the Construction of Large-Scale Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Khaled El-Rayes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract - CAREER: Distributed Multi-Objective Optimization for the Construction
of Large-Scale Transportation Systems &lt;br/&gt;Recent applications of
performance-based contracting methods in the construction of transportation
systems present decision makers in the construction industry with new and
serious challenges that require: (1) optimizing the utilization of construction
resources to satisfy multiple and conflicting contractual objectives; (2)
solving large-scale construction optimization problems; and (3) maintaining
optimality for the developed plans in a dynamic construction environment.
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project addresses these new and vital challenges using an
integrated research and education plan. The research plan focuses on the
development of an innovative Information Technology Framework for Optimizing
Construction Utilization of Resources in Transportation Systems, named IT-FOCUS.
The main research objectives of IT-FOCUS are to: (a) develop robust multi-
objective optimization models; (b) formulate scalable methodologies for solving
large-scale optimization problems; and (c) explore dynamic frameworks for
revising optimal plans whenever and wherever needed. The education plan promotes
the education of optimization and information technology in construction
engineering and management. The main objectives of this plan are to: (a)
incorporate research developments into new and existing courses; (b) use IT-
FOCUS as an effective educational tool; (c) expand student advising and
mentoring activities; (e) increase participation of students from
underrepresented groups; and (f) disseminate research findings to the
construction engineering community. &lt;br/&gt;The integrated research and
education plan provides promising broad impacts on construction engineering
research, construction education, and society. First, the research developments
have strong potential to advance knowledge in distributed multi-objective
optimization of construction resources. Second, the educational activities will
enhance the education of construction optimization and IT for undergraduate and
graduate students. Third, the societal benefits of optimizing the utilization of
construction resources in transportation systems include: improving cost
effectiveness of public expenditures on these systems, accelerating the
revitalization of aging transportation facilities, minimizing construction-
related service disruptions, improving construction quality and safety, and
reducing negative impacts of construction on the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;