* 0238268
* CAREER: Structure and Robustness in Nonlinear Control: Challenges from Fuel Cell Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Murat Arcak, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2009
* USD 558,054.00

The research objective of this proposal is to develop systematic design tools
that exploit, rather&lt;br/&gt;than override, nonlinearities and structural
properties in feedback systems. Encouraged by our&lt;br/&gt;preliminary results,
we address the problems of observer design and robustness to
unmodeled&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, which are crucial for practical applicability of
nonlinear control techniques. The variety of&lt;br/&gt;dynamic phenomena in
nonlinear systems have hampered constructive solutions to these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, we pursue structure-specific designs which are
tailored to inherent system properties&lt;br/&gt;and nonlinear phenomena. Our
robust design tools exploit types of unmodeled dynamics
and&lt;br/&gt;multivariable structures to recover stability and performance
achievable with nominal designs. Our&lt;br/&gt;observers take advantage of
nonlinearities to enhance observer convergence and to recover
stability&lt;br/&gt;of full state-feedback designs in certainty-equivalence
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with United Technologies
Research Center, the PI will apply these design tools&lt;br/&gt;to emerging
feedback problems in fuel cell power systems. Fuel cell technology is
particularly suit-&lt;br/&gt;able for United States, because the wide geography
makes centralized power networks prone to&lt;br/&gt;failure, and the strict
environmental regulations accentuate the necessity of clean power
genera-&lt;br/&gt;tion.A major challenge for potential vehicular and portable
power applications is the high-order,&lt;br/&gt;interconnected, system
structure, and severe nonlinearities, which arise from tight integration
of&lt;br/&gt;system components and wide variations in the electric load.
Robustness to unmodeled dynamics&lt;br/&gt;is crucial for reliability of low-
order designs. Nonlinear observers are of great importance
because&lt;br/&gt;commercially available sensor technologies are not designed to
operate in a fuel cell environment.&lt;br/&gt;The study of fuel cells will set
the stage for abstractions and broad design methodologies which
will&lt;br/&gt;also impact other technologies, such as computer networks,
chemical processes, and fluid control&lt;br/&gt;problems in aeroengines, where
high-order system models and severe nonlinearities constitute
an&lt;br/&gt;obstacle to efficient and reliable feedback
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objective of the proposal is to
make nonlinear concepts accessible to a wider&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of students.
The PI will introduce a new course for undergraduates, and graduate
stu-&lt;br/&gt;dents who wish to study nonlinear systems at an introductory
level. This course will enhance the&lt;br/&gt;appreciation of nonlinear systems
among practitioners of the future, and attract more students&lt;br/&gt;to our
graduate research program. In collaboration with the New Visions Program of
local school&lt;br/&gt;districts and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, we will
include high-school students in project teams&lt;br/&gt;with our undergraduates.
Several pedagogical experiments and computer animations, detailed
in&lt;br/&gt;the proposal, will give them a motivating real-life exposure to
dynamic phenomena and control&lt;br/&gt;concepts.