* 0238233
* CAREER: Characterization of Plant RNase P and Examination of its Utility as a Functional Genomics Tool
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Venkat Gopalan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 09/30/2008
* USD 751,073.00

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is a ubiquitous and essential ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
involved in tRNA biogenesis. Bacterial RNase P consists of a catalytic RNA
subunit and a protein cofactor. While the RNA subunits of most archaeal and all
eukaryal RNase P contain several of the critical and conserved secondary
structural elements present in their bacterial counterpart, they are not
catalytically active in vitro in the absence of their multiple protein subunits,
whose number varies from four to ten depending on the source. Since both the RNA
and protein subunits are essential for function in vivo in all organisms, RNase
P serves as a paradigm for understanding how proteins modulate RNA function.
Moreover, the variations in the functional assignment and composition of
subunits in the three domains of life provide a unique opportunity to evaluate
if RNase P represents an early RNA enzyme progressing through evolutionary
stages to an RNA-protein enzyme in which proteins have usurped most of the
functions originally carried out by the RNA. Proteins could have also been
recruited to facilitate subcellular targeting and spatio-temporal control of
RNase P expression. Any insight in this regard would provide some vindication of
the provocative RNA world hypothesis. The long-term goal of this research is to
use plant RNase P as a model system for understanding the complex subunit make-
up of eukaryal RNase P in a multi-cellular organism and also employ this
knowledge to exploit plant RNase P for targeted degradation of endogenous mRNAs,
an application that would facilitate discovery of gene-function relationships.
This project will help build a network of academic collaborations and strengthen
the infrastructure for research at a land grant institution. The dual aims of
fostering learning and advancing discovery in biochemistry, plant molecular
biology and biotechnology will continue to be accomplished by innovatively
integrating state of the art multi-dimensional research training and education
for undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral scholars.