* 0238841
* CAREER: Microscale Two-Phase Zeotropic Flow in Energy Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Laura Schaefer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 405,107.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0238841&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Laura
Schaefer&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: CAREER: Microscale two-phase zeotropic flow in energy
systemss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the coupled heat transfer
and fluid flow behavior of two-phase zeotropic mixtures in micro- and
minichannels. Zeotropic mixtures are distinct in that the concentrations of
their liquid and vapor phases are continually changing in the two-phase region.
The temperature glide between the concentration profiles can cause both
component accumulation at the vapor-liquid interface and drastically nonlinear
temperature versus enthalpy contours. On the microscale, these behaviors can be
exacerbated by the increased effect of intermolecular interactions. The
thermodynamic, heat transfer, and fluid flow properties of these mixtures will
be studied through theoretical modeling, numerical simulation, and experimental
observation. The results of this project will provide the tools needed to create
effective miniature vapor compression and absorption cycles, pumping mechanisms,
and extraction devices. This research can also be used to increase the
efficiency of heat exchangers that utilize micromachined components, which may
have a large impact on the costs and emissions generated by energy consumption.
These types of energy pplications are appealing to students who are concerned
about the environment and to students who are interested in current technology.
High school, undergraduate, and graduate students will be introduced to energy
systems through a four-tier integrated approach. The proposal has been funded by
the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and
Transport Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;