* 0238837
* Murid Rodent Phylogenetics Using Multiple Nuclear Genes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Ronald Adkins, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ronald Adkins at the University of Tennessee to
work in collaboration with Dr. Scott Steppan of Florida State University to
study the evolutionary relationships of the largest family of mammals (Muridae)
which includes the common mouse and rat. Although Muridae includes one fourth of
all mammals and has immense importance to agriculture, disease, and biomedical
research, the relationships among these species distributed throughout the world
are extremely unclear. Drs. Adkins and Steppan are sequencing DNA from several
genes from a large number of species in this group. Based on computer analysis
of the patterns of mutation among the species, the evolutionary tree of Muridae
will be reconstructed.&lt;br/&gt; The laboratory mouse and rat are the premier
research models for human disease and will soon have their entire genomes
sequenced. Additionally, serious diseases, such as plague and hantavirus, are
spread by parasites harbored by some members of Muridae. Rats, mice and their
relatives are also major agricultural consumers and under certain conditions can
account for over half of the plant material eaten by herbivores. Significantly,
the worldwide distribution of Muridae grants them a unique role in understanding
the climatological, geological, and ecological changes that have shaped the
world. Having the evolutionary tree of these species will clarify the large-
scale genomic changes that distinguish rodents from other mammals (including
humans) and will greatly facilitate our understanding of their roles as
biomedical models, disease vectors, engines of ecological change, and will allow
us to reconstruct the history of this group in the context of ancient geological
and climatological events. &lt;br/&gt;