* 0238993
* CAREER: Artificial Learning Control Systems for Performance Critical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Eric Johnson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of human-like (or better) intelligent control, and systems that combine
the best elements of human operators and machines to achieve a more capable
whole, is held by many researchers. Controllers with intermediate levels of
intelligence and adaptability (between current systems and human-like control)
are significant for at least two reasons: (1) They are a stepping-stone to the
more capable systems envisioned; and (2) They have important practical uses in
their own right, as part of semi-intelligent systems or utilized as an element
of more capable human/machine systems.

This project will depart from previous important and useful artificial neural
network (NN) adaptive control methods, based on a dynamic inverse or feedback
linearization controller and a neural network trained online. This class of
adaptive control has recently been extended by the principal investigator to
include plants that are not feedback linearizable (even approximately). These
methods have distinct advantages for performance critical applications (i.e.,
those where safety, economic pressures, or other factors imply that the
probability of system failure must be minimized), because of rapid response to
new uncertainties and important theoretical stability results. A new approach
will be taken, which retains the advantages described above, but utilizes
untapped potential of NN adaptive controllers to enable the system to learn the
plant over all state and control space for which information is available,
including information given a priori, recorded data, and current state. It will
explore this idea of simultaneous online training and training on recorded past
data within other adaptive control frameworks. The development of these
approaches is hoped to lead to many important new applications of performance
critical controllers, applications that generally required a human "touch" to
achieve acceptable performance (and also require stability and robustness
guarantees), examples include: aspects of factory automation (those where
uncertainty is not negligible), ground vehicle control, construction equipment,
integrated avionics, spacecraft docking, and flight control. This predicted
impact is based on providing an important element of what humans can do as
controllers: become highly proficient at controlling a plant over a large
segment of state and control space, yet also able to respond to a sudden change
in plant dynamics.