* 0238943
* CAREER:  Sub-Angstrom Amplitude Atomic Force Microscopy: From Dissipation Imaging to Atomic Manipulation
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Peter Hoffmann, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2009
* USD 450,000.00

Common Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) Techniques suffer from a number of
fundamental difficulties limiting their usefulness in quantifying nanoscale
interactions. The goal of this CAREER project at Wayne State University is to
apply a novel AFM technique based on fiber interferometry and off-resonance,
ultra-small amplitude operation to study important questions of the
nanomechanics of individual atoms and molecules on surfaces. This includes the
manipulation of single atoms and molecules, atomic scale energy dissipation,
atomic bonding as a function of controlled tip and surface chemistry, atomic
relaxation, and the relationship between AFM and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
(STM) imaging. These questions, while of a fundamental nature, are crucial for
the rational development of future atomic/molecular scale nanosystems. Combined
with this study is an integrated outreach program targeting parents of school
age children with a series of lectures and demonstrations designed to illustrate
the excitement of scientific research and raise awareness of scientific careers
as fulfilling career choices for their children. This outreach program will be
conducted in collaboration with local schools and two local science museums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future of Nanotechnology lies in the controlled
manipulation of single atoms and molecules. This lofty goal can only be achieved
if we gain solid knowledge of the mechanics of single atoms and molecules. This
CAREER project at Wayne State University is designed to use a novel instrument,
a "Sub-Angstrom Amplitude Atomic Force Microscope", to measure forces while
manipulating single atoms and molecules, and to conduct complementary and
important experiments on the 'nanomechanics' of single atoms. These studies will
provide crucial knowledge necessary for the design of future nanometer scale
devices. Research will involve graduate and undergraduate students at Wayne
State University. In addition, the project includes a significant outreach
component whereby parents of local school students are provided with an insight
into the excitement of scientific research, the stimulating life of a university
researcher, and the latest findings in Physics and Nanotechnology. This program,
provided through local schools and two local science museums, is designed to
raise awareness of scientific careers as fulfilling career choices, and to
enlighten the participants about the importance of fundamental and applied
science in our society.&lt;br/&gt;