* 0238788
* CAREER:  Solid Freeform Fabrication of Heterogeneous Multifunctional Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Suman Das, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to create a next-generation solid freeform fabrication (SFF) technique
that will enable the construction of a broad variety of heterogeneous
multifunctional devices. The approach will focus on concurrently developing new
techniques for patterned powder deposition and laser materials processing that
will together enable the layer-by-layer construction of such devices. Powder
deposition techniques will be based on experimental correlations of powder flow
through miniature hoppers and on the physics of granular multiphase flow. Laser
processing techniques for sintering or melting patterned powders will be
developed on an experimental workstation, aided by numerical models to simulate
transport phenomena in heterogeneous powder compositions. The educational goal
is to prepare the next generation of mechanical engineers with knowledge of SFF,
computational design synthesis, and internet-enabled electronic collaboration
methods. SFF and electronic collaboration methods will be introduced into a core
undergraduate course. A new graduate course on SFF including a future
international design competition and special focus journal issue will be
developed. Finally, a multidisciplinary seminar series on multifunctional
materials design and synthesis will be introduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the primary impact of this research will be a next-generation
heterogeneous SFF method. A consequential impact is the ability to fabricate
novel, multifunctional devices that will have great potential social,
commercial, and military value, notably bioimplants for surgical reconstruction,
engineered tissue scaffolds and drug delivery, and devices for energy storage,
production or conversion. Complementary long-term scientific and technical
impacts will include: 1) novel scientific approaches to synthesizing structures
with tailored material compositions and properties from the macro- to nano-
scale; and 2) integration of digital design and digital fabrication, enabling
realization of complex designs derived from physics-based computational
optimization in materials of choice.