* 0238845
* CAREER: Optical and Phonon Interactions in Wide-Bandgap Nano-Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Leah Bergman, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2008
* USD 393,626.00

This CAREER project addresses optical properties/interactions and phonon
dynamics of wide band gap semiconductor nanostructures capable of light emission
in the UV range utilizing Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy. Wide bandgap
semiconductors to be investigated include GaN, AlN, and AlGaN alloys, as well as
ZnO, and SiC. Research issues concerning light emission, crystal structure and
crystal symmetry characteristics of nano-particles, quantum-dots, and random-
structured powders will be studied. The approach includes the study of
properties of individual nanocrystals as well as ensembles of particles to
explore the basic mechanisms of light emission properties such as spectral range
and efficiency inherent to a confined structure of a given size and shape, as
well as the impact of the cluster environment. Additionally, energy re-laxation
channels which occur via crystal vibrational modes--electron-phonon
interactions, will be investigated to assess the impact of confined phonons on
optical characteristics of particles. Year 1 of the project is focused on
investigation of optical and material properties of nano-structures of SiC, GaN,
AlN, ZnO, to lay the foundation for the study of more complicated mixed particle
systems in the following years. Years 2 and 3 will focus on studies concerning
the optical properties of particle ensembles and clusters and on establishing a
novel UV-optical spectroscopy setup for remote excitation to enable studies
concerning phenomena of light interactions, energy transfer, exciton diffusion,
and efficiency losses among nano-particles. Years 4 and 5 will focus on resonant
Raman scattering studies, as well as research involving the optical and
structural behavior of nanostructures under high-pressure, high-temperature
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
materials science research issues having technological relevance. An important
feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration
of research and education. In tandem with the research program, new
interdisciplinary curricula will be developed including a new course on optical
materials and devices and a new undergraduate degree program on the Science of
Materials. The course curriculum will be designed for upper level undergraduate
students as well as for graduate students from various science disciplines. This
program will focus on a broad spectrum of issues related to materials science,
physics, and the chemistry of materials from the large scale to the molecular
level. The impact of the proposed research will be to contribute towards basic
knowledge of the structural and optical characteristics of nanocrystallites, a
key to engineering viable optical devices operating in the UV. The new
curricula, together with the active promotion of student participation in
experimental research, is expected to have broad impact on the educational
development of students and in the longer term contribute to both high
technology industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;