* 0238888
* CAREER: Nanoscale Thermal Processing with a Heated Atomic Force Microscope Cantilever Tip
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,05/31/2007
* William King, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 05/31/2007
* USD 405,358.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: CTS-0238888 Principal Investigator: William P. King
Affiliation: Georgia Institute of Technology Proposal Title: CAREER: Nanoscale
thermal processing with a heated atomic force microscope cantilever tip

Since its invention in 1986, the atomic force microscope (AFM) has become the
most widely used instrument for nanoscience and nanotechnology. AFM cantilevers
used in thermomechanical data storage are fabricated with a tip having a radius
of curvature near 20 nm and integrated heating. As the heated cantilever tip is
brought into contact with a substrate, only the area of contact between the tip
and the substrate is heated. With a diameter of contact as small as 1 nm, the
contact area between a heated AFM cantilever tip and a substrate is the smallest
controlled heating source ever produced. Thus, the heated AFM cantilever tip is
an excellent tool for studying the fundamentals of heat transport and phase
change at the nanometer scale, which can be substantially different compared to
macroscopic scales. This research plan develops the heated AFM cantilever tip as
a scientific instrument for nanometer-scale characterization of temperature-
dependant physical and chemical transitions. The educational plan includes the
development of a new graduate course in the design of thermal and fluid micro
and nano devices. Graduate students involved in this research will also be
exposed to a broad set of technical and cultural experiences, including
collaborations with national laboratories and industry and with international
collaborators.

The award is supported by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program
of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.

