* 0238269
* CAREER: Understanding and Supporting the Acquisition of Manufacturing Automation System Integration Skills
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2010
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 05/31/2010
* USD 473,675.00

The principal goals of this project are to: (1) understand how automated
manufacturing system integration expertise develops; (2) develop a web-based
system - called the System Integration Problem-Solving Environment (SIPSE) -
that can be used both to monitor the development of system integration skills
and to teach them; (3) develop a pedagogy for teaching system integration
concepts and skills that can be used as a basis for developing curricula and
materials for education in system integration and other similar domains; and (4)
develop a curriculum for a undergraduate-level course on Automated Manufacturing
System Integration. The proposed effort will build upon existing cognitive
skills acquisition research in investigating how expert engineers develop
automated manufacturing system integration skills and how to help novices
develop these skills more efficiently. The project will integrate research and
education by (1) involving graduate and undergraduate students in data
collection and analysis, programming, interface design, and graphics design
tasks; (2) inviting manufacturing automation students to participate in
evaluating SIPSE; (3) adding an instructional module to SIPSE; (4) developing
and evaluating a syllabus and curriculum materials for a new course on
manufacturing automation system integration; and (5) presenting research results
and investigating opportunities to make SIPSE available in high school and
informal education settings. It will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups by involving students and faculty from minority and/or rurally located
institutions in using and evaluating the results of the proposed research. It
will enhance the research infrastructure in the area of manufacturing automation
by making SIPSE available over the Internet for use by researchers. Research
results will be broadly disseminated in academic journals and professional
conferences, on the Web, and by making presentations to high schools and in
informal education settings, such as children's museums. Direct beneficiaries of
this effort will include automated manufacturing system end users, system
integrators, and automation product manufacturers. The Division of Engineering
Education &amp; Centers (ENG/EEC) has agreed to co-fund this project.&lt;br/&gt;