* 0238271
* CAREER:    Fundamental Performance Limits of Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Terrence Fine, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 05/31/2008
* USD 403,125.00

In recent times much has been said about how, once deployed,
networks&lt;br/&gt;of devices with wireless communication capabilities will
affect the way&lt;br/&gt;we work, learn, interact, organize, get entertained,
fight wars, and&lt;br/&gt;recover from disasters. This interest in wireless
networks has led to&lt;br/&gt;a fair amount of research activity in the areas of
mobile and ad-hoc&lt;br/&gt;networking, addressing both systems and theory
issues. However, not&lt;br/&gt;much research work has been done on fundamental
information theoretic&lt;br/&gt;concepts related to wireless *sensor* networks,
i.e., networks of tiny,&lt;br/&gt;low power, unreliable devices equipped with
very limited sensing and&lt;br/&gt;communication capabilities, and embedded in
the environment. This&lt;br/&gt;project is primarily about the study of
fundamental performance limits&lt;br/&gt;for large-scale wireless sensor
networks. Specifically, there are&lt;br/&gt;three problems, deeply intertwined
with each other, and very relevant&lt;br/&gt;in practice, on which we
concentrate our efforts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Source Coding problems, dealing
with the design and performance&lt;br/&gt;analysis of codes and signal
processing algorithms for the random fields&lt;br/&gt;generated by sensor
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Routing problems, dealing with design and
performance analysis of&lt;br/&gt;protocols and signal processing algorithms for
moving sensor data *within*&lt;br/&gt;the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; -
Reachback Communication problems, dealing with the design
and&lt;br/&gt;performance analysis of codes and signal processing algorithms for
moving&lt;br/&gt;sensor data *out* of the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
solution to problems of source coding, routing, and
reachback&lt;br/&gt;communication in sensor networks requires a "marriage" of
networking&lt;br/&gt;and communication theoretic concepts. This presents an
interesting&lt;br/&gt;opportunity for innovation in education, since networking
is typically&lt;br/&gt;regarded as a "pure CS" topic, whereas communication
theory is typically&lt;br/&gt;regarded as a "pure EE" topic. All of my
educational and outreach&lt;br/&gt;activities (undergraduate and graduate course
development, lab development,&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate textbook development,
service to community) are designed&lt;br/&gt;around the general goal of
providing a solid theoretical basis to our&lt;br/&gt;students in networking and
communications, as well as the more specific&lt;br/&gt;goal of highlighting the
interplay between these concepts in the context&lt;br/&gt;of wireless sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;