* 0238712
* CAREER: Integrated Approach To Superplastic Forming of Advanced Materials: Mechanics-Materials-Manufacturing Linkage
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Marwan Khraisheh, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 12/31/2008
* USD 486,850.00

This Faculty Early Career (CAREER) development plan presents a novel approach
that integrates mechanics, materials and manufacturing concepts to optimize the
superplastic forming (SPF) process and advance its industrial utilization. The
principal research goals of this project are: (1) to improve the current
predictive capabilities of material deformation and failure during SPF and (2)
to devise optimum forming practices to increase production rate. To achieve the
first research goal, accurate multiaxial and microstructure-based constitutive
models of deformation and failure will be developed and incorporated into a
general purpose FE code. The modeling framework will be based on large
viscoplastic deformation with a microstructure-based overstress function, a
dynamic anisotropic yield surface, and internal variables. The models will be
calibrated and validated using detailed mechanical tests, including multiaxial
experiments, and advanced microstructural characterization techniques in
collaboration with a National laboratory. The second research goal will be
achieved by developing optimum forming pressure profiles that can reduce the
forming time and maintain the integrity of the formed part, and by refining the
initial microstructure of the superplastic sheet using friction stir processing
(FSP). The research will also include a detailed post SPF analysis, an issue
that has been neglected in previous SPF studies. The outcome is a comprehensive
methodology, which involves experimental procedures, analytical and numerical
models that can be used to optimize SPF of various superplastic alloys. The
focus of this project will be on commercial magnesium alloys because of their
unique properties and the recent increased interest in Mg alloys, especially
from the automotive industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan in this
CAREER project outlines efforts to: (1) expose young children to the exciting
possibilities of the engineering profession and inspire their imagination and
curiosity; (2) help freshmen engineering students learn more about engineering
disciplines and help improve retention rate; (3) encourage engineering students
to be involved in the activities mentioned in 1 and 2, and ensure that student
involvement includes all facets of the student population including female and
minority students; and, (4) introduce modern undergraduate and graduate courses
which meet the new ABET requirements, in particular, the need to integrate
advances in mechanics and materials into manufacturing. The educational
component will have a direct impact on the welfare of the State by investing in
the youth and strengthening and promoting the only children's museum in the
State. The CAREER development program includes a management plan to ensure
achieving the objectives. It involves an advisory committee consisting of
multidisciplinary individuals to offer technical advice, facilitate
dissemination of the results and ensure exposure of the findings. The success of
the research activities will advance the widespread industrial utilization of
SPF. This will have a positive impact on society and will lead to cheaper, safer
and environmentally friendly products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;