* 0238390
* CAREER: Numerical Simulations of Transitional and Turbulent Hypersonic Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,10/31/2008
* M. Pino Martin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 10/31/2008
* USD 430,480.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0238390&lt;br/&gt;M. MARTIN&lt;br/&gt;PRINCETON
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is focused on developing a
basic understanding of hypersonic transitional and turbulent flows. Previous
turbulence models for hypersonic applications have been calibrated using direct
numerical simulation data of incompressible flows or perfect gas wind tunnel
data. Thus, the models that are used today do not represent the effects of high
compressibility and temperature levels. Accordingly, this research will provide
solutions for (1) improving our understanding of the fundamental physical
mechanisms of transitional and turbulent hypersonic flows; (2) providing an
accurate and detailed database of the flows of interest; and (3) using the
gained understanding and database to develop physically-based scaling laws for
the accurate prediction of these flows. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed configurations
include transitional and turbulent boundary layers with and without adverse
pressure gradient, as well as flow around axisymmetric and elliptical cross-
section cones. The effects of free-stream disturbance, Mach number, and wall-
temperature conditions will be studied for non-reacting and reacting conditions.
A key feature of the simulations is the validation against experimental data at
the exact same conditions. This research will have significant impact on a large
number of technologically important applications related to hypersonic flight
within and out of our atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;Concurrently, education activities
will address important and challenging engineering problems while fostering a
dynamic learning environment. The goals of the education and outreach plan
include: (1) integrating research and education via a modular scientific
computing, data analysis, and database software infrastructure; (2) organizing
outreach activities for talented students of under-represented groups in K-12,
undergraduate and graduate levels; and (3) maintaining and building upon a
current curriculum. A key planned activity is the integration of a computational
infrastructure to solve and analyze fluid flow problems into the classroom and
into the scientific community. Undergraduate and graduate students will use the
infrastructure as part of their course materials. Other education and outreach
activities include a summer course in hypersonic flight to promising high-school
students from lower-income families. This will provide an opportunity for the
students to participate in the academic and cultural life of Princeton
University. In collaboration with the Prince-ton University Preparatory Program,
twenty students will be selected from schools in the Trenton, Ewing and
Princeton areas. For a period of three years these students will enroll in a
week-long course sequence in hypersonic flight. In addition, summer internships
will be offered to two students of under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;