* 0238910
* CAREER:  Mechanics of the Physical-Biological Interface: Mechanotransduction of Endothelial Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Peter Butler, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 01/31/2009
* USD 406,000.00

0238910&lt;br/&gt;Butler&lt;br/&gt;Blood forced through arteries by the pumping
action of the heart exerts shear stresses on the endothelial cells (ECs) that
line the arteries. ECs respond to shear stress by producing substances that
affect blood vessel diameter, blood coagulation, the adhesion of white blood
cells to the vessel wall, and the leakiness of the artery wall to water,
proteins and cholesterol. Therefore,studies of EC-sensitivity to shear stress
will lead to an understanding of how ECs signal the blood vessel to control
blood flow, immune responses, and the delivery of nutrients to the tissues. In
certain cases, shear stress can cause ECs to become dysfunctional, a situation
which leads to hypertension, atherosclerosis and other vascular diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologies used to study EC-sensitivity to shear stress
range from studies in animals, tissues, cells, cell components to molecules.
Molecules (lipids and proteins)responsible for detecting force reside in
specialized structures in the EC-membrane and these structures have unique
physical characteristics (their lipid components exist in a liquid-ordered
(gel)phase). A molecule's activity is regulated, in part, by the dynamics of
molecules around it. Therefore, the proposed research seeks to measure the
effects of fluid force on the dynamics of molecules located in these specialized
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To measure the dynamics (e.g. rotation rate,
lateral diffusion) of single molecules in membrane subdomains, the PI proposes
to combine (i) polarized laser light delivered at very short, controlled pulses,
(ii) the preference of certain fluorescent lipid-like molecules for specialized
domains in the cell membrane, and (iii) the use of optics and fast-response
light detection. The PI will combine powerful spectroscopic and microscopy tools
to investigate molecular dynamics in subcellular membrane domains in single
cells subjected to shear stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI hypothesizes that
shear stress may perturb lipids in membrane microdomains, which, in turn, alters
the dynamics of membrane bound proteins important in mechanotransduction. To
test this hypothesis the PI proposes to (i) measure the effects of shear stress
and membrane modifications on the signaling through three classes of membrane
receptors: peripheral membrane proteins (G-proteins), cytoskeleton-linked
integral membrane proteins (integrins) and non-cytoskeleton-linked integral
membrane proteins (receptor tyrosine kinase, flk-1),(ii)to measure the effects
of shear stress and membrane modification on the rotational and lateral dynamics
of these molecules using novel fluorescent probes, and (iii)to measure the
spatio-temporal aspects of the effects of shear stress on membrane phase sub-
domains in endothelial cells. A central feature of this proposal is to integrate
these scientific aims with educational aims to incorporate physical, applied,
life, and clinical sciences and Bioethics in the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students. As part of a detailed plan to integrate
research and education, the PI will act as co-director and educational director
in a Penn State Summer Institute (PSSI)for Biomaterials and Bionanotechnology
that is jointly funded by NIH and NSF. &lt;br/&gt;