* 0238008
* CAREER:  Large-Scale Semidefinite Programming
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Madhu Nayakkankuppam, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 11/30/2005
* USD 83,136.00

Nayakkankuppam&lt;br/&gt; This project, which lies at the interface of
optimization&lt;br/&gt;theory, numerical analysis and parallel scientific
computing,&lt;br/&gt;focuses on the design, analysis and implementation of
novel&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for large-scale semidefinite programming. A
growing&lt;br/&gt;number of applications (for example, structural
design,&lt;br/&gt;communication networks, combinatorial optimization,
quantum&lt;br/&gt;chemistry, VLSI design) give rise to very large-scale
problems&lt;br/&gt;well beyond the capabilities of the interior-point
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;currently in use. The investigator studies (a) quasi-
Newton&lt;br/&gt;techniques in first and second order subgradient bundle
methods,&lt;br/&gt;and (b) parallel variable distribution in interior-point
and&lt;br/&gt;subgradient bundle methods. The goals of the project
are&lt;br/&gt;three-fold: (i) to develop convergence theories for these
new&lt;br/&gt;classes of algorithms, (ii) to develop fast, reliable
and&lt;br/&gt;parallel software implementations, and (iii) to apply
these&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and codes to specific problems in quantum
chemistry&lt;br/&gt;and numerical linear algebra. The educational plan,
integrated&lt;br/&gt;with the research goals of the project, includes (i)
the&lt;br/&gt;development of new graduate curricula in parallel
computing,&lt;br/&gt;numerical optimization and convex programming designed to
train&lt;br/&gt;graduate students to participate in, and contribute to,
the&lt;br/&gt;research program; (ii) a revision of undergraduate curricula
in&lt;br/&gt;linear and nonlinear programming to include significant
modeling&lt;br/&gt;and computational components.&lt;br/&gt; Due to the wide-
ranging applicability of semidefinite&lt;br/&gt;programming, the tools and
techniques developed in this project&lt;br/&gt;can directly benefit society by
providing improved,&lt;br/&gt;cost-effective solutions to a variety of
engineering design&lt;br/&gt;problems. The specific problems targeted in
numerical linear&lt;br/&gt;algebra are relevant to aerospace applications, while
the&lt;br/&gt;problems in quantum chemistry are of a fundamental nature
with&lt;br/&gt;potential technological impact in, for example,
semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;design, magnetic storage media, rational drug design,
etc. The&lt;br/&gt;outreach activities of the project promote
synergistic&lt;br/&gt;collaborations with a national lab and industry. The
educational&lt;br/&gt;plan enriches special UMBC programs targeted at
educating&lt;br/&gt;minorities and historically underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;