* 0238260
* CAREER: Enabling Futuristic Distributed Applications With Integrative Multistream Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Ketan Mayer-Patel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 07/31/2009
* USD 404,387.00

Realizing the full potential of the information infrastructure requires building
distributed applications in which the capabilities of these myriad devices are
harnessed together. The Internet applications of today connect devices (i.e.,
connecting my browser with the CNN server). The Internet applications of the
future will connect environments (i.e., proposer's office with the CNN
newsroom). High-performance futuristic distributed applications will employ
scores of media streams in conjunction with other types of information (e.g., 3D
geometry, control information, structured XML documents, etc.). The networking
challenges presented by these applications are fundamentally different than
traditional client/server applications. They are characterized by:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple, semantically related flows of
information.&lt;br/&gt;Distributed application architectures.&lt;br/&gt;Complex
adaptive behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;Extensibility and composability. &lt;br/&gt;Large
bandwidth-delay products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Futuristic distributed
applications are difficult to build because current networking infrastructures
do not support their characteristic multistream architecture. Doing so is
important because these types of applications (e.g., distance learning, tele-
medicine, etc.) are most effective when all of the devices in an environment
contribute to a rich and immersive experience. The proposed research addresses
the networking challenges presented by futuristic distributed multiflow
applications. The research will focus on the problems that arise when managing
multiple semantically related flows of data within an application. Exploiting
high-level semantic relationships between flows is important for achieving
application-level goals and appropriately allocating limited network resources.
Components of our approach to this problem
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building protocols informed by both aggregate
application behavior and the state of related peer
flows.&lt;br/&gt;Experimenting with network mechanisms integrated across levels
of the networking stack. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically targeting distributed
architectures in which applications are implemented across multiple devices.
&lt;br/&gt;Enabling distributed application-driven adaptation which exploits
high-level semantic relationships between flows. &lt;br/&gt;Developing data type
(i.e. video, audio, geometry, etc.) representations that are more congruent with
underlying protocol dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;Demonstrating the effectiveness of
multistreaming (i.e., transmitting complex media types in multiple flows
possibly employing different protocols).&lt;br/&gt;