* 0238530
* CAREER: Spectroscopic/Computational Insights into the Biosynthesis and Reactivity of Adenosylcobalamin
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Thomas Brunold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2009
* USD 890,765.00

The B12 cofactor adenosylcobalamin has long fascinated chemists with its
unparalleled structural complexity and unusual reactivity in biological systems,
involving homolytic cleavage of the organometallic Co-C bond. The goals of this
CAREER project are to develop molecular-level understanding of the mechanism by
which the adenosyltransferase from Salmonella enterica catalyzes the Co-C bond
formation and to explore the mechanism by which the adenosylcobalamin -dependent
isomerase methylmalonyl-CoA mutase from Proprionibacterium shermanii accelerates
the rate of homolytic Co-C bond cleavage by 12 orders of magnitude without
significantly enhancing undesired Co-C bond heterolysis. These goals will be
accomplished by using a combination of spectroscopic methods (electronic
absorption, circular dichroism, magnetic circular dichroism, resonance Raman,
and electron paramagnetic resonance) and computational techniques (density
functional theory and combined quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics approaches)
to study free and enzyme-bound adenosylcobalamin and derivatives thereof. The
educational plan is to develop and implement a series of interactive projects
aimed at guiding student exploration of key chemical concepts in symmetry,
bonding, and inorganic electronic spectroscopy. The Kolb model, a well-
researched student-centered teaching model, will serve as the framework for
incorporating both spectroscopic data collection and Mathcad-based interactive
projects into graduate and upper-level undergraduate classrooms.

Research in the interdisciplinary field of bioinorganic spectroscopy readily
facilitates the development of a collaborative learning environment, in which
students with diverse backgrounds share and communicate their individual
expertise. The linking of research to applied chemistry provides a template for
students attempting to bridge the gap between classroom and laboratory settings.
Through integration of research-oriented problems into the classroom, new
techniques and exercises engendering student involvement in the teaching process
will be developed. Together, the research and educational projects outlined in
this project would foster the breadth of experience, depth of knowledge, and
communication skills crucial to the development of young scientists. This
project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.