* 0238979
* Permeation of Penetrants in Nanocomposites: A Test of the Theory of Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Donald Paul, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

The project proposed here will have broad impact on the emerging field of
polymer nanocomposites since it will determine whether current theories of
composites are applicable or not for predicting performance as the size of the
filler particles approach molecular dimensions. Further, this project will
provide a vehicle for students at all levels to learn how to answer key
questions in new technical areas, where all concepts have to be questioned,
using well-structured research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As used here, the term
nanocomposites refers to a polymer matrix containing well-dispersed filler
particles (spheres, rods, or platelets usually comprised of an inorganic
material) where at least one dimension is in the range of one to tens of
nanometers. The very high surface area of these particles and small distances
between them raises the question of whether the particles may influence the
nature or properties of the polymer matrix by interfering with the chain
conformation, segmental packing, or the force field in which these segments
move. The well-developed mathematical theories for predicting performance
(stiffness, permeability, etc.) of conventional composites assure the properties
for each phase are the same as if the other phase were not there. We must
question whether the local properties of the matrix in nanocomposites are really
the same as in the bulk state. We propose to answer this key question by probing
these local properties by measuring the permeability of various gas and vapor
penetrants in well-prepared and characterized nanocomposites. The absolute
permeability of any given penetrant will depend on the detailed morphology of
the composite (i.e., the aspect ratio, volume fraction, and arrangement of these
particles in the matrix). However, according to composite theory, the ratio of
the permeability of one penetrant to that of another should be the same in the
composite as in the pure matrix. Thus, systematic and accurate measurement of
the permeation of a wide range of penetrants of varying size becomes a powerful
tool for exploring the applicability of composite theory to nanocomposites,
i.e., whether local properties are perturbed by tiny, high surface area
nanoparticles. Further, this work will address issues related to developing
nanocomposites for applications as barrier materials and as membranes for
separations and for fuel cells. The nanoparticles of interest will include the
aluminosilicate platelets of clays (for barrier materials), spherical particles
of silica and other materials (for separation membranes), particles that conduct
protons (for fuel cells,), etc. The matrices will be either crystalline or
glassy polymers of varying chain stiffness and interaction with the
nanoparticles. The research will identify the materials issues that determine
when the matrix properties are significantly affected by the filler and when
they are not.&lt;br/&gt;