* 0238185
* CAREER:    An Unified Approach to Mobile Robot Localization and Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Sooyong Lee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 02/29/2004
* USD 82,523.00

This research investigates design and implement a framework for autonomous
multiple mobile robots localization/navigation in a dynamic, partially known
environment. The framework will integrate autonomous cooperative localization
and navigation capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, autonomous
cooperative sensor-based navigation capabilities will be explored, which
integrate; extrapolated artificial potential field based path planning;
consecutive sensing based localization methods with the aid of techniques for
computing uncertainty regions; robust, safe techniques for distributive control
suitable for dynamic, partially known environments that facilitate efficient,
on-line adjustment and re-planning in the presence of unknown or moving
obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mobile robots have variety of sensors and
controllers to inform or take action in response to the environment. The ability
to reconfigure sensors dynamically between data collection operations enables
planning of sensing strategies. Each sensory action will improve knowledge of
the environment; hence, each sensory action can be chosen utilizing a larger
knowledge base than was available for previous actions. An immediate benefit
from this work will be a direct use in sensor based control of mechanical
systems. The approach will be a breakthrough in practical machine design and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed cooperative, distributive,
robust, and inexpensive multiple mobile robots will be used to many potential
applications ranging from maintenance and repair of mechanical machinery, to
clean up operations for accidents, to search and rescue operations, or to
assisting the disabled or elderly around the home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's education component focuses on developing new interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate courses with an emphasis on robotics and mechatronics
and involving undergraduate students in research. It also includes helping high
school students understand technical concepts and principles, and providing
students with a real-world engineering challenge offering students an academic
experience that encourages abstract thought, self-directed learning, and
decision-making through TexasBEST robot competition program.&lt;br/&gt;