* 0238905
* CAREER:  An Integrated Transvascular Biotransport Research and Educational Initiative
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Anthony English, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/28/2009
* USD 399,780.00

0238905 English The overall goal of this project is to integrate a biomedical
engineering research program of vascular biotransport processes with an
educational program that targets graduate, undergraduate, and underrepresented
middle school levels of education. To meet this goal, this proposal exploits and
strengthens a unique collaborative environment between The University of
Tennessee, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, The University of Tennessee Vascular
Research Laboratory, and two underrepresented middle schools in the East
Tennessee area.

The primary objective of this research is to investigate endothelial cell
barrier function using synthetic hydrogel scaffolds with predefined surface
properties and a novel electrical impedance model. The intellectual merit of the
research component lies in the integration and application of concepts from
electrical, mechanical, and chemical engineering to investigating an important
and fundamental problem in vascular biology. Using a combination of quantitative
modeling techniques, thermodynamically engineered hydrogel scaffolds, and
electrical measurements, this study examines how specific receptor mediated and
cytoskeletal interactions control endothelial cell barrier function. The central
hypothesis of this work is that endothelial cell barrier function is regulated
by specific cytoskeletal elements that control cell-cell and cell-matrix
coupling. This study tests this hypothesis using a microcontinuum electrical
model with cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion dependent impedances and drugs
that target specific cytoskeletal elements. This model is experimentally and
numerically validated using biological interventions and a novel tissue
engineered endothelial cell and hydrogel matrix structure that permits direct
control over cell-matrix specific binding interactions. The outcome of this
research will contribute to an understanding of endothelial cell barrier
function and cellular-biomaterials interactions and impact several areas of cell
biology, tissue engineering, and pharmacology.

The overall educational objective is to stimulate efficient learning at
graduate, undergraduate and pre-college levels of education. Curriculum
development at both the undergraduate and graduate level compliments the
proposed research program. As part of the curriculum improvement, a Cellular
Fields, Forces and Flows graduate course and a senior/graduate level Cell and
Tissue Biotransport Processes course and laboratory are being developed. This
proposal targets underprivileged and minority groups at the middle school level
and supports an existing minority outreach program at The University of
Tennessee.