* 0238169
* Behavioral Responses of Elk to Predation by Wolves: Physiological Costs and Dynamical Consequences
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Scott Creel, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 12/31/2007
* USD 394,781.00

Most theoretical models of the impact that predators have on prey populations
focus exclusively on direct offtake and its impact on the survival rate of prey.
However, most prey species modify their behavior when predators are present, to
reduce the risk of predation. Because these behavioral responses require time
and energy, they are likely to affect the survival and reproduction of prey
species in ways that should be incorporated into predator-prey models. This
research will examine the behavioral responses of elk to the risk of predation
by wolves, in three ways. (1) Most fundamentally, it will test for behavioral
responses of elk to spatial and temporal variation in the risk of predation by
wolves. The behavioral responses to be examined include patterns of herding,
individual time budgets, movement patterns, spatial distributions, and habitat
selection. (2) It will then test for physiological costs associated with
antipredator responses, using fecal glucocorticoids to measure stress, snow-
urine allantoin:creatinine ratios to measure foraging success, and fecal
progestins to measure pregnancy rates. (3) Finally, it will determine the
impacts of antipredator behavior on patterns of survival and changes in
population size. The reintroduction of wolves to the Greater Yellowstone
Ecosystem has produced a rapidly growing and geographically expanding
population. The steady growth and expansion of wolves has generated enormous
controversy among wildlife managers, conservation biologists, state and federal
lawmakers, the media, and the general public. Sitting at the heart of this
controversy is the potential impact of wolf predation on wildlife populations,
particularly elk. This research will produce substantial data on rates of wolf
predation and its effects on elk demography, distribution and dynamics. These
data will play a critical role in establishing policies for the management of
wolves and elk.