* 0238188
* CAREER: ELECTRONS, PHONONS AND THE PROPERTIES OF STRONGLY CORRELATED MATERIALS
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Sergey Savrasov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research on strongly
correlated electron materials with an aim to incorporate recent advances in
quantum many-body theory into electronic structure methods. Research will have a
focus on the interaction of electronic and lattice degrees of freedom. The PI's
approach aims to merge density-functional linear-response theory with dynamical
mean field theory. As advances are made toward more realistic modeling of
strongly correlated electron materials, new theoretical methods, algorithms, and
computer codes will be developed. These tools have the potential to help guide
the search for new materials. Specific applications include: the study of the
effect of electronic correlation on lattice dynamics in Mott insulating oxides
and Multiferroics, the study of the electron-phonon contribution to the pairing
interaction in materials where superconductivity and magnetism coexist, the
study of the spin-Peirels transition. Computer programs will be designed to
enable materials exploration by non-experts, by materials scientists and
engineers, and by theoretical solid-state physicists. These will be accessible
via the Internet. The project will promote teaching, training and learning via
intensive integration of undergraduate and graduate students of New Jersey
Institute of Technology into the research process. It will involve students in
materials design, development of analytical methods and software, computations
of solid state properties and comparisons with experiments, and the creation of
WEB-based materials research databases. The project will expose Newark area
high-school students to today's world of materials engineering with emphasis on
the participation of underrepresented groups. This will be accomplished by
motivating the students to learn fundamental mathematics and physics via the use
of user-friendly software packages developed for PC platforms and training the
students to use programs such as simulations and visualizations of properties of
solids using this software. %%% This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at enhancing our capabilities to
predict the properties of materials involving strongly correlated electrons.
These display intellectually intriguing phenomena with potential for
technological application. These phenomena include high-temperature
superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance, giant optical non-linearities and
large thermoelectric coefficients. The research will have a particular focus on
the interaction of strongly correlated electrons with the crystalline lattice.
The PI will work to merge recently developed theoretical methods with density-
functional-theory based techniques to create more realistic models of strongly
correlated materials. This work involves developing new algorithms, and computer
programs that may amplify the level of comparison of sophisticated theories with
experiment and may help guide searches for and assist in the design of new
materials with desired properties. Computer programs will be designed with an
aim to allow materials exploration by non-experts, by materials scientists and
engineers and by theoretical solid-state physicists. These will be available
through the Internet. The project will promote teaching, training and learning
via intensive integration of undergraduate and graduate students of New Jersey
Institute of Technology into the research process. It will provide educational
experience via involvement of students into material design, development of
analytical methods and software, computations of solid state properties and
comparisons with experiments, and creation of WEB-based materials research
databases. The project will expose Newark area high-school students to today's
world of materials engineering with emphasis on the participation of
underrepresented groups. This will be accomplished by motivating the students to
learn fundamental mathematics and physics via the use of user-friendly software
packages developed for PC platforms and training the students to use programs
such as simulations and visualizations of properties of solids using this
software. ***

