* 0238294
* CAREER: Exploiting Tomography in Network-Aware Protocols: Theory and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Sonia Fahmy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 437,085.00

The overarching goal of our research is to address the problem of scalable and
network-adaptive overlay networking, including load balancing, optimized
dispersity routing, and low-overhead network monitoring. To achieve this goal,
we will design novel techniques for spatially and temporally exploiting end-to-
end measurements for inference and on-line adaptation. Our techniques will be
implemented and evaluated in a system that includes three
components:&lt;br/&gt;1. Overlay networks for multicast, anycast, geocast, and
peer-to-peer services: We will design methods to infer underlying network
characteristics (e.g., topology, losses) and host properties (e.g., location,
remaining battery power), and exploit them for adapting overlay trees and meshes
on the Internet. We will also model and characterize the structure, dynamics,
and performance of various overlay network classes. Understanding and isolating
the impacts of Internet topology and the overlay construction algorithm will be
an integral component of this work.&lt;br/&gt;2. Load balancing, optimized
dispersity routing, and coordinated congestion control: We will study the
feasibility of using correlations among delay/loss measurements to partition TCP
or application-layer flows according to inferred bottlenecks in real time. The
resultant flow partitions can be used to continuously balance loads, utilize
dispersity routing and parallel paths, and make coordinated congestion avoidance
decisions. &lt;br/&gt;3. Distributed network monitoring: We will design
lightweight tomography-based methods to continuously diagnose network problems
and detect anomalies or attacks based on inferred network characteristics. Based
on our solutions and the associated studies of (1) network-layer and
application-layer interactions; (2) overlay properties, cost, and dynamics; and
(3) the feasibility of on-line tomography, we will be poised to expand our scope
from overlay networks, to other challenging problems in network security, and
wireless and sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research covers
various facets of networking (from theory to implementation) and will provide
graduate students with a balanced exposure to both theory and practice that will
be invaluable in their future careers. In addition, the research will be
integrated with lab and seminar development and mentoring and outreach
activities that span levels from high school to graduate students. The programs
aim at increasing *women* student participation and retention statistics, by
attracting students to quality networking research. A set of web-based graphical
user interfaces and lab assignments for network simulation and measurement will
be developed, leveraging both our proposed research software, and tools
available from research labs and universities. These labs will aid high school
and undergraduate students appreciate the scale, heterogeneity and dynamics of
the Internet in an interesting environment. Undergraduate and graduate
mentoring, and research seminars with industry involvement, will encourage
students, especially women, to pursue research to the PhD level. All labs and
seminar material will be made freely available on the Web for the benefit of
similar programs at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;