* 0238166
* CAREER: Advanced interface circuits for communication systems through architecture, circuit, and software innovation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Michael Perrott, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 02/29/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Efforts to create low cost,high performance communication systems in the future
will be chal- lenged by the high cost of developing new interface circuits that
are suited to their needs.These interface circuits serve as the intermediary
between real world signals,which are analog in nature, and the digital
processing engines at the core of the system.Current interface circuits are
primarily analog in their implementation,which makes their performance highly
sensitive to manufacturing variations in the process they are fabricated in,and
to noise generated by digital circuits that operate on the same chip.The impact
of this sensitivity is that interface circuits must be custom designed for the
process they are implemented in,cannot be easily integrated with their adjoining
digital processor,and are often very restricted in their ability to serve a wide
variety of applica- tions.The resulting lack of portability of these circuits
leads to high development costs since they generally must be redesigned from
scratch for new systems. The goal of the proposed research is to develop new
interface circuit architectures that can be leveraged over a wide variety of
fabrication processes and applications,and thereby dramatically reduce the cost
of their implementation in future communication applications.This goal will be
achieved by replacing a signi .cant portion of the analog circuitry in the
interface with digital circuits that realize the required functionality through
signal processing techniques that will be developed as part of this e .ort.This
implementation philosophy will lead to dramatically di .erent interface
architectures than in use today,and will provide new insights into the tradeo .s
between using analog versus digital circuitry for given function and performance
requirements. New simulation models and software tools will be developed to
facilitate the process of exploring new system architectures and their
accompanying circuits.The simulation modeling e .ort will be focused on
obtaining accurate behavioral level descriptions of analog components in digital
circuit simulators,which will allow straightforward evaluation of the impact of
di .erent signal processing algorithms on the overall system performance.The
software development e .ort will be directed toward better integrating system
level and transistor level simulation tools,and providing estimation of the
impact of extrinsic factors such as substrate noise. A new educational course
will be developed at MIT that passes on the knowledge and tools ac- quired in
this research program.The class will teach high speed circuit techniques for
both analog and digital components.System level concepts will be explored
through a combination of mathe- matical analysis and interactive numerical
simulation using the custom models and software tools. It will examine the
impact of circuit limitations on system performance,and explore ways of iter-
ating between circuit and system designs to achieve the best overall system
performance.Through MIT 's OpenCourseWare initiative,the course materials and
software will be made available to other universities as well as
industry.Dissemination of the course through the OpenCourseWare program will
allow students and industry designers from a variety of ethnic,economic,and geo-
graphic backgrounds to have access to state of the art techniques and tools for
interface circuit design.