* 0238524
* CAREER: Advancing Technological Fluency of Underrepresented Youth and their Teachers through Project-Based Learning Opportunities
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Brigid Barron, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 04/30/2009
* USD 558,827.00

This five-year research program is designed to advance our understanding of how
to effectively engage diverse groups of youth in learning core IT concepts in
ways that motivate them to continue learning in their future education. Basic
research and design-oriented research will be conducted in three inter-related
phases. The first phase will focus on expanding what we know about students'
access, interest, and experiences with new technologies-with an emphasis on
identifying barriers to equity and revealing learning resources. Survey and
interview work will be carried out with a large and diverse group of students
across socio-economic strata in California's Silicon Valley region to
investigate their access to, and interest in, various kinds of learning
opportunities. The research will document how creative learning opportunities
are distributed across different communities and their effects on student
interests. It will also contribute to defining different profiles of student
fluency and how these are associated with learning ecologies constituted by the
interweaving contexts of self, family, peer group, school, and community. The
second phase of the work will focus on co-developing courses with teachers. A
core guiding principle of these courses will be a primary focus on the student
as designer and a learning goal will be to help students understand design as a
human process in which everyone can be involved. The course material will build
fluency in the context of projects in which students design, program, and
implement information systems that address issues of youth interest. This
approach will allow students to be authentic contributors of knowledge and
processes while simultaneously building understanding of the core concepts and
capabilities outlined in the NRC Fluency report-such as programming, information
design, and human-computer interaction. In the third phase, the teaching and
learning processes in these courses will be studied systematically, with a
particular focus on collaborative design work. A key goal of this research is to
contribute to theories of collaborative learning. Productive collaborative
design practices will be identified and the ways that such collaborations are
often less than productive and can be made more productive will be articulated.
Learning properties of collaborative technology design work beyond cognitive
outcomes will be identified for empirical study, including motivational,
relational, and meta-communicative outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
intensive co-development of courses with local teachers, the educational
component of this project will include the creation of a library of video case
studies that highlight exemplars of more and less productive small group
collaborative interaction. These will be used to help teachers (both pre-service
and in-service) and novice researchers see ways of engaging students in learning
that support fluency and increase interest and the ability to use and understand
technology broadly. The use of video cases will support conversations about
teaching and learning processes as they provide concrete references that can be
revisited and reflected on from multiple perspectives. The video cases will be
used to improve existing courses and in dissemination activities directed at the
broader community of information technology teachers and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;