* 0238281
* CAREER: Genomic Networks for Cold-Adaptation in Embryos of Polar Marine Invertebrates
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Adam Marsh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 04/30/2008
* USD 531,710.00

Although the cold ocean ecosystems comprise seventy-two percent of the biosphere
on Earth by volume, they remain sparsely inhabited and relatively unexploited,
particularly in terms of metazoan phyla. Consequently, the few animals that can
exist at this border of intracellular freezing represent ideal systems for
exploring genomic-level processes of environmental adaptations. Understanding
life at a margin of the biosphere is likely to convey significant insights into
the essential genomic processes necessary for survival under intense selection
pressures. This study of adaptive mechanisms in genomic networks focuses on an
experimental system that faces a formidable challenge for viability at low water
temperatures: embryonic development at sea water temperatures of -1.8 o C in two
Antarctic echinoderms, the sea star Odontaster validus and the sea urchin
Sterechinus neumayeri. The project strategy will quantify temperature effects on
gene expression and protein turnover networks during early development using a
Bayesian network analysis to identify clusters of genes and proteins whose
expression levels are associated in fixed, synergistic interactions. Ultimately,
there is a simple question to be addressed: Is it more or less difficult
(complex) for an embryo to develop in an extreme environment? To answer this
question, the research plan will decipher network topologies and subnet
structuring to uncover gene connectivity patterns associated with embryo
development in this polar environment. This is the new area of Environmental
Genomics that the PI will explore by expanding his research experience into
computational network analyses. Overall, there is a significant need for
integrative biologists in the future development of environmental sciences,
particularly for the application of genomic-scale technologies to answer
ecological-scale questions. The educational goals of this CAREER proposal are
focused at two levels in terms of interesting young students in the developing
field of environmental genomics: 1) increasing the racial diversity of the
scientists attracted to environmental research, and 2) increasing the awareness
of career opportunities within environmental research.&lt;br/&gt;These
educational objectives are incorporated into the research plan to engage
students with the excitement of working in an extreme environment such as
Antarctica and to interest them in the insights that genome-level research can
reveal about how organisms are adapted to specific habitats. Working in a
remote, extreme environment such as Antarctica is always a challenge. However,
the adventurous nature of the work can be utilized to establish educational and
outreach components of high interest to both undergraduate students and the
public in general. The proposed plan will bring the experience of working in
Antarctica to a larger audience through several means. These include the
following: the project theme of environmental genomics will be incorporated into
a new Bioinformatics curriculum currently being developed at the University of
Delaware; an intern program will be implemented to involved minority
undergraduate students in summer research in the United States and then to bring
the students to Antarctica to participate in the research; and a K-12 education
program will bring the excitement of working in Antarctica to the classrooms of
thousands of children (U.S. and international) through a program produced with
the Marine Science Public Education Office at the University of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;