* 0238609
* Telecommunications Research and Development
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 711,500.00

CSTB would convene an expert committee to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
telecommunications research and development. The study would develop a picture
of telecommunications research in the United States, including areas that are
and are not being emphasized, the interplay between telecommunications and
neighboring fields such as computer science and electrical engineering, and the
relationships between pre-competitive research and standards-setting efforts.
The study would examine changes in the level of support, research focus, and
research time horizon at the major U.S. industrial labs as well as more broadly
across the industry, including startups. The study would also examine
telecommunications research within universities, considering how much is done,
where, and under what conditions. It would assess the implications of these
changes for the U.S. telecommunications industry--recognizing that that industry
itself is changing and considering possible future trajectories for the industry
--and compare the U.S. research model to research initiatives being undertaken
in other countries (especially Europe and Japan) and bythe European Union.
Looking across industry and academia, it would consider future research
directions, the interplay between telecommunications and computer science, and
assess whether new institutional arrangements or programs are needed.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project would culminate in a consensus report
recommending ways to strengthen the U.S. research base, sustain education and
training of future telecommunications researchers, and enhance the
competitiveness of the U.S. telecommunications sector. The report would be
distributed to key decision-makers in government, industry, academia; as well as
congressional staff and the general public. The report would be made available
on the Web as well as in hard copy. The completed report would be briefed to
interested parties in government, industry, and academia. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project and its broader impacts both
would flow from its focusing attention on an area of critical national (and
international) importance. Historically, telecommunications R&amp;D has been the
province of private industry(with comparatively little effort in academia),
notably the former Ma Bell and other companies that were leaders in different
telecommunications segments--actors that have suffered with recent economic
conditions. Intellectually, the project would explore and characterize
telecommunications as a field and a focus for different kinds of research. It
will address what it would take to grow a more significant academic research
capability. In addition to stimulating research, boosting academic interest and
activity, the project will have broader impacts by helping to sustain and
enhance an arena that is important to national security, economic
competitiveness, and the larger base of information technology capability and
use of which telecommunications is a vital part. The technical opportunities it
will discuss will be linked to benefits among the public and large and specific
segments as users of different kinds of telecommunications capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;