* 0238627
* CAREER:    Molecular-Scale Interactions Between Microbes and Surfaces in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Terri Camesano, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2009
* USD 432,156.00

0238627 Camesano Protection of drinking water from pathogenic contamination
represents a growing concern since 50% of the population in the U.S. relies on
groundwater for drinking water, and as few as 10-12 colony forming units (CFUs)
of some strains of Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae can cause infection. The
objectives of the proposed work are to characterize the surfaces of pathogenic
and non-pathogenic microorganisms at the single-molecule level, and to relate
the physical and chemical properties of these biopolymers to bacterial adhesion
to "clean" and organic-coated surfaces. Our single-molecule approaches to
studying iopolymer-mediated bacterial adhesion allow us to uncouple the complex
physicochemical phenomena causing bacterial adhesion. The results of our work
will be instrumental to modelers trying to predict the spread of pathogens in
the environment (through intentional or accidental releases), to practitioners
developing treatment technologies for drinking and wastewater, for the
development of bio-barrier containment systems for subsurface microorganisms,
and for all industries or problems that involve biofilms, from marine biofouling
to clinical treatment of patients.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the educational
program are to promote creativity and enhance learning through a continuum of
experiences aimed at the pre-college through the graduate level. Students must
gain an appreciation for the excitement of scientific research, and then learn
to read and interpret scientific literature, design, perform, and analyze
experiments, and communicate their findings. This is most successful when
students are challenged to solve real-life environmental engineering problems by
applying fundamental principles of engineering and science as well as novel
technologies. Toward this end, I propose i) outreach activities through the form
of summer camps for high-school aged female and minority students, which will
create excitement about bacterial adhesion research through exposure to lab
experiments and contact with more senior-level students and faculty, ii)
mentored research experiences for first-year undergrads in a bacterial adhesion
lab, iii) international research experiences for upper-level undergraduates at a
chemical engineering school in France, iv) opportunities for graduate students
to mentor undergraduate projects, v) improved undergraduate and graduate courses
by introducing more problem-solving, laboratories, and real-world problems into
to the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;