* 0238204
* PECASE:     Virtual Robotic Environments for Rehabilitation and Human Augmentation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Yoky Matsuoka, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 09/30/2007
* USD 381,560.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Virtual Robotic Environments for Rehabilitation
and&lt;br/&gt;Human Augmentation&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop truly integrated human-robot
interactive environments to understand, assist, rehabilitate, and enhance the
human neuromuscular systems, a virtual robotic environment that explores human's
full potential needs and abilities will be developed. As the first step, an
inherently safe stationary wearable arm system will be designed and constructed
with a neuro-muscular system identification technique to extract the human
adaptation parameters in real time. The intellectual merit of the proposed
activity is that, using this virtual robotic environment, fundamental scientific
questions relating to human perceptual and neural interactions between the
virtual and actual movements will be investigated. With these intellectual
contributions, this environment will immediately lead to rehabilitating patients
with motor impairments, even for those who are not strong enough to execute
task-level movements on their own, by steering them beyond what they had
previously thought they were capable of doing. The educational goals are to
create interdisciplinary educational environment, to increase the number of
women in engineering and computer science, and to increase the interaction
between motor-impaired students and engineering students. The proposed research
and educational approach will have a significant and broader impact not only in
the scientific and educational communities but also the lives of disabled people
who are not currently able to independently execute everyday
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a CAREER
award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and
Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;