* 0238692
* CAREER: Model-Based Microstructure Evaluation of Hydrating Cementitous Materials: Development of a Test System and Experimental Investigation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Kolluru Subramaniam, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* lawrence bank
* 06/30/2009
* USD 401,873.00

Requirement of high performance concrete places high demands on achieving
superior performance in both strength and durability. Producing these new,
engineered concretes often involves improving the microstructure of the
cementitous phase of the concrete to achieve the desired properties. Successful
production of high-performance concrete generates research needs in the
following areas: (a) developing methods to monitor and assess the
microstructure, and (b) developing a fundamental understanding of the
relationship between the microstructure of the cementitous phase and the
strength and durability characteristics of the concrete. Techniques that provide
for assessing the internal structure of the cementitous phase and a rational way
of predicting the development of its material properties are required.

Sustaining high level of research activity in universities requires the
enthusiastic participation of students. Therefore scientific achievements have
to be concordant with advancements in education and outreach. In academia there
is a need to provide an environment conducive to learning. In particular, an
environment that increases the participation of minority students in engineering
practice and research is required. There is a need for better outreach to the
minority students and increasing their involvement in research related
activities.

This career plan addresses the dual objectives: (a) advance the state-of-the-art
in monitoring the microstructure development in cementitous systems and (b)
provide for increased participation of minority students in research related
activities. An essential aspect of the study is the educational and professional
development of not only the Principal Investigator, but also the student
participants and collaborators from engineering practice.

This research plan will commence with the development of an ultrasonic test
procedure for obtaining the acoustic properties of hydrating cementitous
systems. The two main components are: (a) to relate the acoustic properties with
information pertaining to microstructure of a hydrating cementitous system, and
(b) to provide a rational approach for predicting property development in these
materials. The model-based representation of the cement microstructure will be
formulated using the poroelastic theory.Fundamental understanding of the
relationship between the internal structure variables within the framework of
the poroelastic theory and the properties of cement systems (such as elastic
moduli, strength, shrinkage etc.) will be researched. Finally, microstructure-
based predictive approaches for property development will be developed.

The proposed multi-disciplinary research approach involves developing
collaborations with the departments of Chemistry, Electrical, and Computer
Engineering. The research tasks involve synthesizing the knowledge and
understanding developed in these areas. Minority student participation
throughout the course of this study will be enacted at the graduate,
undergraduate and high school levels. The participating students will be better
prepared for further study or for practice and, it is hoped, will be excited by
the challenging nature of the research. Educational outreach is specifically
targeted at women minority high schools students in the Harlem area of New York
City with the objective of increasing their enrollment in the engineering
program at the City College of New York (CCNY). Dissemination of the study
results to more distant researchers will be achieved through publishing of the
results and participating in international collaborative studies. In addition,
the development of an innovative web-based virtual laboratory is an essential
component of this study.s educational component.