* 0238623
* CAREER:    High-End Computing in Environmental Engineering With Application to Subsurface Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Gnanamanikam Mahinthakumar, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0238623 Mahinthakumar Accurate characterization of the subsurface is an
important element in the development of reliable and efficient groundwater
management practices. Accurate and reliable estimation of hydraulic conductivity
distribution, contaminant distribution, and/or contaminant source release
history is necessary for problems such as estimating groundwater yields, design
of efficient cleanup strategies, and identifying responsible parties in a
contamination incident. This requires solution of an inverse problem because
direct measurement of detailed subsurface properties is not feasible. Inverse
problems are difficult to solve and are computationally demanding. This
multidisciplinary CAREER proposal will investigate novel computational
strategies for the efficient solution of large-scale inverse problems in
subsurface characterization.&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of this career proposal is
to investigate the use of hybrid genetic algorithm - local search (GA-LS)
approaches and parallel computing for subsurface characterization inverse
problems by developing a flexible prototype test environment.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed development will target parallel supercomputers as well as emerging
computing environments such as the computational grid. Several new ideas will be
explored in this proposal to improve the efficiency and flexibility of the
approach. The computational approach will be rigorously tested and validated
using a number of subsurface characterization problems including case studies,
published field results, and application to field problems in North Carolina
through collaboration with North Carolina&lt;br/&gt;Department of Environment
and Natural Resources (NCDENR). The testing and validation activities will lead
to a greater understanding of using hybrid GA-LS algorithms for a wide range of
subsurface characterization problems and may lead to further improvements of the
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;Currently there are no concerted efforts in bringing
computational science content into environmental engineering education. The
educational activities will focus on bridging the gap between environmental
engineering and computational science by integrating several components of the
proposed research into existing and new courses. Research activities in inverse
modeling, subsurface characterization, GA-LS algorithms, and parallel computing
will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses. One of these
courses, an entry-level graduate course, will be targeted for the NCSU Distance
Education Program. An interactive training module will be developed to introduce
different inverse modeling approach to students and practitioners. Easy access
to this module will be provided via the web for educators and practitioners
throughout the nation. Introduction of computational science education to
minority environmental engineering students will be pursued through
collaboration with North Carolina A&amp;T State University. These educational
activities will impact computational science education among environmental
engineering students and practitioners. The collaborations with NCDENR will
result in the transfer of knowledge to practitioners and policy makers in North
Carolina. These activities are expected to foster long-term relationships
between the PI and NCDENR in research and educational activities beyond the
proposal period. In addition to publications and professional presentations, a
conscious effort will be made to quickly disseminate teaching materials,
research methodologies and findings, and software through a project web
page.&lt;br/&gt;