* 0238442
* CAREER:  Adaptive Control in Biological and Man-made Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Robert Scheidt, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2009
* USD 411,996.00

0238442 Scheidt Engineers have long drawn inspiration and insight from the study
of biological systems. Some of the most intriguing parallels between biological
and man-made systems have arisen in the study of information processing and
control within biological nervous systems. Early explorations into control and
communication in animals and machines have influenced the development of diverse
engineering disciplines such as artificial intelligence, computational
neuroscience and the mathematical modeling of logic and the mind. Particularly
intriguing are studies of learning and adaptation in nervous systems; such
studies have influenced the development and analysis of artificial neural
networks and have in turn been influenced by advances in adaptive control
theory.

The goals of the proposed research are to identify the neural mechanisms
mediating adaptive improvements in motor performance, and to test the hypothesis
that abnormal sensory feedback gain degrades motor coordination in a relatively
common clinical population. The PI will develop a novel, single-degree-of-
freedom, robotic manipulandum for use with both event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging (ER-fMRI) and systems identification techniques to
characterize, model and locate within the brain the adaptive mechanisms
mediating an important form of motor learning known as motor adaptation.
Neurologically unimpaired subjects and autistic children will make goal-directed
hand movements while holding the handle of a novel robot. ER-fMRI techniques
will be used to quantify brain activity while the robot perturbs the moving
hand. Linear (and if needed, nonlinear) systems identification techniques will
be used to identify which brain region(s) are most likely involved in the
adaptive neural representation of the hand's mechanical environment.

The proposal outlines the PI's role in developing Marquette University's new
Biocomputer Engineering curriculum. The PI will train up to 40 engineers per
year in the processes, methodologies, technologies and physiological aspects of
engineering microcontroller-based systems in the regulated medical electronics
industry. The PI will integrate state-of-the-art knowledge of adaptive
algorithms and their validation into the new undergraduate curriculum. The PI
will also integrate the proposed research and device development activities into
his existing Neuromotor Control course. Finally, the proposal describes an
engineering curriculum development process that draws from industrial best
practices in product design and quality control. Curriculum development will
incorporate industrial advisory feedback from periodic curriculum design reviews
to ensure that state-of-the-art design processes, methodologies and technologies
are instructed.