* 0238422
* Microbial Observatories: The Galapagos Microbial Observatory: Analysis of Novel Archaeal and Bacterial Diversity Associated with Iguanas Across Environmental Gradients
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Isaac Cann, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2006
* USD 205,550.00

A grant funded by the Microbial Observatories program and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering has been awarded to Drs R. Mackie, and I.
Cann of the University of Illinois, and M. Wikelski of Princeton University to
identify and characterize novel archaeal and bacterial diversity and dynamics in
the intestinal tract of unique herbivorous iguanas using a combination of
classical cultivation and modern molecular methods. The Galapagos archipelago
harbors two endemic genera of large herbivorous lizards, the marine
(Amblyrhynchus) and land (Conolophus) iguanas. These islands are situated over a
volcanic hotspot 1000 km west of Ecuador and have never been in contact with any
continental landmass. The Galapagos Islands were declared a UNESCO Biosphere
Reserve in 1984. They will utilize an array of classical cultivation based
techniques for enrichment, isolation and characterization of uncultured and
undescribed anaerobic bacteria and archaea. To assess molecular diversity and
phylogeny, they will utilize a culture independent approach based on retrieval
of genomic DNA directly from the iguana intestinal samples. DNA fingerprinting
technique (PCR-DGGE) as well as clone libraries encoding16S rDNA and large
genomic fragments from mixed microbial community DNA such that each cloned
fragment contains a phylogenetically-informative end (SuperPhylo-BAC) libraries
will be used for this purpose. Samples will be collected in the cool-dry season
(September) and the hot-wet season (February) for this two-year "proof of
diversity " award.

The long-term objective is to link phylogenetic and functional microbial
diversity in iguanas with the environmental and ecological gradients that exist
within this natural laboratory of evolutionary biology. The results are expected
to reveal novel biochemical and genetic capacity of the bacteria and archaea
accessed by the culture-dependent and independent approaches. This award will
provide a molecular and culture database for future screening of novel genes and
potentially useful products. The project will foster collaboration with the
Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Ecuador and Charles Darwin Research Station
through training of US and Ecuadorian undergraduate and graduate students, and
contribute significantly to the long-term conservation of the Galapagos world
heritage site.