* 0238861
* PECASE:  Development of Advanced MEMS Actuator Technology for Microrobotics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Elisabeth Smela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Development of Advanced MEMS Actuator Technology for
Microrobotics&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This PECASE proposal
addresses the development of a new actuator technology based on dielectric
elastomers for microrobotics, flying microdevices, and micromanipulation. This
will require the development of new fabrication processes. I shall: The
processing advances will permit us to design and fabricate three types of
elementary micro- actuation components: 1. Out-of-plane actuators, which will
also allow the measurement of actuator metrics that provide data essential for
device modeling. 2. Bending actuators, which will be used to realize novel
articulated structures with 6 degree-of-freedom movement. 3. In-plane actuators
that can be effectively coupled with Si MEMS
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Research: The motivation
for using dielectric elastomers actuators is that they are tough and compliant
and have an extraordinarily high efficiency, whereas existing microactuators are
either too brittle to transmit contact loads or consume too much power to carry
their own power supplies. Dielectric elastomer actuators also inherently
function as sensors. The proposed research will therefore make possible the
realization of robust, autonomous actuators that MEMS devices can use for
walking, manipulating, and perhaps flying, which will impact diverse
fields.&lt;br/&gt;Education: I will adopt inquiry-based teaching methods in
order to improve learning outcomes. Students will formulate their own projects
and use knowledge gained during the course to accomplish their objectives. These
projects will expose students to actual research experiences. This approach will
first be implemented in a 2-part undergraduate MEMS course in which students
design and fabricate original building blocks of an ant-like, walking
microdevice. These components will be the actuators, including legs,
manipulating arms, and chemical-squirting self-defense system. The dielectric
elastomer research will be utilized in the course, and the student's devices
will advance the research, closely integrating the research and education. A
broader curriculum development effort will establish a comprehensive MEMS core
program at UMD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a
CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;