* 0238903
* CAREER:  Optical Spectroscopy and Imaging for Understanding the Interrelation of Molecular and Ultrastructural Changes in Neoplastic Cells and Early Cancer Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Vadim Backman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0238903&lt;br/&gt;Backman&lt;br/&gt;Under this CAREER award, the advances of
optical spectroscopy and imaging will be bridged to those of molecular biology
to investigate the dynamics of the alterations of the organization of epithelial
cells undergoing precancerous and early cancerous transformations. A novel
spectroscopic imaging technique that utilizes light elastically scattered by
living epithelial cells and enables quantitative characterization of the cell
and tissue micro- and nano-architecture without tissue processing will be
developed. This technique will be applied to correlate the ultrastructural and
morphological changes in the living epithelial cells with specific molecular
events associated with the development of neoplasia, to establish how the cell
organization and molecular events are interrelated and affect the development of
cancer, and to evaluate the usefulness of these findings for the purposes of the
detection and diagnosis of precancerous and early cancerous transformations in
the colon. In these studies, experimental model of colon carcinogenesis
(azoxymethane-treated rats) and human tissues will be utilized. To enable the
development of the light scattering spectroscopic imaging, realistic analytical
and numerical models of light scattering by inhomogeneous tissue structures will
be developed, and the origins of light scattering signatures in the living
epithelial cells will be identified. One of the long-term outcomes of this
project would be the development of a novel optical technique to risk-stratify
patients for colon neoplasia and to non-invasively diagnose colon and,
potentially, other types of cancer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
educational plan is to integrate the traditional engineering and physical
aspects of the medical imaging curriculum with these of the contemporary biology
and medicine. To achieve this goal, an innovative component of the medical
imaging curriculum will be developed. This component will consist of three new
integrative interdisciplinary courses: Optical Imaging and Microscopy, Advanced
Physical Optics, and Clinical Experience in Medical Imaging. The curriculum will
bridge the physical and engineering principles with the biological and clinical
applications of optical imaging and other imaging modalities. Furthermore,
students will learn how the medical imaging is used in clinical practice by
rotating through various clinical sub-specialties where medical imaging is
extensively used. &lt;br/&gt;