* 0239038
* SBIR Phase II:  Surface Modification of Textiles for Protective Clothing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Waheguru Singh, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 05/31/2005
* USD 487,598.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project involves the
modification of the surface of textiles through graft polymerization of an
oxidizing polymer resulting in a fabric which has the ability to
eradicate/neutralize pathogenic microorganisms, pesticides, and
chemical/biological weapons. The fabric could be used to produce medical
textiles in order to reduce the transmission of infectious pathogens in
hospitals, protect agricultural workers from contact with pesticides, and
protect military personnel and first responders from contact with
chemical/biological weapons in the event of terrorism or war. The Phase I
research showed that the grafted fabric was highly effective against both
microbial and chemical agents. The modified fabric was also found to be non-
irritating to both intact and abraded (compromised) skin. In this Phase II
project the research will consist of optimizing the graft polymerization
process, extensive testing of the optimized fabric against microbial and
chemical challenges, durability testing through repeated laundering, mechanical
property evaluation, extensive cytotoxicity and irritation testing, capacity and
regenerability assessment, stability assessment in storage, pilot plant
production runs, and custom production/testing of fabric for a strategic
partner.&lt;br/&gt; The fabric technology to be developed in this project has a
vast amount of potential in a variety of niche applications in the medical,
agricultural, and military arenas. In addition to the huge markets that exist
for these products, there are obvious societal benefits that are inherent with
the technology. Infection control is a huge problem in medical facilities
resulting in prolonged hospital stays and leads to higher medical costs. The
modified fabric could be constructed into medical textiles for use as surgical
drapes, scrubs, lab coats, bed sheets, privacy drapes, gowns, etc. Farm workers
could protect themselves from exposure to the pesticides they use in the field.
The fabric could be employed in the production of protective clothing for first
responders and military personnel who find themselves in an environment where
there is a potential risk&lt;br/&gt;of exposure to chemical/biological weapons.
&lt;br/&gt;