* 0239755
* CAREER:    Organosulfur Natural Products Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Rabi Musah, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2007
* USD 529,816.00

This research program focuses on the organosulfur chemistry of natural products
isolated from plants with insecticidal, agricultural, or medicinal value, and
whose organoleptic properties imply the presence of organosulfur derivatives
other than the ubiquitous sulfur containing compounds such as cysteine and
methionine. Major objectives include 1) isolation and characterization of novel
potentially useful gamma-glutamyl cysteines, 2) C-S lyase crystallization,
structure determination, and mechanistic study, 3) assessment of the variety of
cysteine sulfoxide precursors responsible for organosulfur headspace volatiles
observed in selected plants, 4) chemotaxonomic classification of plant species,
5) determination of the lachrymatory principle(s) in plants, 6) thiosulfinate
chemistry and optical activity, 7) determination of formation pathways of
observed organosulfur natural products, and 8) synthesis and characterization of
observed novel compounds. A three-pronged approach to integrate teaching and
education will be taken, involving a K-12 scientific outreach program,
mentorship at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and pedagogical innovations
in teaching and research.

With the support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Rabi Musah, of the Department of Chemistry at the
State University of New York, Albany, is exploring the chemistry of sulfur-
containing natural products. Garlic is the best-characterized organosulfur
containing plant. It has become increasingly evident that other plants possess
considerably different organosulfur chemical makeups. Given the rich diversity
of compounds and chemistry observed in garlic and onions, it is likely that
numerous other novel compounds with interesting and important chemical and
biological properties are present in other plants. Through a variety of
integrated approaches, Professor Musah will explore the isolation,
characterization, and attendant chemistry and biochemistry of organosulfur
products from natural sources. In addition, Professor Musah will develop a K-12
scientific outreach program and implement a mentorship program at the
undergraduate and graduate levels.