* 0239492
* CAREER: Advancing Hurricane Landfall Science through Numerical Modeling, Observational Networking, and Greater Public Awareness
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Sytske Kimball, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 412,152.00

The characteristics of hurricanes at landfall have been identified by the United
States Weather Research Program (USWRP) as a critical area deserving increased
research attention. The reasons for focusing on landfall issues are: i)
hurricane evolution at landfall is a highly complex and destructive process that
is poorly understood and difficult to predict; ii) coastal populations are
continuing to grow rapidly. Consequently, this CAREER project will focus on
hurricane landfall in both its research and education components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to improve hurricane landfall forecasts, the
process of hurricane landfall needs first to be better understood. This project
will focus on rainfall and wind field evolution at landfall, in response to the
physical factors of surface evaporation, surface roughness, terrain elevation,
coastline configuration, hurricane size and intensity, and the angle at which
the hurricane crosses the coast. Past research has included observational and
modeled case studies, as well as a few simplified, idealized numerical modeling
studies. Real case studies are complex with a myriad of processes all occurring
at the same time, and the lack of real observations has made isolating them
difficult. The idealized models made a good start at systematically isolating
individual physical factors, but not all factors were addressed. This project
will fill the gaps by repeating the earlier, simplified experiments, gradually
increasing their complexity, and ending with landfall simulations on a realistic
north central U.S. Gulf Coast. Using an advanced mesoscale meteorological model,
important physical factors can be isolated one at a time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As this work progresses, research results will be shared
with the University's Coastal Weather Research Center, the National Weather
Service and the Mobile County Emergency Management Agency. Furthermore, local,
public schools which predominantly serve students from poor and/or minority
backgrounds, and retirement communities will be invited to attend Hurricane
Information Days at USA. They will learn what exactly a hurricane is, why these
storms are so difficult to predict, and that their local university performs
hurricane research and teaches students and the general public about hurricanes.
Throughout the 5-year period, meteorology undergraduates will function as
research assistants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A surface observational network, or
Mobile Bay Mesonet, will be established by i) incorporating existing surface
observational sites (some to be upgraded); ii) adding new surface sites; and
iii) including monthly sea surface temperature measurements in Mobile Bay. Most
of the 10 planned new stations, like 65 of the existing ones, will be located on
public school campuses and their students will be involved in collecting and
using meteorological data. The collected data can be used in a range of local
research and educational projects. The PI will join forces with local
organizations such as the National Weather Service, Mobile office, and the GLOBE
Program to develop the Mesonet and share data. The presence of the Mesonet,
which will remain in place after the 5-year CAREER period, will encourage other
institutions to bring their mobile observing platforms to the Mobile Bay area in
the event of a land falling hurricane.