* 0239625
* CAREER:  Transition Pathways in Complex Systems. Theory and Numerical Methods.
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2009
* Eric Vanden-Eijnden, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 03/31/2009
* USD 540,000.00

Abstract of NSF Proposal 0239625

PI: Eric Vanden-Eijnden, Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences

Title: Transition pathways in complex systems

The description of complex system driven by rare events, or conformations, is a
major challenge in applied mathematics and computational sciences. Well-known
examples of conformations include nucleation events during phase transition,
conformational changes in molecules, thermal activated switching of magnetic
materials, and chemical reactions. The disparity between the execution time of
the conformation event and the waiting time between these events is typically so
large that it impossible to simulate the dynamics of these processes by solving
directly the underlying dynamic equations. This project is a combined theorical
and numerical effort to describe and simulate these rare conformation changes.
The theoretical description of transition pathways in complex systems leads to
challenging problem in probability and stochastic processes theory which require
to go beyond the standard tools of large deviation theory and extensions
thereof. These new theoretical tools will be developed so as to naturally lead
to efficient algorithms, well-suited for the numerical investigation of the
transition pathways required in realistic complex systems.

Applied mathematics has much to contribute, and much to gain in understanding
via a coordinate program of analysis, simulation, and education the mechanisms
by which rare conformation changes arise in complex systems. Topics to be
addressed include: (a) the development of appropriate theoretical tools for the
description of the transition pathways in complex systems; (b) the development
of efficient numerical algorithms for the identification of these pathways; and,
(c) the development of courses at undergraduate and graduate levels in applied
stochastic methods which will provide the students with the necessary background
to do research on these topics at the interface between mathematics, computer
science, and the natural sciences. Successful pursuit of these issues requires a
multidisciplinary effort, drawing expertise from computational sciences, applied
mathematics, in the multiple fields in the natural sciences which involve
complex dynamical systems. The students and postdoctoral scientists
participating this effort will gain flexibility and perspective through exposure
to these many disciplines.