* 0239511
* Workshop on Critical Infrastructure Protection; September 23-24, 2002; Leesburg, VA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Sosale Sastry, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2005
* USD 66,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CCR0 0239511&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
workshop on information for Critical Infrastructure Protection, organized by the
University of California at Berkeley, in cooperation with Vanderbilt University
and the University of Virginia. The NSF Workshop on Information Technology
Research for Critical Infrastructure Protection, to be held in cooperation with
OSTP, September 19-24, 2002 in Leesburg VA. The purpose is to evaluate status
and identify research needs for information technology embedded in critical
infrastructures. This workshop addresses research gaps in secure, networked,
embedded systems for critical infrastructures; Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) systems; and infrastructure interdependencies. The first
session is a two-day, in-depth exploration of research needs. This session
brings together the academic research community, industry, and federal
participants. The objective is the identification of challenge areas and
development of a research agenda for software and information technology to
support secure, networked, embedded systems. The goal is a new software and
systems research strategy that can underpin next-generation embedded systems,
provide research infrastructure, and ultimately improve the nation's critical
infrastructure. Next is a one-day session, organized and co-funded by the
Computing Research Association, to discuss academic perspectives on challenges
in Critical Infrastructure Protection. Concluding the workshop is a two-day
session jointly sponsored by NSF, the Department of State, and OSTP to promote
global progress on these issues and to promote international collaboration
between researchers in the US and the EU. The product of the workshop is a
report, made available to the research community, to OSTP for strategic planning
and to NSF and other Federal program managers for planning and coordination of
research investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;