* 0239419
* Enhancing Opportunities for Undergraduate Learning in Immunology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Lynn Hannum, Colby College
* Fellowship Award
* Carolyn L. Piper
* 09/30/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to provide opportunities for undergraduates to
participate in research in cellular immunology at a small liberal arts college.
Students will be mentored by the Principal Investigator, a faculty member with
dual training in immunology and science education, through the NSF Postdoctoral
Fellowship in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Education Program
(PFSMETE).&lt;br/&gt;Independent research is a powerful learning experience for
undergraduates. Students are motivated to think creatively. They are given the
chance to develop skills in experimental design, data analysis and
interpretation, communication of findings and ideas with others, and to feel the
sheer excitement of discovery. Undergraduate research can inspire students to
pursue careers in science, and those who have the chance to work closely with a
dedicated teacher and mentor may be more likely to include education as part of
their future paths. Thus, the benefit of such experience goes well beyond the
individuals involved.&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed will focus on the immune
system of fish, a model well?suited for study in a small college setting. The
adaptive immune system of fish is particularly interesting because it has many
of the same cell types and functions as the mouse and human immune systems, yet
is simpler and largely unexplored. Support will allow up to four students
(during the academic year as well as summers) to work on characterizing the
kinetics of zebrafish B cell (antibody?producing white blood cells) responses to
immunization with innocuous proteins. For example, at various times after
immunization with different proteins, students will determine the number and
location of antibody producing cells in the main lymphoid organs, spleen and
head kidney. This work has the distinct advantage of being easily divided into
well?defined projects that will accommodate students of different levels of
experience and knowledge. Students will communicate their findings the yearly
college?wide research symposiums, as well as regional and/or national scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;Information on where and when B cell activation occurs
during the primary immune response will provide a basis on which to begin to
study secondary, memory cell mediated responses, those which are responsible for
providing long?term immunity to pathogens. Learning how immune memory is
developed and maintained in fish will be beneficial both to understanding the
evolution of higher vertebrate immune systems, and to efforts in developing more
effective vaccines for aquaculture. Having undergraduates be empowered
contributors to this field of knowledge will be invaluable.&lt;br/&gt;