* 0239844
* CAREER: The Organization and Reputation of Firms
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Steven Tadelis, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 09/30/2005
* USD 160,882.00

Modern economies exhibit a broad diversity of organizational forms: from small
owner-operated firms to employee-owned partnerships, cooperatives, non-profits,
and finally investor-owned corporations. Two important assets that a firm has
are its organizational form and function, and its market reputation. A
fundamental problem in economics is to understand both the forces that lead to
these different forms of organization and what determines the value of these two
intangible assets. This project proposes an economic framework for studying the
economics of organizations, with focus on organizational form and firm
reputation. The first part of the proposal studies partnerships and their role
in the professional services. The approach highlights three ingredients that
favor the formation of partnerships: (1) the importance of human capital in
production; (2) a lack of information on the part of clients that leads them
potentially to be concerned about the quality of the service they will obtain;
and (3) the differing incentives of partnerships and corporations in the hiring
and selection of senior employees. The theoretical model developed will explain
why partnerships are typical in the professional services, where human capital
is primary input to production and the nature of the service provided may be
quite difficult for consumers to accurately assess, but rarely observed in
manufacturing, technology, or lower-skill service industries. Associated with
this project is a rich set of policy questions concerning which forms of
organization the law and regulatory policy should accommodate. There is no
single coherent framework for understanding the differences between partnerships
and corporations, or for understanding the specific economics of professional
services that have led to this particular form of organization. This project
will offer a starting point for a broader investigation of market structure in
the professional services, for examining legal and regulatory issues in these
industries, and for interpreting empirical evidence about the structure of
professional organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the proposal
investigates the economic value of a firm's reputation, and how the dynamics of
entrepreneurial behavior and firm reputation are linked. Building heavily on the
insights I have gained from my previous work on firm reputation, I propose to
empirically test the clear predictions of my theoretical work on the market for
names using data on restaurants that combines both changes in ownership and
reputation dynamics. The proposal also outlines some new theoretical ideas that
would lead to a richer set of empirical predictions, and relate firm reputation
to dynamic entrepreneurial choices. In particular, the "entrepreneurial spirit"
may be related to particular types of people who specialize in creating new
businesses, and who then pass on the successful ones to other people who
specialize in maintaining ongoing enterprises. Understanding the link between
the dynamics of a firm's reputation, and its effect on the creation and turnover
of businesses, may help us understand the dynamics of entrepreneurial activity.
Furthermore, the framework may offer some policy implications regarding the
disclosure of information with respect to ownership turnover.&lt;br/&gt;