* 0239570
* CAREER:    Synthesis of Multi-Functional Mesoporous Silica Materials for Study Intercellular Interaction and Controlled Release Drug Delivery
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Victor Lin, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2008
* USD 470,000.00

The focus of this research is to produce non-toxic mesoporous materials for use
as sensors or controlled release drug delivery systems. The goal of the project
is to use multiple functional groups in conjunction with structurally ordered
silica particles to produce "sensing nanospheres" of use in the detection of
neurotransmitters released by cultured nerve cells. Unsymmetrical disulfides
will be used to attach functionalized molecules to the surface of mesoporous
beads. The surface properties of these materials will be studied, and their use
as nanodevices for controlled release of encapsulated drugs also will be
explored using FT-IR, solid state NMR and fluorescence spectroscopy. Dr. Lin's
educational focus will be provided by the highly interdisciplinary nature of
this project in conjunction with curricular development within and across these
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
efforts of Dr. Victor V. Lin of the Department of Chemistry at Iowa State
University. Professor Lin will focus his work on the use of small particles
designed to sense their chemical environment, and then react to changing
conditions by the controlled release of drugs or hormones into the surrounding
media. It is expected that these particles will be of use in expanding the
horizons of neuroscience. The educational activities of the award will include
teaching state-of-the-art concepts in material science to general chemistry
students. &lt;br/&gt;