* 0239481
* CAREER: Magnetic Resonance - From Materials Research to Science Education
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Stephen Hill, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will focus on microwave
spectroscopies of novel molecule based materials. Specific projects include:
magnetic resonance studies of interlayer coherence in quasi-two-dimensional
organic metals; Josephson plasma resonance investigations of interlayer phase
coherence in nodal superconductors; spectroscopy of the field-induced-
superconducting state in lamda-(BETS)(2)Fe(1-x)Ga(x)Cl(4); and electron
paramagnetic resonance investigations of exchange coupled systems of single
molecule magnets. Instrument development will continue to play a major role in
the growth of the PI's research activities, extending various novel "magnetic
resonance" spectroscopic techniques well into the sub-millimeter-wave regime.
Unique high-frequency instrumentation can be expected to have important uses
beyond the scope of the investigations described in this proposal, e.g. for
high-resolution high-frequency EPR, with applications in chemistry and biology.
The educational component of the project is aimed at addressing the
disconnection between the general public and their appreciation of forefront
materials research. Activities include: research experiences and outreach
activities involving undergraduates, high school students and teachers; courses
in the communication of science; the development of an interdisciplinary
graduate level materials research seminar; and efforts to convey the excitement
of materials research into freshman physics courses.

Research into molecule based materials has made enormous strides in recent
years, with the discoveries of all organic magnets and superconductors,
synthetic electronic materials, and single-molecule nano-devices. While there is
huge promise in terms of potential applications, much remains to be learned
about the fundamental characteristics of these materials. This Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project aims to explore many of these novel material
characteristics using electron magnetic resonance (EMR) spectroscopy. EMR
enables us to probe the dynamics of electrons in solids, as well as the nature
of their interactions with the environment in which they exist. In doing so, we
hope to address several key questions such as: why do some newly discovered
materials display superconductivity only at high magnetic fields, while the
superconductivity in almost all other known superconductors is destroyed by a
magnetic field; and what happens to magnetic memories when they are reduced to
the (nanometer) dimensions at which quantum effects begin to play a role?
Answers to these questions will impact society in terms of future technologies.
In parallel with these investigations, outreach and instruction will address the
obvious disconnection between the general public and their appreciation of
forefront materials research. Efforts will focus on students at all levels, as
well as high school teachers. Strategies include participation in
interdisciplinary research projects, and courses aimed at developing effective
scientific communicative skills.