* 0239089
* Collaborative Research: Productivity, Biogeochemical Transformations and Cross-margin Transport in an Eastern Boundary Buoyant Plume Region
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2011
* Parker MacCready, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 11/30/2011
* USD 2,915,591.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; This proposal was funded under the auspices of the
Coastal Ocean Processes Program (CoOP) in response to the "Buoyancy-Driven
Transport Processes" announcement of opportunity (NSF 02-059). This announcement
called for proposals investigating processes that control buoyancy-driven
systems influenced by freshwater inflows.&lt;br/&gt; This proposal focuses on
the highly productive Eastern Boundary Columbia river plume. This plume is
sufficiently large to be of regional importance, yet small enough to allow
determination of dominant processes affecting river plumes, and to facilitate
rate comparisons with regions outside the plume The proposed study will
integrate results from the nearby wind-driven CoOP study, as well as with those
from nearby GLOBEC and ECOHAB projects to provide definitive new information on
alteration of rates of biogeochemical processes by the unique stratification,
turbidity, mixing environment and nutrients of a river plume. Moreover, because
the Columbia River provides no significant terrigneous nitrate to the plume in
the growing season, this study allows plume-endemic processes to be isolated and
hence process results can be directly applied to other plumes. Results can also
be contrasted with more eutrophic, buoyancy-influenced coastal
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will address three hypotheses:
&lt;br/&gt;- During upwelling the growth rate of phytoplankton within the plume
exceeds that in nearby areas outside the plume being fueled by the same
upwelling macronutrients. &lt;br/&gt;- The plume enhances cross-margin transport
of plankton and nutrients. &lt;br/&gt;- Plume-specific nutrients (Fe and SiO4)
alter and enhance productivity on nearby shelves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed strategy is to compare production rates within the plume and outside
the plume, on the more productive shelf to the north of the river mouth
(Washington) and the less productive shelf to the south (Oregon). Results from
this study address important question as to why a shelf with weaker upwelling
winds is more highly productive than a shelf with stronger winds.&lt;br/&gt;