* 0239805
* CAREER:    Octahedral Hexanuclear Clusters:   Fundamental Studies and Inquiry Into Potential Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Lisa Szczepura, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 09/30/2010
* USD 495,000.00

This CAREER award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports research by Dr. Lisa Szczepura at Illinois State University on
fundamental studies of hexanuclear octahedral molybdenum cluster complexes. The
studies are aimed at probing two fundamentally important reactions of these
complexes, ligand substitution and reduction-oxidation. An understanding the
redox chemistry of the proposed aqua cluster complexes is likely to lead to the
discovery of novel oxidants. In addition, the ability to predict substitution
trends and generate linked hexanuclear cluster complexes together will enable
the preparation of new solids based on the hexanuclear molybdenum unit with
rigid spacer units which should provide room for molecules or ions to
intercalate and deintercalate. Overall, these data are crucial to the future use
of these cluster complexes in applications such as catalysis and materials
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project
involves the training and mentoring of women and underrepresented minorities.
The PI proposes to run enrichment workshops that parallel the general chemistry
sequence; these workshops will be available to students who are members of the
Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP). Students
from underrepresented groups will be recruited from these workshops as well as
from other classes to conduct undergraduate research in the PI's laboratory. By
providing financial support to graduate and undergraduate students, the PI hopes
to provide an environment where learning and mentoring are at the forefront.
Increasing the number of chemistry graduates from such underrepresented groups
is crucial to increasing diversity in the field of chemistry and in generating a
workforce that is capable of solving the complex scientific problems facing
society.&lt;br/&gt;