* 0239945
* Individual Differences in Self-Regulation during Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Lauri Jensen-Campbell, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 35,720.00

Self-regulation is associated with inhibiting actions an individual may
otherwise be inclined to perform. Poor self-regulation has been linked to
failure to control emotions, alcohol abuse, addictions, overeating, behavioral
control problems (e.g., aggressive behavior), and victimization. Interestingly,
previous research has focused on either young children or adults. However, the
pre-frontal cortex, the area of the brain believed to be responsible for impulse
control and self-regulation, continues to develop throughout adolescence. The
present research focuses on adolescents aged 10-14. The study specifically
examines individual differences in adolescent self-regulation that promote long-
term social outcomes and the possible underlying neural mechanisms that are
implicated in these differences by employing physiological measures as a source
of data about the individual. Two fundamental questions will be addressed: (1)
Are agreeableness and conscientiousness related to effortful control processes
in adolescence?; and (2) Are agreeableness and conscientiousness predictive of
psychosocial adjustment in adolescence? It is anticipated that agreeableness and
conscientiousness will be directly related to traditional cognitive assessments
associated with impairments in self-regulation. Adolescents higher in
agreeableness and conscientiousness will score higher on these traditional
cognitive assessments and will have greater physiological reactivity while
performing these cognitive tasks than will persons lower in agreeableness and
conscientiousness. In addition, adolescents lower in agreeableness and
conscientiousness will exhibit more behaviors associated with poor self-
regulation than will their peers. Overall, this study will provide converging
data between child and parent reports about personality and behaviors associated
with self-regulation on an age group that is often neglected in self-regulation
research. Second, this study will link personality to behavioral observations
and physiological responses associated with self-regulation. Third, this study
will examine whether personality and self-regulation are predictive of
adjustment in adolescence. Finally, this study will lay groundwork for future
research that will examine the possible developmental transitions related to
personality and self-regulation during adolescence. If we can understand how
personality is linked to control processes, we may then be able to understand
what factors affect development and psychosocial adjustment negatively in
adolescents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;