* 0239482
* U.S. - Swiss Cooperative Research:  Linking Adhesion--Promoted Reporter Gene Expression to Bacterial Attachment-Detachment Dynamics in Porous Media
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/2004
* USD 54,800.00

0239482&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award supports a
first-time sabbatical in Geneva, Bern, and Zurich, Switzerland to investigate
the role of bacteria in decomposing pollutants in contaminated soils and waters.
The project involves William B. Johnson of the University of Utah and his
graduate student and three Swiss researchers. Their research focuses on
observations of bacterial attachment-detachment dynamics in well-characterized
systems. Using green fluorescence protein methodology, they propose to
characterize bacterial cell surface properties and apply this relationship to
how bacteria attach and detach themselves through porous media. The attachment-
detachment behavior of selected bacterial strains on various surfaces will be
examined under different environmental conditions (water velocity, bacterial
surface characteristics, substratum surface roughness and solution chemistry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international cooperative program brings together
researchers with complementary expertise. Professor Johnson will perform
characterization of bacterial cell surface properties with Dr. Paolo Landini, a
microbiologist at the Swiss Institute for Environment Technology. Direct
observation of bacterial attachment-detachment dynamics will be examined with
Dr. Jaro Ricka of the University of Bern. Interaction and adhesion force
profiles will be developed with Dr. Michal Borkovec at the University of Geneva.
Understanding of attachment and detachment processes of bacteria in porous media
have practical applications in environmental and pollution clean-up, and in
particular, could lead to new methods to introduce pollution eating bacteria
into contaminated sites.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;