* 0239376
* CAREER: The Importance of Iron in the Remineralization of Organic Matter in Estuarine and Continental Shelf Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2009
* USD 499,184.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0239376

The fate and transformation of organic carbon in coastal and marine sediments is
intrinsic to understanding the carbon cycle and its influences on global climate
change. The objective of the proposed research by the PI was to examine the
mechanisms of natural organic matter (NOM) transformation in estuarine and
continental shelf sediments through in-situ technology and mathematical
modeling. The research is based on the following two hypotheses: 1) microbial
Fe(III) reduction accounts for a significant portion of NOM remineralization in
the target regions, and 2) sufficient oxygen is supplied through bioturbation to
recycle Fe(OH)3 efficiently for NOM remineralization. The PI proposed to
construct a lander system with a benthic chamber, a micromanipulator and
voltammetric microelectrodes to obtain in situ benthic flux data and
microprofiles. This in situ data combined with sulfate reduction rates, solid
phase and porewater data from sediment cores, and results from reactor
experiments would be used to calculate NOM remineralization rates. The PI then
proposed to develop a 3-D diagenetic model to predict NOM remineralization in
continental shelf and estuarine sediments.

Incorporating chemists and engineers into the chemical oceanography field was
one of four objectives of the educational component. The PI proposed to involve
students in these fields in the development of the lander system and the
modeling effort. Additionally, a high school teacher would conduct a research
project in the PI's laboratory during the summer as part of an existing program
at GIT. The third component entailed development of a laboratory component of an
existing Geochemistry course. This laboratory component would include cruises on
the R/V Savannah to deploy the lander system and involve the students in the
field and laboratory efforts of the proposed research. The fourth component
consisted of a student exchange program involving GIT, Skidaway Institute of
Oceanography, and European partners.

