* 0239091
* CAREER:  Mixed Reality Science and Technology for Architecture Engineering and Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Phillip Dunston, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 426,353.00

Project Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to establish scientific
principles and extend technologies for using Mixed Reality (MR) ? visualization
blending real and virtual elements ? to support decision-making and control
through the life cycle phases of constructed facility projects. Challenges in
establishing MR as a viable technology in the architecture, engineering, and
construction (A/E/C) industry will be addressed through real-time virtual model
generation, measurement of spatial cognition benefits, information
visualization, and the definition of functionalities for individual and
collaborative human-computer interactions. This research is guided by the
promise of Mixed Reality to provide intuitive and liberal interactions with
design models and related project data in a more ubiquitous computing
environment for the construction enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;Two particular research
foci are 1. the creation of efficient and intuitive design and planning
environments that utilize MR technology for enhancing design comprehension and
supporting collaborations; and 2. the creation of interface systems and
interaction techniques that support the acquisition and communication of job
site planning, execution, and inspection knowledge through direct access to
graphically displayed, spatially referenced digital design data. &lt;br/&gt;The
core research is complemented by education activities encompassing both the
creation of virtual visualization course modules and outreach and mentoring
activities to expand the pipeline of African American students pursuing graduate
degrees in civil engineering. Recruiting and mentoring of students will be aided
by a network of linkages with existing university outreach programs, an existing
industry-university consortium, and parallel department-level initiatives to
increase the numbers of women and students from Predominantly Undergraduate
Institutions in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;The research plan aims to advance
knowledge in the A/E/C industry with regard to human-machine interfaces and
computer-mediated human-to-human interactions, particularly by addressing human
factors. This research will advance discovery in the construction discipline by
applying a greater range of interdisciplinary expertise to meet challenges in
creating, modifying, communicating, and comprehending constructed facility
designs. By further broadening the application of computing, the research serves
to transform what is generally regarded as the predominantly "low-tech" nature
of the A/E/C industry. Enhancements can be achieved for both construction work
processes and construction education. The integrated education plan will develop
a model for improving the network of relationships between minority and majority
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;