* 0239121
* CAREER:    Statics and Dynamics of Singularities In Some Models From Material Science
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Sylvia Serfaty, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Sylvia Serfaty, New York University DMS-0239121

This project, in the field of analysis and PDEs, is concerned with the analysis
of statics and dynamics of singularities in some models from physics/material
science. We have been and will continue to be particularly interested in two
specific models: the Ginzburg-Landau model of superconductivity, and
micromagnetics. In the area of micromagnetics, we studied previously some
simplified two-dimensional model in the asymptotic regime corresponding to sharp
"domain-wall" transitions. We established some optimal energy estimates, and
exhibited optimal patterns for the transition profile, which fit very well with
the "cross-tie wall" observations, and gave a first example of a non one-
dimensional optimal profile in a vector-valued phase-transition problem. We
intend to pursue this analysis towards more physically relevant models. In the
area of the Ginzburg-Landau model, we previously focused on understanding the
apparition, structure, and location, of vortices. We established a Gamma-
convergence result deriving a limiting free-boundary problem, and proved
convergence to some limiting vortex-densities, which we characterized, for
minimizers as well as critical points. The project is to pursue further the
analysis in the regime of high-applied fields, and turn towards the study of the
associated dynamical models. We hope to establish the limiting dynamical laws
obeyed by the vortices, first for a finite number of them, then for an infinite
number of them, via some new estimates and an energetic approach to gradient-
flow. Beyond that, we will be interested in understanding better the convergence
of gradient flows for general Gamma-converging energies.

This project, in the field of analysis and PDEs, is concerned with the analysis
of statics and dynamics in some models from physics, in particular the Ginzburg-
Landau model of superconductivity and microagnetics. In both cases the focus is
on understanding, via rigorous mathematical proofs, the qualitative behavior of
solutions to such models, and in particular explain the structure and the
dynamics of singularities arising in some asymptotic regimes.

The purpose of such research is thus two-fold. First to shed light on the
understanding of the specific physical problems themselves: by obtaining
asymptotic expansions and explicit formulas, one can explain physical
experiments, confirm or disprove the validity of models, and by rigorous
analysis one can one also derive reduced simplified models (for example reducing
the dimension) that are easier to work and compute/simulate with. The second
purpose is more mathematical. As mentioned, the underlying philosophy is to
manage to reduce the original asymptotic problems to simpler limiting problems
(of lower dimension) on which the core phenomena (here singularities) can be
tracked down. This is the main philosophy of ``Gamma-convergence''. In order to
perform such analysis, one needs to develop appropriate mathematical tools and
provide the right settings to understand the phenomena. One also wishes to
understand how much of the behavior is particular, and how much can be extended
and understood as a more general mathematical phenomenon, with the hope that
what is understood for one specific model may in turn help to understand others.