* 0239688
* CAREER: Study and Control of the Optoelectronic Properties of Ternary Semiconductor Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Clemens Burda, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2010
* USD 588,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division, Burda will study ternary semiconductor nanodots using
nanoparticle synthesis and chemometric modeling, detailed characterization of
optoelectronic properties by laser spectroscopy, and device fabrication and
application-specific efficiency measurements. The fabrication of nanoparticles
is based on two different families of materials, namely compounds of the type
Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se,Te)2 and TiO(2-x)N(x). Characterization techniques include high-
resolution transmission microscopy (EDS and EELS) and nanosecond-to-femtosecond
spectroscopic measurements. In the end the investigator will fabricate
photovoltaic devices using nanoparticles of the two types synthesized in this
research. The educational activities of this project include involvement in the
"Math and Science Partnership" (MSP) Outreach Program for Local High School
Teachers, educational workshop programs of the NASA Glenn Research Center, and
collaborative outreach projects. Undergraduate students and students from the
local high school will be able to participate in the research experience of the
PI's laboratory. A new course for undergraduates on the topic of nanomaterials
will introduce students from different scientific backgrounds (engineers,
chemists and physicists) to developments in the interdisciplinary field of
nanoscience.

Understanding and controlling the optoelectronic properties of ternary
semiconductor nanomaterials is of great interest to many important technological
applications, such as fabrication of photovoltaic solar cells and lasers as well
as semiconductor-based photocatalysis. The outreach activities impact education
from grades K-12 through postdoctoral training and from local to national
arenas.