* 0239385
* CAREER:    A New Methodology for Copolymer Functionalization:   One-Step Multi Recognition Site Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Marcus Weck, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/29/2008
* USD 510,000.00

The focus of this research is on the design and synthesis of "universal" polymer
backbones for use in simultaneous multi-recognition of functional groups. The
central theme is to produce a polymer backbone that can be modified as required
by the attachment of binding functionalities of interest. Monomers bearing
various transition metals and chelating groups, as well as functional groups
bearing hydrogen bond donor and acceptors with various patterns will be
polymerized to produce polymers capable of subsequent modification. In terms of
broader impact, the modified polymers are expected to be useful for a wide range
of biological, optical and electronic applications. The focus of the educational
effort will be the development and introduction of a new campus-wide
interdisciplinary laboratory course for undergraduates.

With this CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
supporting the research and educational efforts of Dr. Marcus M. Weck in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Professor Weck will focus his research on the production of polymers capable of
modification to suit various purposes in biology, optics or electronics. The
educational component of the award will center on the development of a new
laboratory course designed to introduce college students from many different
disciplines to the uses of polymers, and a workshop to introduce polymer
chemistry to faculty at undergraduate institutions.