* 0239063
* PECASE:    Systems of Conservation Laws and Related Models in Applied Sciences - Math Awareness and Outreach
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Konstantina Trivisa, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2009
* USD 482,132.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: SYSTEMS OF CONSERVATION LAWS AND
RELATED&lt;br/&gt;MODELS IN APPLIED SCIENCES - MATH AWARENESS AND
OUTREACH&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program of the investigator lies on the
interface between continuum physics and applied partial differential equations,
with emphasis on nonlinear systems of conservation laws. These quasilinear
systems in divergence form govern a broad spectrum of physical phenomena in
compressible fluid dynamics, nonlinear materials science, particle physics,
semiconductors, combustion, multi-phase flows, astrophysics, and other applied
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, major progress has been made in
both the theoretical and the numerical aspects of this field. The main objective
of this investigation is to build a bridge between the most recent developments
in the general mathematical theory and significant areas of application that
have developed in the last few years. The main focus of this program will be
given to significant and, until recently, unexplored areas of research,
including: hyperbolic systems of conservation laws with large initial data;
multi-dimensional systems in nonlinear elasticity, fluid dynamics, and
combustion theory; vanishing viscosity solutions to models of compressible
flows; stability of boundary layers for realistic models of compressible fluids;
and analysis of numerical schemes for hyperbolic conservation
laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in this interdisciplinary research will rely
substantially on the development of new analytical techniques in nonlinear
partial differential equations. Analytical and numerical methods in this field
have developed together; analytical understanding contributes to the
construction of accurate and efficient numerical schemes, while numerical
experiments often lead the theoretical analysis. Progress in this research
program will contribute (a) to the successful investigation of a wide variety of
important physical systems modeled by conservation laws and (b) to the design of
high performance computational algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
integrates into her work educational activities that demonstrate the importance
of applied mathematics in a broad spectrum of sciences. Special emphasis is
given to applications in materials sciences, biology, finance, and cutting edge
technologies. The planned educational activities include programs for high
school students, undergraduates, and graduate students. The investigator works
to increase the diversity in the mathematical sciences by encouraging under-
represented groups to study applied mathematics and choose it as a
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a CAREER
award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and
Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;