* 0239417
* Vibrational Spectra and Structure of Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Samuel Krimm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

The goal of this research program is to develop and apply more
physically&lt;br/&gt;accurate potential energy functions for polymeric
macromolecules than are&lt;br/&gt;presently available, in particular functions
that, in addition to the&lt;br/&gt;usual prediction of structures and energies,
give spectroscopically&lt;br/&gt;accurate reproduction of vibrational
frequencies (which is not achieved by&lt;br/&gt;current standard functions).
This is accomplished by the spectroscopically&lt;br/&gt;determined force field
(SDFF) methodology previously developed in this&lt;br/&gt;laboratory. Under this
proposal, current SDFFs will be extended to include&lt;br/&gt;polarization,
which is very important in describing properties of polar&lt;br/&gt;groups such
as amides. A new protocol for determining parameters in the&lt;br/&gt;energy
function assures the avoidance of correlations and indeterminacy&lt;br/&gt;in
these quantities. The newly developed formalism for molecular
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;in internal coordinates (ICMD) will be implemented on
macromolecular&lt;br/&gt;systems. The hydrocarbon SDFF will be applied to the
analysis and&lt;br/&gt;resolution of questions concerning structural transitions
and the origin&lt;br/&gt;of spectral bands in trans-1,4-polybutadiene and band
splittings in cis-&lt;br/&gt;1,4-polybutadiene. The SDFF to be developed for the
amide group will be&lt;br/&gt;used to calculate the normal modes of nylons 6 and
66 to provide deeper&lt;br/&gt;insights into the analysis of vibrational and
inelastic neutron scattering&lt;br/&gt;spectra of these polymers. The new ICMD
formalism will be applied to&lt;br/&gt;calculations on crystalline polyethylene,
with the particular goals of&lt;br/&gt;correcting published spectral intensity
inaccuracies and of comparing&lt;br/&gt;spectral predictions from normal mode
analysis with those from the Fourier&lt;br/&gt;transformation of the time-
autocorrelation function of the dipole moment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to its intellectual contributions, this research program will&lt;br/&gt;have
broader impacts. New research results will be incorporated
into&lt;br/&gt;advanced courses, and graduate students and postdocs will develop
and&lt;br/&gt;report a more sophisticated understanding of an important area
of&lt;br/&gt;science. The previous emphasis on involvement of women in the
research&lt;br/&gt;program will continue. Advanced computer programs for
analysis of&lt;br/&gt;properties of polymers will be made available to the
scientific&lt;br/&gt;community. The more acurate theoretical understanding of
properties will&lt;br/&gt;lead to advances in commercial polymer technology and
the amide group&lt;br/&gt;aspect of the work have will an important impact in
the study of &lt;br/&gt;biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;