* 0239355
* CAREER: Integrated All-Optical WDM Devices Using Photonic Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Ali Adibi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0239355&lt;br/&gt;Adibi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-increasing need for
reliable high-speed information access is a global need in today's world. Many
people's lives would be improved by easy and fast access of information through
the internet. Providing low-cost and fast information access for more people all
over the world has great global impact on education and quality of life through
programs like distant learning. The most promising technology for achieving this
goal is wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) in optical communications. Most
fiber optic systems deployed today are constructed from rather large discrete
components, requiring many fiber-coupling connections that are inherently
expensive, large and introduce losses. So far, it has been difficult to
miniaturize devices for coupling, sorting, and multiplexing of light. It is
expected that integrated chip-scale WDM devices can provide lower weight, more
reliability, smaller size and less sensitivity to electromagnetic interference.
It further eliminates the need for labor-intensive alignment of discrete optical
devices. To implement integrated chip-scale WDM modules, there is an urgent need
to integrate discrete devices into a unified platform. In this research the PI
seeks to use photonic crystals (PCs) as such a platform. The possibility of
completely designing electromagnetic modes in photonic crystals devices makes
them the excellent candidates for designing integrated WDM devices. Furthermore,
the existence of the photonic bandgap eliminates long tails of evanescent fields
that usually cause crosstalk between WDM channels in normal slab waveguides.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this proposal he uses PC waveguides, PC cavities, and
PC superprisms to perform the three major functionalities requires in WDM, i.e.,
guiding, filtering, and multiplexing/demultiplexing. Currently these PC devices
are not optimized. There is no systematic method for designing these devices. He
will develop these systematic methods in PC devices by optimally designing and
controlling their electromagnetic modes. Furthermore, I will develop techniques
required for optimal coupling of these devices to integrate them in the form of
WDM devices. His research includes both theoretical and experimental
investigation of PC structures. The major research tasks are summarized below.
Although aimed at a single target, each component of the effort provides
considerable understanding of photonic crystal structures that are valuable in a
variety of other applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) The development of fast
and efficient three-dimensional analysis tools which will allow us to design and
optimize specific linear and nonlinear optical properties of the photonic
crystals. &lt;br/&gt;2) The development of a systematic method for dispersion
engineering in photonic crystal devices, especially superprisms, waveguides, and
cavities using the simulation tool developed in &lt;br/&gt;part 1. &lt;br/&gt;3)
Optimization of coupling between discrete photonic crystal devices in order to
integrate them to perform WDM functionalities &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research has considerable impact both at the basic science level and at
the application level. It provides a complete understanding of PC waveguides,
cavities, and superprisms as well as a systematic method to design these
devices. At the application level, it can have a global impact by realizing
chip-scale integrated WDM. The type of devices developed in this research can be
used in other information processing applications, especially in biosensors.
Combined with the small size and perforated structure of photonic crystals,
these devices can be used in very small biosensors that and will enable in vivo
sensors, nanosensors to swallow, spectrometers on a needle, etc. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;On the education side, this CAREER plan provides an excellent
educational benefit for students. The ability to analyze, model and optimize PC
structures as well as hands-on lab work in fabrication and characterization of
actual WDM devices allow students to obtain experience in modeling, fabrication,
and measurement techniques. Three graduate and several undergraduate students
will be trained this way to help accommodate the huge demand in industry for
experts in nanotechnology and optical engineering. Providing K-12 and minority
students with the opportunity of learning some basics of optical systems as well
as involving teachers (with help from NSF's RET program) are other aspects of
this CAREER plan. He also plan to develop a graduate level course entitled
Introduction to photonic crystal devices, and to add some material on state-of-
the-art WDM to the existing graduate level course, Fiber Optics networks, that
has not been taught for a few years. He will also improve the undergraduate
course, Lasers and Applications. The PI will also write one book on Photonic
Crystal Optical Waveguides. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;