* 0239512
* CAREER: Neutron, Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction and Instrumented Indentation Studies of Deformation in Shape-Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Rajan Vaidyanathan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 369,763.00

Shape-memory alloys are of theoretical and commercial interest for the
deformation phenomena they exhibit - twinning and stress-induced or temperature-
induced phase transformations. The proposed program uses neutron diffraction,
synchrotron X-ray diffraction and instrumented indentation to investigate
deformation in shape-memory alloys. The emphasis is on in situ diffraction
measurements, i.e., simultaneously recording diffraction spectra from samples
that are subjected to external stresses or temperature changes, or a combination
thereof. Such measurements provide quantitative information of the evolving
internal strains, texture and phase volume fractions during twinning and stress-
induced or temperature-induced phase transformations. The experiments will
utilize the neutron beam at Los Alamos National Laboratory and the synchrotron
X-ray beam at Argonne National Laboratory. Consistent with the theme of
investigating deformation in shape-memory alloys and with the objective of
obtaining mechanical properties from small sampling volumes of shape-memory
alloys, instrumented indentation experiments will be performed on shape-memory
alloys to correlate load-depth data from indentation experiments with
macroscopic stress-strain data from conventional tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program is expected to further the understanding of (a) shape-memory alloys for
actuator applications and for biomedical applications, as shape-memory alloys
continue to make inroads as the material of choice for stents, and (b) neutron
diffraction, synchrotron X-ray diffraction and instrumented micro- and
nanoindentation as valuable tools for mechanical characterization of internal
stresses in emerging materials, bulk, coatings, thin-films, line and dot forms.
The educational activities include curriculum development, instruction and
laboratory development providing experience and training for students using
facilities at National Laboratories. Outreach and mentoring activities include
collaboration with a local science center and the Minority Engineering and
Computer Science Office at UCF, engineering education in the work place through
distance education in the Florida Engineering Education Delivery System (FEEDS)
and the development of industry short-courses.&lt;br/&gt;