* 0239626
* CAREER:     The Search for Underlying Structure in String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Shiraz Minwalla, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2006
* USD 238,630.00

The proposed research involves various aspects of understanding the basic
structure of string theory. Although many interconnections have been recently
discovered between gauge theories, quantum gravity and conformal field theory as
a result of string theory investigations, the organizing principle relating the
different formulations of string theory has yet to be uncovered. It is hoped
that by studying special limits of string theory, we will gradually reach a
better understanding of the organizing principle. The PI intends to study the
problem of the mixing of the ultraviolet and infrared properties in string
theories in the simpler case of non-commutative field theory. By coupling non-
commutative field theory to gravity it is hoped that some insight will be gained
on the issue of the cosmological constant. The PI also intends to study solitons
in non-commutative field theory as a tractable model for D-branes. He will also
study non-commutative open string theories to better understand the high-energy
behavior of such theories. As part of the PI's outreach program the PI will set
up a program to have students from developing countries to come to Harvard for
extended periods to be better exposed to forefront research in string theory. He
will also develop a yearlong course on modern field theory based on new
developments coming from string theory.