* 0239883
* Spatial Thinking and Reasoning
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Reginald Golledge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 06/30/2006
* USD 337,561.00

Spatial thinking and reasoning is common to most knowledge domains. It is
central to geography and other geosciences, and it is important in domains
ranging from astronomy to zoology where geospatial databases are common. Other
knowledge areas, such as dance, music, painting, sculpture, genetics, biology,
physics, and linguistics, all require spatial thinking and use spatial
metaphors. The peculiar contribution of spatial thinking and reasoning to solve
certain types of problems has been recognized by psychologists like Beck and
Uttal, who claimed that preparing and using spatial representations of
information (as in maps, graphs, and images) provides a perspective that is not
matched by any other means. The purpose of this research project is to develop a
spatial task ontology and a concept lexicon to assist in the development of
spatial thinking and reasoning. The investigator will define spatial thinking
and identify sets of tasks that will help people understand the nature and
importance of spatial thinking and reasoning in everyday life. The task ontology
will identify different levels and types of tasks ranging from those designed to
identify spatial primitives and will illustrate how such primitives can be
expanded into discrete levels. The levels range from simple derivations to more
complex multiple combinations of primitives and derivations to form complex
concepts, such as geographic association and spatial interpolation. When
elaborated, these concepts assist in the understanding of everyday activities,
such as learning a route to primary school, choosing a neighborhood in which to
live, or selecting places to work, shop, or enjoy recreational activities. This
project aims to synthesize theoretical work on spatial ontology with empirical
work on spatial task performance in the world of everyday experience. To achieve
the project's objectives, sets of innovative tasks will be developed and tested
in both laboratory and field settings to evaluate whether or not developing an
understanding of spatial concepts embedded in everyday living leads to enriched
geographic understanding of neighborhood, city, region, nation, and the world.

This project will explore the ways that people organize the ways they think
about space and the forms of thinking and reasoning that they use when they are
confronted with spatial information. The research should shed light on how
enhanced understanding of geographic concepts influences the comprehensive of
spatial information, and it will illustrate differences that result from formal
training in geographic concepts. All of these developments have intellectual
implications ranging from the formalization of geographic knowledge to the
development of more effective geographic information systems. This project will
influence the development of future enhancements of geographic information
systems, and it could help identify new strategies for more effective geographic
education at all levels.