* 0239282
* Identification and Genesis of a Cluster of Fungal Pathogenicity Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Hans. VanEtten, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 397,019.00

This research has the potential to identify a new class of pathogenicity genes
in fungi and to further the understanding of the genomic organization and
transmission of these genes. Whereas the horizontal transfer of groups of genes,
as exemplified by bacterial pathogenicity islands, is well accepted as a
phenomenon and an evolutionary driving force in bacterial pathogens of plants
and animals, its role in the evolution of fungal pathogenicity is controversial.
The studies on the genesis of the PEP cluster, a group of genes involved in the
pathogenicity of the fungus Nectria haematococca on pea, will contribute to the
understanding of the evolution of pathogenicity and help to determine whether
fungi can acquire pathogenicity genes by horizontal transfer. The PEP cluster is
located on a 1.6-Mb conditionally dispensable (CD) chromosome, which is
dispensable for growth in culture but is required for growth in specific
habitats, in this case pea tissue. The prototype PEP cluster contains six genes
that are expressed during the infection of pea. A survey of 25 field isolates
has revealed that all highly virulent isolates have all members of the cluster,
while none of the non-virulent isolates contains the entire cluster. Recently,
six additional ORFs, which are expressed during infection, have been identified
in the regions flanking the prototype PEP cluster. When the codon bias of these
genes and 21 genes from non-CD (N) chromosomes were compared using a cluster
algorithm, two distinct groups with a high degree of correlation to the sources
of the genes were identified. These differences in DNA structure between the
genes in the PEP region and the genes from the other chromosomes are consistent
with the hypothesis that the PEP cluster, and perhaps the entire CD chromosome,
are of exogenous origin. The objectives of this project are to characterize
further the contributions made to virulence by each gene in the PEP cluster,
including the newly identified ORFs in the regions flanking the cluster, and to
determine if these genes and the CD chromosome upon which they reside were
acquired by horizontal transfer. To address the question of horizontal gene
transfer, the DNA sequences of approximately one hundred additional genes from
both the N and CD chromosomes will be obtained and their characteristics (e. g.
G+C content, codon usage, frequency of di- and tri- nucleotides, and 3:1
dinucleotide bias) will be compared utilizing multivariate analysis. The
physical locations and organization of the PEP homologues in isolates with
different pathogenicity phenotypes will be determined to gain insight into
events that may have lead to the formation and/or fragmentation of the cluster.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of the PEP genes and other genes from the
CD chromosome will be analyzed to extend preliminary results that showed a
discontinuous distribution, a result that is consistent with horizontal gene
transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic questions on the
evolution of fungal genomes. In addition, the identification of pathogenicity
traits and knowledge about how fungi acquire them may directly affect the
current methods for the control of these agricultural pests and aid in the
design of new strategies to prevent plant diseases. Undergraduates from the
University of Arizona and from Luther College, one of six liberal arts colleges
participating in the Department of Plant Pathology's "Winter Internship
Program", will participate in this research. Funds from this grant will enable
these Luther College students to carry out hands-on research utilizing
contemporary technologies at their home institution. &lt;br/&gt;