* 0239637
* PECASE: Toward a Model of Emotion-Specific Influences on Judgment and Choice
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Jennifer Lerner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Toward a Model of Emotion-Specific Influences
on&lt;br/&gt;Judgment and Choice&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once an exclusively cognitive enterprise,
research on judgment and decision making increasingly addresses the powerful
influence of emotion. Recent research has shown that even incidental emotion -
emotion that is normatively unrelated to the judgment/decision at hand - can
have a significant impact on judgment and choice. The majority of studies in
this tradition have been motivated by a valence-based approach, contrasting the
effects of positive versus negative emotions on judgment and choice. But there
is growing evidence that specific emotions of the same valence can trigger
opposing perceptions and judgments. For example, in the wake of the terrorist
attacks of 9-11, experimentally induced fear produced opposite effects from
anger on both risk estimates and policy preferences among U.S. citizens in a
nationwide field experiment (Lerner, Gonzalez, Small, &amp; Fischhoff, in
press). From a theoretical perspective, these findings demonstrate that
dimensions of emotions other than valence are also important components to
include in decision models. From an applied perspective, they demonstrate how
and why citizens primed for anger will endorse rather different policies than
will citizens primed for fear.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed research is
to develop and test a parsimonious yet powerful theory that comprehensively
predicts relations among specific emotions and judgment/choice outcomes. The
proposed research will expand Lerner and Keltner's (2000; 2001) appraisal-
tendency framework (ATF). The ATF predicts that each emotion activates an
implicit cognitive predisposition - an "appraisal tendency" - to appraise future
events in line with the central appraisal dimensions that triggered the emotion.
Such appraisals, although tailored to help the individual respond to the event
that evoked the emotion, persist beyond the eliciting situation - becoming an
implicit perceptual lens for interpreting subsequent situations. The appraisal-
tendency approach provides a flexible yet specific framework for developing a
host of testable hypotheses concerning emotion, judgment, and decision making.
The proposed research will test hypotheses concerning the effects of emotion on
three fundamental cognitive processes: probability assessment, valuation, and
attribution. Probability assessment, valuation, and attribution are chosen for
study because they underlie countless judgments and decisions in daily life.
Indeed, the first two processes also form the basis for the dominant theoretical
model for decision making under uncertainty: the expected utility model. To the
extent that incidental emotion influences subjective utility and/or probability
estimates, it will have implications for classical decision theories and
contemporary revisions. To the extent that incidental emotion influences
attribution processes, it, too, will have manifold implications because
attribution plays a central role in foundational theories of social cognition,
mental health, physical health, and justice. The project also aims to
disseminate knowledge about the effect of emotion on judgment and decision
making, and about the larger field of behavioral decision research (BDR), to
broader audiences of students, the public, and policymakers. Dissemination of
the insights of BDR is especially important because it has clear practical
implications for both public policy and private decisions. Knowledge of the
field will be circulated to wider audiences through a new, interdisciplinary
undergraduate major in Decision Science at Carnegie Mellon; through briefings
for policymakers and interviews with the press; and through the development of a
sustainable infrastructure for disseminating BDR research in concert with the
National Academy of Science's Office for the Public Understand&lt;br/&gt;