* 0239614
* CAREER:Cognitive Neuroscience of Emotional Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Kevin LaBar, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia Friedman-Hill
* 09/30/2008
* USD 835,861.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Labar and colleagues will conduct
a five-year CAREER award that combines event-related potential (ERP), functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and patient-based studies to investigate the
impact of emotional cues during memory encoding and retrieval tasks in human
subjects. The long term scientific goal of the project is to reveal insights
into the organization of large-scale brain networks that link emotional stimuli
to long-term memory. Memories for emotional episodes are intricately associated
with our autobiographical experience, yet little is known about the brain
mechanisms involved in encoding and retaining emotional events in memory.
Arousal and valence dimensions of emotion are hypothesized to differentially
impact memory functions. Arousal effects on memory are predicted to be mediated
by an amygdala-centered frontolimbic network, whereas valence effects on memory
are predicted to be mediated by a semantic network centered on lateral
frontotemporal cortex. Specific experiments are planned to delineate the scope
of the amygdala's contribution to arousal-mediated memory processes, and to
identify the frontotemporal semantic networks that regulate emotional valence
effects on memory organization. The known role of the amygdala and associated
frontolimbic regions will be extended along three lines of inquiry: (1)
performance on new implicit emotional memory tasks, (2) arousalmediated
attentional effects at encoding, and (3) retrieval of autobiographical and non-
autobiographical emotional memories. The contribution of semantic networks to
emotional memory will be evaluated for affectively valenced and categorized
neutral stimuli in three domains: (1) explicit memory organization, (2)
subsequent memory effects, and (3) retrieval biases. Collectively, these studies
will provide experimental support for the applicant's overarching goal of
developing a comprehensive 2-factor neuropsychological model of emotional
memory. In parallel with the research plan, an educational curriculum will be
executed to advance the study of affective neuroscience. Because cognitive
neuroscience applications to studying human emotion are relatively new,
appropriate educational tools are not available and must be created. Recent
developments in a university-wide initiative in cognitive neuroscience at Duke
University provide the applicant with a means to incorporate topics on emotion
through a two-tiered approach. (1) Development of undergraduate and graduate
courses that disseminate the fundamental principles of affective neuroscience,
emphasizing human-based approaches, and (2) training in research methodologies
through laboratory-based independent study and research practical opportunities.
A final goal of the educational initiative is to write an affective neuroscience
textbook to educate students and interested professionals more broadly. The
integration of these educational and research plans should help poise the
applicant to make unique career contributions to the modern study of cognitive-
emotional interactions in the brain&lt;br/&gt;