* 0239244
* CAREER:  Stream-of-Variation Modeling and Analysis for Multi-Station Manufacturing Processes Modeling Infrastructure for Virtual Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Dariusz Ceglarek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 04/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports an
integrated research and education project on modeling; analysis and control of
dimensional variation in complex multistage assembly processes (MAP) with
compliant parts such as in automotive, aerospace, appliance and electronics
industries. The goal is to develop a generic MAP model with capabilities to
represent key product and process control characteristics/features (KPC/KCC)
with varying resolution/"information granularity" that can be utilized during
design, launch and full production phases of a new manufacturing system. The
model will be based on a generic Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing
(CAD/CAM) system integrated with statistical analysis to predict manufacturing
process performance in early design phase. A challenge facing the proposed plan
is the diversity of required information and lack of physical and geometrical
relations between KCC and KPC. The research will focus on developing: (1)
variation propagation models integrating statistical and CAD/CAM information;
(2) multi-resolution/granularity of KPC/KCC as they change during product
development; (3) computational efficiency for simulation of multistage assembly
processes; and (4) generic issues pertaining to new process-oriented modeling,
design and control. The education efforts are to: (1) integrate statistical
analysis into CAD/CAM courses; (2) explore challenges in the development and
realization of new MAP systems; and (3) provide opportunities in developing and
analyzing MAP systems using 3D simulation tools. It also includes creating
grade-specific (graduate, undergraduate and K-12) projects.

Broader Impact: If successful, this project will lead to a new methodology that
can: (1) Fundamentally integrate CAD/CAM models with statistical analysis to
predict manufacturing process dimensional variability during design as it
relates to compliant parts, thus continuously improving product quality while
reducing overall new MAP development time through rapid fault root cause
detection. (2) Facilitate math-based design and manufacturing of the MAP
systems: The integration of product and process variables expands the classical
"part interchangeability" concept into "process interchangeability" considered
during early design phase of a new MAP development. This is critical in relation
to suppliers selection, benchmarking or outsourcing. (3) Train Industrial
Engineers in statistical methods and their application in CAD/CAM systems thus
preparing them towards developing a new generation of CAD/CAM system for virtual
realization of MAP.