* 0239667
* CAREER: Functional Oxide Films for Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Barrett Wells, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development project describes an effort to integrate
innovative educational and research activities as a basis for an active career
in both areas. A dearth of science majors is a national problem with serious
implications for the country's technological future. The education component of
this plan focuses on attracting and retaining physics majors by improving the
class work and general environment of the University of Connecticut
undergraduate physics program. Pedagogical efforts will apply strategies that
have proved successful for large introductory courses to smaller courses for
physics majors. Student advising efforts include seminars for undergraduates on
graduate school, careers, and invited presentations from past UConn physics
graduates on their career choices. Advanced education and training along with
the creation of new knowledge is promoted through research into fundamental
properties of nanometer scale films of complex, functional oxides. An array of
advanced surface science probes will be brought to bear on in-situ grown films
in order to study questions concerning reduced dimensionality, strain, and non-
equilibrium structures. The focus will be on understanding properties that are
strongly altered in very thin films, particularly phase transitions. The project
will serve as a nexus for establishing interdisciplinary research at UConn and
foster ties with national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early
Career Development project describes an effort to integrate innovative
educational and research activities as a basis for an active career in both
areas. A dearth of science majors is a national problem with serious
implications for the country's technological future. The education component of
this plan focuses on attracting and retaining physics majors. Pedagogical
efforts will apply strategies that have proved successful for large introductory
courses to smaller courses for physics majors. Student advising efforts include
seminars for undergraduates on graduate school, careers, and invited
presentations from past University of Connecticut physics graduates on their
career choices. Advanced education and training along with the creation of new
knowledge is promoted through research into fundamental properties of nanometer
scale films of complex, electronic materials. Under the proper conditions, very
thin films show properties that are remarkably different from the bulk versions
of the same compounds. However, such films are difficult to study with
traditional techniques and the reasons for the altered properties are largely
unknown. This project will adapt very powerful experimental techniques usually
used on large bulk samples for use with films. The project will serve as a nexus
for establishing interdisciplinary research at UConn and foster ties with
national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;