* 0239486
* CAREER:  Unique Chemical Functionalization of Nanoparticles for Dispersion, Directed Assembly, and Precise Interfacial Mediation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2008
* USD 481,100.00

&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to functionalize nanoparticles,
eliminate aggregation of the resulting particles, segregate and assemble the
particles in polymer materials, and explore the chemistry of the functionalized
particles at liquid-liquid interfaces. The goal of the project is to achieve
precise interfacial control of the nanoparticles within polymer matrices by the
simultaneous use of tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide (TOPO) to control solubility,
and ruthenium-based Grubb's catalyst sites to initiate polymerization in a
spacially segregated manner. A second aspect of the proposed work involves
orienting the nanoparticles along an aqueous-organic phase boundary. Unique
educational opportunities for students will be pursued in collaboration with
scientists from Kodak. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
efforts of Dr. Todd Emrick of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst. Professor Emrick will focus his research on the
development of new materials containing nanoparticles oriented along specific
planes within the materials. This could have important ramifications in the
development of new types of optical and electrical devices. The educational
activities of the award will include interactions of his students with
scientists at Kodak Park in Rochester, New York. &lt;br/&gt;