* 0239721
* PECASE: Superconductor/Carbon-Nanotube Junctions and Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Paola Barbara, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/2009
* USD 544,085.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Superconductor/Carbon-Nanotube Junctions and
Interfaces&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgetown
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PECASE project addresses nanoelectronics
research and introduces this topic at the graduate level, and also to
undergraduate non-science majors. The research focuses on carbon-
nanotube/superconductor materials, and will explore nanotube/superconductor
junctions. Spe-cific goals are: 1) Achieving control of superconductor/nanotube
interfaces, both in the high-transparency and low-transparency contact regime,
by using liquid metals and metals with low melting point. 2) Studying the
superconducting proximity effect, DC and AC Josephson effect, and quantum
entanglement in single and multiple junctions. Microfluidic MEMS techniques will
be used to attach liquid metals and metals with low melting point to nanotubes.
Properties of interfaces will be studied by varying the temperature through the
liquid, solid and superconducting transitions. Nanotube devices will also be
made using aluminum or niobium-aluminum bilayers as superconducting electrodes.
Niobium-aluminum bilayers will also be used to form low-transparency interfaces
by oxidizing the aluminum to form a tunnel barrier for the study of Cooper pair
tunneling in nanotubes. The research has potential impact beyond the interplay
of nanotubes and superconductivity. Control of the contact interface is
essential for future mass-production of nanotube devices to assure reliability
and to keep heating as low as possible. De-velopment of the integration of
nanotubes with microfluidic MEMS techniques will also enhance the possibility to
use nanotubes as biological and chemical sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses fundamental materials science research issues having
technological relevance. The research program provides excellent opportunities
for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific equipment.
Additionally, research will be brought into the classrooms of non-science majors
by introducing nanotechnology in a course on How Things Work. An important
feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration
of research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally
funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award
for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in September
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;