* 0239664
* CAREER: Chemical Investigations into the Bioactivity of the Damaged DNA Nucleotide 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Michelle Hamm, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 404,324.00

This research program addresses the mutagenesis and repair of the oxidatively
damaged nucleoside, 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (OdG), one of the most prominent DNA
lesions and linked to aging and several diseases. In order to probe the steric
and/or electronic properties that dictate the bioactivity of OdG, analogs on the
spectrum between dG and OdG will be synthesized. Comparisons of the activity of
various polymerases and DNA repair enzymes with dG, OdG, and their analogs will
isolate the exact factors leading to the bioactivity of OdG. These studies will
also be used as a mechanism to better connect chemistry to biology in the
classroom. Students in organic chemistry and a non-majors course will see real
world applications, while biochemistry students will gain a chemical
understanding of biomolecules and metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program, Professor Michelle Hamm, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Richmond, is developing an understanding of the specific
properties and interactions that dictate the bioactivity of chemical compounds
in cells. Professor Hamm's studies target particular DNA lesions that have been
linked to aging and various diseases. Through a variety of synthetic and
biochemical studies, a better understanding of the chemical nature of mutation
and DNA repair will be obtained. Through the introduction of biological and
biochemical themes throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum, Professor
Hamm is helping students make the connection between chemistry and biology and
to appreciate the real-world implications of these sciences.