* 0239759
* CAREER:  Simulations of Galaxy and Cluster Formation:  The New Frontiers
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Andrey Kravtsov, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 04/30/2008
* USD 703,833.00

Proposal ID: AST-0239759&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kravtsov, Andrey &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Andrey Kravtsov
will use his CAREER award at the University of Chicago to pursue an
understanding of how galaxies and galaxy clusters form within the framework of
the Big Bang cosmology. Comparisons of data and theoretical predictions show
that Cold Dark Matter models work remarkably well at scales larger than one
megaparsec, but have serious difficulties in explaining an increasing number of
observations at smaller scales. Dr. Kravtsov will model the formation of galaxy
clusters and individual galaxies, including important physical processes such as
star formation, stellar energy feedback, and heavy element enrichment, at an
unprecedented level of sophistication and detail. High-resolution simulations
will be used to study the effects of stellar feedback and metal enrichment on
the properties of galaxies, the intergalactic medium, and intracluster gas of
galaxy clusters as well as possible observational signatures of these effects.
The improved feedback models will be used in a larger set of lower-resolution
simulations of galaxies and galaxy clusters to evaluate the statistical effects
of feedback on the morphology and structural properties of galaxies and thermal
properties of the intracluster medium. He will make both the codes and the
results of the simulations available to the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmology, and the field of structure formation in
particular, is an exciting subject with broad popular appeal. However, currently
there are very few resources concerning the formation of large-scale structure
available to educators and the public. Dr. Kravtsov will integrate his research
projects into education and outreach by (1) working to deliver results of
research in the area of structure formation as both public lectures and high-
quality visualizations for educators and the general public; (2) involving
undergraduate and graduate students in the proposed research activities; (3)
developing new projects and classes introducing students to modern computational
techniques and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;