* 0239034
* SBIR Phase II:   Group Coding for Reliable High Performance Network-Centric Storage
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Qutaibah Malluhi, Data Reliability Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2005
* USD 505,011.00

This SBIR Phase II project takes advantage of a powerful new coding technique
called Group Coding (GC) pioneered in Phase I by Data Reliability Inc. (DRI),
and an innovative storage system architecture called NetSTOR, to build a
prototype for a highly available, reliable, high performance, application-
friendly, and scalable network-based storage engine. The engine is multi-
platform software that cost-effectively aggregates distributed islands of
independent storage resources into a single virtual shared pool of storage. GC
typically offers 6 to 27 times enhancement for encoding and 3.5 to 6.5 times
enhancement for decoding. The NetSTOR approach is superior to commonly used data
replication because it offers optimal redundancy leading to better resource
(storage and bandwidth) utilization. NetSTOR is capable of aggregating the
capabilities of multiple parallel storage nodes to get improved response times
in both WAN and LAN environments. NetSTOR dramatically enhances the overall
system throughput and exhibits perfect linear throughput scalability. The
NetSTOR engine serves as an enabling core storage technology. Applications can
build on and benefit from the unique feature of this core. Many applications
will exploit the competitive advantages of NetSTOR including storage
virtualization, electronic software distribution, multimedia network-based
services, modeling and simulation applications, data grids, document storage and
delivery, distributed information retrieval, medical imaging, video on demand
and terrain visualization. The GC technique pioneered by this project provides a
new way of looking at and understanding existing array codes. This understanding
will lead to the discovery of new codes and could result in significant
scientific advances in coding theory. The impact of Phase II is not limited to
the technological and commercial merits. For this project, DRI is partnering
with Jackson State University (JSU); therefore, the project will offer JSU
students a tremendous educational experience. Since Jackson State University is
an HBCU (Historically Black College and University), the project will set a
precedent for continuous collaboration and will increase the participation of
underrepresented and minority groups in science and technology.