* 0239377
* CAREER:  Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Unconventional Phase Transitions in Materials with Strong Interactions or Fluctuations
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Young Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology is to investigate the unconventional
electronic and magnetic phases found in strongly correlated electron materials.
Quantum effects play a central role in the many-body states, and unconventional
phases may result (such as high-Tc superconductivity and disordered spin-
liquids). This project will involve the synthesis of important materials,
including copper-oxide superconductors and geometrically frustrated magnets, in
clean, single-crystalline form. Neutron and x-ray scattering experiments will be
performed at the national scattering facilities to provide unique information
regarding nanoscale inhomogeneities and fluctuations of the charge, spin, and
lattice degrees of freedom of the low-temperature phases. These measurements
should help identify the relevant competing order parameters in these highly
correlated systems, a topic of much current debate. The ultimate goal is to
understand the basic structure of the many-body ground states, as well as create
new materials that exhibit new phenomena. This project will naturally train
future scientists to fully utilize the nation's investment in neutron and
synchrotron x-ray scattering facilities. At MIT, a course will be taught to
materials researchers on cutting-edge scattering techniques. Also, new
visualization tools will be created to aid the teaching of quantum mechanics to
undergraduates, and these will be used in outreach programs to local high-school
students.

Our understanding of the electronic behavior of materials is deficient. Current
theory cannot describe the properties of systems composed of many quantum
particles (such as electrons) that strongly interact with each other.
Technologically useful properties may emerge within these systems, such as high
temperature superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistance; however, the
mechanisms that lead to these properties are not understood. The goal of this
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology is to investigate the unconventional electronic and magnetic
phases found in strongly interacting electron materials. This project will
involve the synthesis of new materials, as well as studying them with scattering
techniques. Neutrons and x-rays can scatter from the spin and charge of an
electron, and thus can provide unique information regarding the collective
behavior of the electrons in these systems. The ultimate goal is to understand
the basic physics behind the emergent many-body phenomena, as well as discover
new phenomena. This project will naturally train future scientists to fully
utilize the nation's investment in large scattering facilities. At MIT, a course
will be taught to materials researchers on cutting-edge scattering techniques.
Also, new visualization tools will be created to aid the teaching of quantum
mechanics to undergraduates, and these will be used in outreach programs to
local high-school students.