* 0239560
* CAREER:     Spectroscopic Studies of Interface Structure and Strain in Low-dimensional Semiconductor Heterostructures by Laser-enhanced Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Sophia Hayes, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 526,715.00

In this NSF-CAREER project, supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Hayes will examine the interfaces and defects
in semiconductor heterostructures, such as AlGaAs/GaAs quantum wells or thin
films of InGaP grown on InP, to obtain atomic-level information about the
structure, geometry and the chemical nature of nanostructures present. Combined
optically-polarized NMR and optically-detected NMR methods will be used to study
the interfacial and defect structures, generally termed "laser-enhanced NMR."
Because the information provided by each technique is complementary, the
combination of the two types of spectroscopy in a single experiment can provide
insights into structure and electronic properties of the material
simultaneously.

This multidisciplinary research program, through participation in the
University's Materials Science initiative, will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education. The research component of this project will be
integrated with the graduate and undergraduate teaching efforts. Graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral research associates will
participate in the research and will thereby acquire skills and training for
advanced studies or employment in industry, academia, or government
laboratories.