* 0239316
* CAREER: Sharp Concentration and Probabilistic Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Van Vu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2006
* USD 237,566.00

DMS-0239316&lt;br/&gt;Van V. Vu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PI
addresses some of the deepest and most&lt;br/&gt;important issues in
probabilistic combinatorics, including sharp&lt;br/&gt;concentration
inequalities and the semi-random method. The PI and his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators
plan to develop new sharp concentration inequalities and&lt;br/&gt;apply them,
together with the powerful semi-random (Rodl nibble) method&lt;br/&gt;to attack
several well-known and long standing conjectures in&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics.
Among others, the PI will study a series of minimax&lt;br/&gt;problems in finite
geometry, raised in the fifties. Another topic is the&lt;br/&gt;study of
geometrical properties of random objects. Here is a typical&lt;br/&gt;question:
how many points does one need to pierce n random d-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;boxes,
where a random box is obtained as the Cartesian product of d&lt;br/&gt;random
subintervals of the unit interval ? The PI also plans to use&lt;br/&gt;methods
from probabilistic combinatorics to attack problems arose from&lt;br/&gt;very
practical fields such as coding theory and the study of&lt;br/&gt;"real-world"
graphs. For educational purposes, he intends to write a&lt;br/&gt;textbook on
sharp concentration inequalities and its applications in&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics
and theoretical computer science. He also plans to design&lt;br/&gt;and teach a
graduate course at UCSD on the probabilistic methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the last twenty years, probability has become one of the most&lt;br/&gt;powerful
weapons in discrete mathematics and computer science. The&lt;br/&gt;first main
reason is that randomness helps us to overcome algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;and
existence problems which cannot be solved deterministic means.
The&lt;br/&gt;second main reason is that many important real-life objects (such
as the&lt;br/&gt;internet) can be modeled by a random process. On the other
hand, in&lt;br/&gt;many situations, the problems are so complex that traditional
results&lt;br/&gt;from probability theory cannot be applied. The PI plans to
develop new&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic tools which would have a break-thought
impact on many such&lt;br/&gt;problems, some of them have been open for decades.
Among others, these&lt;br/&gt;new tools would help us to design very efficient
randomized algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;to prove the existence of interesting objects,
and to analyze&lt;br/&gt;complicated processes. For educational purposes, the PI
intends to&lt;br/&gt;write a textbook on discrete probability and its
applications in&lt;br/&gt;discrete mathematics and theoretical computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;