* 0239697
* CAREER:     Development of Novel Ternary Copolymer Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Robert Grubbs, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2008
* USD 420,000.00

The proposed research activities will focus upon the preparation and analysis of
ternary copolymers designed to self-assemble into two classes of novel
structures. In one class of materials, phase-segregation of ABC triblock
copolymers in the bulk will be used to arrange different sets of metal compounds
for preparation of interworked arrays of gold and cobalt nanoparticles within a
polymer matrix. In the second class of materials, solution-phase assembly of
ternary block and graft copolymers containing thermomorphic components will lead
to formation of micellar structures with temperature-dependent shapes and sizes.
Established techniques for the cross-linking of micelles will be used to prepare
robust collapsible nanometer scale materials and devices from these materials.
Living free radical polymerization techniques will play a major role in
preparation of these ternary copolymers. The intellectual merit of the proposed
activities lies in their extension of current synthetic techniques for the
preparation of new triblock and ternary copolymers, their likely expansion of
current understanding of block copolymer self-assembly phenomena, and their
enablement of the connection of theory concerning these topics to potential
applications. Study of these assemblies will complement and build upon the
current state of research in not only polymeric materials, but also in more
broadly defined nanomaterials research fields.

In terms of broader impact, the proposed research activities will contribute
greatly to current understanding of nanoscale devices and lead to the
development of nanometer scale materials with potential for elaboration into
larger functional materials. These activities will also involve the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in materials and polymer research. As
inclusion of polymer chemistry in a general education in chemistry is becoming
increasingly desirable and the current chemistry curriculum at Dartmouth College
offers only a single one-term course in polymer chemistry, the PI will also
develop an elective course in the synthetic aspects of polymer chemistry for
graduates and upper-level undergraduates. This new course will complement the
more physical bent of the existing polymer chemistry course. As part of a
greater effort toward polymer education in the community, an exhibit on
important and interesting aspects of modern polymer science at a local science
museum is being developed. The proposed educational activities will bring an
awareness of polymer science to several groups of people: the students directly
involved in research, the students participating in the new polymer chemistry
curriculum, and to community members who visit the proposed museum exhibit.