* 0239273
* CAREER:  Fabrication and Optical Properties of Novel Self-Assembled Photonic Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Miriam Deutsch, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/2009
* USD 578,540.00

This CAREER project combines interdisciplinary research and education in optical
and materials science focusing on photonic crystals. Research emphasis is on the
fabrication of new functional materials--self-assembled photonic crystals (PCs),
and exploration of their optical response with emphasis on metallo-dielectric
photonic crystals (MDPCs) and polymeric PCs. New methods are proposed for the
fabrication of three-dimensional MDPCs exploiting self-assembly of metallo-
dielectric colloidal spheres. The primary goal of the research is to achieve a
better understanding of light-matter interactions in photonic crystals, and to
harness these effects to a variety of chal-lenging applications. In the linear
regime, enhanced light transmission is predicted in MDPCs, compared to bulk
metals, due to efficient coupling of the electromagnetic field into surface
plas-mon-polaritons. While nonlinear properties of most bulk materials in the
optical region are well understood, detailed studies of their manifestations in
highly patterned structures are only begin-ning to emerge. Nonlinear PCs are
predicted to exhibit enhanced nonlinear response, making them candidates for
all-optical switching and frequency conversion applications. In addition to
comparison with theoretical predictions and exploring new physical systems,
these materials of-fer prospects for developing novel photonic devices. The
approach includes three main objec-tives: 1) Adapting colloidal self-assembly
and chemical synthesis techniques to fabricate novel three-dimensional PCs. 2)
Detailed study of the optical properties - both linear and nonlinear of the
composite materials. 3) Implementation of PCs in nonlinear optical devices, as a
basis for fu-ture photonics technologies. %%% The project addresses fundamental
materials science research issues having technological rele-vance. An important
feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integra-tion
of research and education. The education plan addresses four main objectives
that mesh with the research, and are aimed at enhancing learning experiences in
physics at the undergraduate and high school level. At the undergraduate level
the aim is to expand avenues for learning, both by integrating key scientific
journal publications in classroom teaching, and by offering undergraduate
students working opportunities in the research group. At the graduate level the
program ad-dresses the development of an Applied Physics program with emphasis
in photonics. The research program offers graduate students opportunities for
comprehensive research, to expand their skills as students and scientists while
working towards their doctoral degree. Through mentoring of younger students,
graduate students will also develop valuable leadership, teaching and
collaborative skills. An educational outreach program includes a hands-on summer
program in physics, aimed at able and eager high school students. The main
emphasis of the educational program is on exposing students of all levels to
research and scientific disciplines with a central goal to actively involve an
increasing number of students in physical sciences. ***