* 0239769
* CAREER:  Fabrication and Characterization of Stimulus-Responsive Polymer Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2010
* Stefan Zauscher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2010
* USD 420,000.00

The proposed research program will make significant contributions to the
fabrication and characterization of stimulus-responsive biomolecular and bio-
inspired polymeric nanostructures, and will contribute to the advancement of
nanotechnology and hybrid biological/nonbiological microdevices. Specifically,
the research will develop nanopatterning strategies that combine scanning probe
lithography (SPL), such as dippen nanolithography (DPN), with surface initiated
polymerization (SIP) or direct deposition, and promises an inexpensive, "bottom-
up" approach to create functional stimulus-responsive architectures. The results
from the proposed research program promise insight into the mechanical behavior
of stimulus-responsive polymers on the ensemble and single molecule level. On
the single molecule level the mechano-chemical properties of SRPs will be probed
by force spectroscopy, measuring the force-extension behavior of a single
molecule level. On the single molecule level the mechano-chemical properties of
SRPs will be probed by force spectroscopy, measuring the force-extension
behavior of a single molecule tethered between the tip of an atomic force
microscope cantilever and a surface. On the ensemble level, characterization
will be accomplished by optical probes (imaging ellipsometry, surface plasmon
resonance spectroscopy) and by scanning probe methods (force spectroscopy,
colloidal probe microscopy). The results from the proposed research will lay the
groundwork necessary to exploit the mechanical properties of biologically
inspired materials and will provide a sound understanding of their mechanical
properties on the molecular level for actuation and force transduction
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, the proposed program
will impact our understanding of soft-wet materials at the interface between
engineering, biology and medicine and the proposed nanofabrication methods will
potentially be developed into immunosensor arrays or used for gating in
nanofluidics applications. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research
and education activities will equip students with indispensable experimental and
analytical skills in the rapidly growing field of nanotechnology. A
collaboration with researchers in Sweden will provide an international dimension
to the research and education activities. Finally, the proposed program seeks to
include hearing impaired students in the research and discovery process in an
attempt to break down attitudinal barrier that often prevent the acceptance and
inclusion of students with disabilities in research.&lt;br/&gt;