* 0239262
* CAREER: Development of Bio-MEMS for determining cell structure using microfluidics and bio impedance
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Shekhar Bhansali, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2009
* USD 587,751.00

The research objectives of this proposal are: (a) Development of novel MEMS
sensors and techniques to reliably and repeatedly image individual
cells/organisms using bio-impedance measurements, (b) Integration of
microfluidic sensors into flow-through system to develop a generic
identification technique and (c) Understand and analyze the challenges in signal
processing enabling differential detection. Research outcomes of this proposal
would facilitate the fundamental understanding and optimizing of the science and
technology of bio-impedance at a micro scale. The research will establish the
fundamental science required to enable the development of a single generic
sensor that would be capable to identify cells based on their bio-impedance
maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Proposed research integrates
developments in two research areas (bio-impedance and microfluidics) in a novel
approach that will advance the knowledge and understanding in diverse fields,
from instrumentation to detection. The research will provide a basis for
quantitative diagnosis in diverse environments. This is a major advance across
fields. The research team comprises of experts in different areas
(microfabrication, microfluidics and systems development -PI, tissue engineering
and clinical testing-collaborators) and is uniquely positioned to accomplish the
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research will train students in
emerging cross-disciplinary areas (microfabrication, electronics, biology and
tissue engineering). The research has participation of underrepresented groups
(minority, women) and fosters partnerships at a global scale through
collaboration and exchange. The results of the research will be widely
disseminated through inclusion in courses and modules developed by PI,
demonstrations and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;