* 0239330
* SBIR Phase II:  Parallel Hardware Implementation of the Split and Merge Discrete Wavelet Transform for Wireless Communication
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Alexander Moopenn, Mosaix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2005
* USD 494,150.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop the Intellectual Property (IP) core of a novel image compression /
signal decomposition algorithm based on the discrete wavelet transform (DWT).
This is a fully parallel, scalable, multi-resolution, and low power
implementation of the JPEG2000 DWT engine and is particularly well suited for
use in both consumer applications at one end of the spectrum (as in reduced bit-
rate web browsing over wireless communications channels as found in the next
generation of web enabled cell phones) as well as in high-end commercial
applications at the other end of the spectrum (as in non-linear video editing
accelerators for the movie industry). This particular implementation is a highly
efficient implementation of the DWT transform and makes use of a novel Overlap-
State wavelet decomposition algorithm which minimizes memory, I/O and
computational requirements. Over the next decade, spiraling consumer demand for
fast mobile communication of voice and IP over increasingly integrated
terrestrial and satellite based systems plagued by a limited electro-magnetic
spectrum allocation necessitates the pursuit and development of better
compression algorithms that a visually pleasing at low bit rates. As a
consequence of extensive research, transform coding techniques now dominate
every single image and video coding scheme proposed to-date. Consequently,
efficient software and hardware based transform coding system designs and
implementations have become a high priority objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
fact, it is widely accepted that JPEG2000 will become the universally accepted
format for digital images and high quality video - whether on the web, cable,
over wireless systems, in digital cameras, printers, faxes or remote sensors.
With its wavelet based image-coding technology, it offers features previously
impossible in JPEG. Compared with the old baseline JPEG, the new JPEG2000 spec
poses formidable technology challenges for the myriad of developers and OEM's
planning on using it. The new standard uses coding algorithms based on the
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) which is fundamentally different from the
discrete cosine transform (DCT) JPEG spec. In JPEG2000, the importance of
computational and especially memory bottlenecks has clearly increased several
fold over the old specification. In fact, various implementations of
computationally efficientCE wavelet transforms have been reported in recent
years.