* 0239525
* CAREER:  C-3'-Nucleic Acid Radicals:  Generation and Mechanistic Investigations
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Amanda Bryant-Friedrich, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 434,260.00

Oxidative processes are at the heart of numerous chemical and biochemical
processes, including the damage of nucleic acids by ionizing radiation or
specific drug interactions. This project involves the synthesis of modified
nucleosides and nucleotides that will permit the elucidation of the mechanism of
degradation of C-3' nucleotide radicals in DNA and RNA. Modifed nucleosides
containing photoactive functional groups will be synthesized and incorporated
into small DNAs and RNAs designed for the investigation of damage events. The
nature and fate of nucleoside radicals derived from these site-specifically
functionalized nucleic acid systems will be explored by a variety of chemical,
analytical, and biophysical methods. A curriculum for a Master of Science degree
will be developed, targeting specific groups in an effort to increase the pool
of underrepresented minorities in the chemical workforce. This program
specifically targets students who are ill prepared for graduate studies or who
have not been successful in previous attempts to receive a graduate degree due
to a lack of proper preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this
CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Amanda Bryant-Friedrich, of the Department of Chemistry at Oakland University,
is developing an understanding of the chemical processes which result in the
damage of DNA and RNA. Radiation, drug interactions, and other oxidative
processes can lead to the formation of nucleic acid radicals. Through the
synthesis and manipulation of modified nucleic acid subunits, Professor Bryant-
Friedrich is elucidating the mechanisms by which these radicals lead to nucleic
acid degradation. Professor Bryant-Friedrich is also working toward increasing
the representation of women and minorities in the chemical workforce. Through
development of a Master of Science program at Oakland University, Professor
Bryant-Friedrich will provide a program targeting students who are academically
ill-prepared for graduate study, placing them on track for employment or for
placement in competitive doctoral programs.