* 0239136
* CAREER:Integrated Research and Education in Multi-scale Chemical-Mechanical Manipulation and Nanofabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Hong Liang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jimmy K. Hsia
* 01/31/2006
* USD 471,015.00

CAREER Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, Professor Hong
Liang at the University of Alaska Fairbanks will develop innovative processes to
generate nano-coatings. She will further investigate mechanisms of tribochemical
interactions on surfaces of metals and oxides. Experimental approaches include
using an atomic force microscope (AFM) and a table-top tribometer to polish,
manipulate, and test materials at different length scales. The primary methods
of surface characterization include Anomic Force Microscope, Transmision
Electron Microscope, X-ray Phonon Spectrometer, Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion
Mass Spectra, and other high-resolution spectroscopic techniques. Materials
studied are strategically selected to reveal principles in effects of
electronic, chemical, and crystal structures on friction and wear. Fundamental
investigation will focus on new phenomena and non-equilibrium surfaces,
including surface forces and wear at atomic-to-centimeter scales, new surface
bonds, non-equilibrium crystal structures, non-stoichiometric products, and
kinetics of growth. This research is at the interface of several scientific and
technological areas involving physical, chemical, mechanical, and tribological
properties of advanced materials. This research will result in development of
novel nanostructured materials and nanofabrication processes. It will open
opportunities for developing advanced manufacturing technologies for industries
such as semiconductors and optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this
research will be realized by establishing long-term international collaborations
and integrating research and education activities. Students will be trained in
the multidisciplinary fields of materials science and mechanical engineering.
Students involved in this research will have opportunities to conduct surface
analysis at the Washington State University and the Ecole Centrale de Lyon.
Professor Liang will use on-line education to deliver new knowledge and
technology to rural area students in Alaska and as an alternative for students
who take traditional classes. Extensive outreach activities include recruiting
female students and Alaska natives as well as involving k-12 students and
schoolteachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;