* 0239642
* CAREER:   Advancing Nearshore Circulation Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Donald Slinn, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2009
* USD 454,068.00

ABSTRACT

PI/Institution: Slinn/UF-G Proposal No: OCE-0239642



This integrated plan for research and education in Coastal Engineering will
emphasize nearshore circulation modeling. Two new (three-dimensional (3-D),
time-dependent, non-hydrostatic, large-eddy simulation (LES) surf zone models
will be used to gain improved understanding of effects of three important
nearshore processes: 1) Mean undertow; 2) Along-shore current instabilities; and
3) Partitioning of offshore mass transport between rip currents and undertow.
Calibration of the models will be achieved by comparison with laboratory
measurements collected at the Army Corps of Engineers, Long-Shore Sediment
Transport Facility (LSTF) and with data from recent and ongoing field
experiments at Duck, North Carolina, Daytona Beach, Florida, and from planned
experiments such as NCEX. Six specific hypotheses will be tested with the
models, lab, and field data. The first new model is a phase-averaged model and
examines the depth-dependent, low-frequency, nearshore current response to
breaking waves in the surf zone. This model is faster computationally than other
similar codes and can be used to study shear instabilities of the mean current
and time-averaged effects of the undertow in unsteady flows. The second new
model is based on the Volume of Fluid (VOF) algorithm and simulates the
individual wave breaking events in the surf zone within the LES approximations.
This model can be used to examine individual wave-breaking effects but it is
slower computationally, because of the more complex methodology for solving the
Poisson equation and because smaller time steps are required to capture higher
frequency fluctuations associated with turbulent flow caused by breaking waves.
It is anticipated these new models will help the field converge towards improved
predictive capabilities for near shore flow. Five specific educational
integration activities are described. These include: 1) guiding graduate
students on their thesis projects; 2) supervising senior projects for Civil
Engineering students, 3) developing a new under-graduate course introducing
Coastal Engineering to Civil Engineering majors; 4) collaborating with students
from outside of engineering on nearshore science and public information
projects, and 5) enhancing my own continuing education by taking (and then
teaching) advanced courses in Coastal Engineering.