* 0239163
* CAREER:  Creating Nanostructured Gratings on Microstructures for Residual Strain/Stress Measurement in NEMS/MEMS and Traction Force Measurement in Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Xin Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 454,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project is intended to
create nanostructured gratings (e.g., 1D nanograting lines and 2D nanograting
dots) on micromachined devices for residual strain/stress measurements in MEMS
(Microelectromechanical Systems) and NEMS (Nanoelectromechanical Systems); and,
bio traction force measurements in real time and in live cells. This research
project is a unique combination of MEMS, NEMS, nano-optics, biomechanics, and
nanomanufacturing. This project involves several broad but highly interconnected
areas of micro/nanomanufacturing research, all related to translating
morphological recognition into micro/nanomechanics directly in thin films, in
real time, and/or in live cells. This project aims at developing several novel
nanostructured gratings and the corresponding measurement techniques based on
the current emerging nanofabrication/nanomanufacturing technologies. Preliminary
results show that the sensitivity of the methodology is at least three orders of
magnitude higher than other techniques commonly used in residual strain/traction
force measurements. The impact of the theoretical and experimental efforts would
be significant. Through a careful leverage from current core competencies in
MEMS/NEMS fabrication and biomedical processes, completion of this project will
ensure that residual strain/stress in MEMS/NEMS structures and materials be
directly imaged, and its magnitude quickly estimated, and more importantly, both
direction and magnitude of small traction forces generated by different regions
of a live cell be measured accurately and the maximum traction force generated
under each of different regions of the cell be quantified in real time.

The investigator has chosen to focus the work on the domain of
micro/nanomanufacturing science and technology for four reasons: (1) wide scope
of the MEMS/NEMS and nanomanufacturing enterprise naturally fosters
interdisciplinary research; (2) the investigator has a long track record of
expertise and direct involvement with such systems and technologies, giving the
project the benefit of a thorough understanding of the real issues, as well as
invaluable insights; (3) unquestionable economic and technological importance of
MEMS/NEMS and micro/nanomanufacturing is compelling, (4) the investigator's
connections with MEMS/NEMS and micro/nanomanufacturing organizations will afford
opportunities to transform the research findings to concrete tools. The research
project's educational program will encompass both curriculum development and
development of innovation teaching techniques. The investigator is involved in a
Distance Learning Program that plays an important role promoting the
manufacturing engineering department in the classroom and online, providing
important industrial connections, international recognition, and important
technological initiatives. Students can benefit greatly from opportunities to
design, implement and operate complete micro/nanosystems. The investigator has
recently created one and will further develop one more micro/nanomanufacturing
new courses that give students these opportunities. Collaborative work is
planned and broader two-way interaction between the university and industry is
highly anticipate