* 0239943
* Collaborative Research:  Land-Use Practices and Persistence of Amphibian Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Raymond Semlitsch, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 04/30/2009
* USD 497,000.00

Over the past 200 years, conversion of land for agricultural use, industrial
development, and urban sprawl has drastically reduced natural habitat for many
species and is considered the most serious threat to biological diversity.
Fragmentation divides once continuous natural habitats into smaller pieces that
are often separated by areas unsuitable to sustain viable populations. The goal
of the proposed research is to understand how important local population and
metapopulation processes are altered by fragmentation of natural habitats in a
model system of pond-breeding amphibians. The primary objectives of the proposed
study are to experimentally compare demographic and behavioral responses of
amphibians in clear-cut (with and without coarse woody debris), partial-cut,
edge, and intact forest habitats around replicated natural breeding ponds.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These results will lead to a better understanding of the
habitat requirements for successful recruitment and survival of local
populations, and how amphibians disperse through fragmented landscapes. It will
allow strong inferences about the disruption of metapopulation dynamics in
amphibians caused by fragmentation and about how to prevent population declines
and extinctions. Further, information from this project is essential to the
development of conservation and management plans in state natural resource
agencies, the U.S.D.A. Forest Service, and the Bureau of Land Management.
&lt;br/&gt;