* 0239058
* CAREER: Spin Polarization Spectroscopy of Complex Magnetic Materials and  Spin Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Boris Nadgorny, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 03/31/2009
* USD 411,997.00

The possibility of exploiting the spin of electrons (or holes) in electronic
devices has led to the emergence of the new field of spintronics. The efficiency
of spintronics devices is strongly dependent on the degree of the spin
polarization in a ferromagnet. In particular, half-metals, which are 100% spin-
polarized, are of fundamental importance for the next-generation of electronic
devices. The experimental confirmation of the existence of such highly spin-
polarized materials systems is vital to spintronics. The proposed research
focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of the basics of spin
transport in highly spin-polarized materials and on the ongoing search for novel
highly spin-polarized materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a cohesive
research program to further develop and expand Point Contact Andreev Reflection
(PCAR) Spectroscopy and to apply it to the spin polarization measurements in
dilute magnetic semiconductors and metal alloys. In addition, we propose to
explore the viability of a new nonvolatile ferromagnet-superconductor device
based on Andreev reflection. The proposal also includes an initial exploratory
study of spatially resolved spin polarization measurements (Spin Mapping) with
potential in situ capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has recently
observed for the first time Andreev reflection in the point contact geometry in
a non-magnetic semiconductor, and has obtained some preliminary results in
magnetic semiconductors. These results strongly indicate that the PCAR technique
can become a viable measurement technique for dilute magnetic semiconductors,
which is crucial for the future development of this field. In addition to the
spin polarization measurements, transport, magnetic, chemical, and structural
analysis will be performed to study in detail the following materials systems:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Dilute magnetic and non-magnetic semiconductors: Non-
magnetic semiconductors (e.g., BeGaAs). Magnetic semiconductors: GaMnSb, GaMnAs,
InMnSb, and MnAs.&lt;br/&gt;2)Other theoretically predicted half-metals: double
perovskites (Sr2FeMoO6,) and CoxFe1-xS2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the
broader impact of his research proposal the PI is planning to promote
collaboration with the local industry (especially Delphi Automotive) and with
HYPRES (on ferromagnet/superconductor nonvolatile device). He is also
collaborating with Oak Ridge National Laboratory, where the PI is one of the
"University Champions" of the new Nanophase Materials Science Center. The
spatially resolved spin polarization measurements (Spin Mapping) and will be
investigated in partnership with the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is
actively involved in a comprehensive program to broaden participation of
minorities in physics. He gives public lectures to high school students to
explain what is involved in being a physicist and to try to eliminate a
psychological barrier that often prevents many minority students and women from
becoming a scientist. He is advising the Detroit Science Center on the content
and scientific quality of their physics-related exhibits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's two major educational goals, integrated with his
research, are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)Develop a pilot program aimed at
introducing a Senior Research Project at WSU as a required part of the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;2)Develop a new graduate level course "Magnetism, Magnetic
Devices and Nanotechnology". This course will introduce the basic concepts in
magnetism, GMR and TMR devices and sensors, novel magnetic materials, spin
transport and spin polarization measurements, and modern nanofabrication
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;