* 0239119
* SBIR Phase II:   Characterization of Three Dimensional Discontinuity Properties from Digital Images of Rock Masses
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Jeffrey Handy, SPLIT ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 02/28/2005
* USD 501,897.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will further the
investigation of two innovative technologies for characterizing fractures in
rock masses. The first technology involves image-processing algorithms for the
extraction of 3D fracture properties from fracture traces in digital images. The
second technology involves the use of laser-scanners to extract the 3D
properties of exposed fracture surfaces. The two technologies complement each
other well and there are situations where the characterization of fracturing is
best analyzed with one or the other or both technologies. The first objective of
the Phase II research is to continue to improve the two technologies, and to
integrate all the various algorithms into a single user-friendly software tool.
The second objective is to thoroughly evaluate sources of error in both
technologies through synthetic and field studies, and to develop a set of
recommended field procedures and equipment for various applications to optimize
the techniques and minimize errors. The third objective is to develop
relationships with potential customers for the software and also groups
interested in collaborating on software development and validation. Once a beta
version of the software is developed, this software will be provided to some
customers for validation and assessment.

Within the broad scope of the rock engineering market, four distinct market
segments have been identified for this innovation. Each market segment has a
separate end-use application: mining, geotechnical, petroleum, and environment.
Market research and letters of support from various market participants have
demonstrated that a market need exists for automation of tasks currently
performed manually by rock engineering professionals.