* 0239648
* Hurricane Intensity Response to Changes in Inflow Thermodynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Gary Barnes, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/29/2008
* USD 399,100.00

Tropical cyclone intensity, defined as the minimum sea level pressure or the
maximum sustained winds found in the eyewall, remains a major forecasting
challenge. Current theories identify the energy content of the low-level inflow
to the eyewall as one of the key factors affecting intensity, but there is a
dearth of observations in the low levels available to test or refine the
theoretical arguments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will
examine the response of tropical cyclone (TC) intensity to changes in the energy
content of the low-level inflow to the eyewall for TCs Guillermo (1997),
Gabrielle (2001), and Humberto (2001). Each TC was sampled on two or more
consecutive days with the new Global Positioning System (GPS) sondes deployed
from the NOAA WP-3D aircraft. Consecutive day sampling enables the correlation
of changes in the inflow energy with changes in TC intensity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of the vertical profiles of thermodynamic
and kinematic variables derived from these sondes, airborne expendable
bathythermographs that provide sea surface temperature, and reflectivity fields
from the aircraft radars, are the basis for the production of storm scale maps
of kinematic and thermodynamic variables and trajectory analyses. Trajectory
analyses are used to determine where, when, and how much energy is acquired or
lost as the inflow column moves toward the eyewall. These fluxes at the top and
bottom of the column, and the disposition of the energy through the column, are
critical for the intensification and maintenance of the hurricane. Variations in
the larger scale environment will be assessed with GPS sondes deployed from the
NOAA Gulfstream, and from numerical model analyses. Determining what changes
occur in the large-scale environment will allow the role that changes in the
inflow layer have on TC intensity to be isolated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the research include the development of effective and
economic sampling strategies to ascertain factors that affect TC intensity
change, leading to improved forecasts of intensity that result in substantial
safety and economic benefits to the United States. Educational benefits of the
work include the training of graduate students, and in particular, the placement
of women into the field. The work also enhances the partnership between the
University of Hawaii and NOAA's Hurricane Research Division. This research is of
high priority within the U.S. Weather Research Program.