* 0239657
* CAREER: An Integrated Approach to Research on Collision Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Rob Gray, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 07/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Gray -- 0239657&lt;br/&gt;CAREER Award&lt;br/&gt;Each time a
driver steps on the brakes he uses visual information in a strategy to avoid a
collision. Each time a baseball player hits a ball she uses visual information
in a strategy to create a collision. That seems obvious enough, but it is not
obvious what visual information people use or how they use it to control their
behavior. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Robert Gray's
program of research and education investigates the problem of collisions with
approaching objects-how people avoid collisions and how people make them happen.
Dr. Gray's approach uses realistic, three-dimensional simulations of potential
collisions in conjunction with real-time recording of the person in motion. This
creative approach explores several issues including how control of the body
utilizes different sources of visual information, how control changes between
younger and older individuals, and how control is adapted to particular
situations and environments. Some broader impacts of the funded work include the
development of a Perception and Action curriculum at Arizona State University's
East Campus, research opportunities for undergraduate students, and progress in
the important applied area of transportation safety.&lt;br/&gt;