* 0239842
* CAREER:    Electronic, Chemical, and Mechanical Interactions at the Nanometer and Single - Molecule Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Philip Collins, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/29/2008
* USD 450,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to provide
educational and research opportunities for students interested in nanometer-
scale materials and electronics. The research goals of the project are to build
a better understanding of electronic devices made from nanoscale materials.
Because the electrically active components in these devices can incorporate very
small numbers of atoms or conduction channels, the devices are exquisitely
sensitive to electrostatic, chemical and mechanical perturbations and are
excellent probes of the interactions between these properties. The research
program will develop techniques for identifying and controlling such
interactions, for example by identifying the electronic signatures of chemical
interactions between adsorbate molecules and nanowire conductors. In addition to
the research goals, this project will develop a summer laboratory course where
students can observe and participate in ongoing nanoscience research. Using an
active learning environment, students will explore the interdisciplinary nature
of nanoscience and the various ways that electronic, chemical, and mechanical
properties vary and become more closely interdependent at the nanometer scale.
This integration of education and research will allow students to experience the
dynamics of scientific discovery in a rapidly developing new
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project aims to provide educational and research opportunities for students
interested in nanometer-scale materials and electronics. The research goals of
the project are to build a better understanding of ultrasmall electronics made
from novel nanowire materials, which have a variety of unusual properties. For
example, nanowire electronics are exquisitely sensitive to tiny changes, such as
when a single molecule from the air lands on the device. Further investigation
is necessary to understand the science behind this sensitivity. The research is
currently leading to new types of detectors able to sense ultralow
concentrations of harmful chemicals. In addition to the research goals, this
project will develop a summer laboratory course where students can observe and
participate in ongoing nanoscience research. Using an active learning
environment, students will explore the interdisciplinary nature of nanoscience
and the various ways that electronic, chemical, and mechanical properties vary
and become more closely interdependent at the nanometer scale. This integration
of education and research will allow students to experience the dynamics of
scientific discovery in a rapidly developing new field.&lt;br/&gt;