* 0239881
* International Symposium on Astrophysics of Dust, Estes Park, Colorado, 26-30 May, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Adolf Witt, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

AST 0239881 Witt

This award will provide partial funding for the support of travel of young
scientists, to make it possible for them to attend an international symposium on
the Astrophysics of Dust, scheduled to convene in Estes Park, CO, in May,
2003.This is the first comprehensive symposium dealing with observational,
theoretical, and laboratory-based aspects of cosmic dust since 1988, with
participants expected from numerous countries from five continents. The coming
decade will provide several new space- and ground-based observing facilities
whose primary subject will be the study of emissions from and through dusty
astrophysical environments. The full and productive utilization of these
facilities will require close collaboration between astronomers and scientists
from related disciplines in physics, materials science and chemistry. The
Astrophysics of Dust symposium is intended to provide the forum for close
interactions between members of these different groups. It is of particular
importance that young astronomers, just entering the field of dust-related
astrophysics, have the ability to participate in this symposium and make the
essential professional and personal connections with other colleagues in the
field, which will enhance their future scientific contributions to this rapidly
growing sub-discipline within astronomy. ***

