* 0239033
* CAREER:   Swashzone Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2010
* Britt Raubenheimer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2010
* USD 582,530.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Raubenheimer / WHOI Proposal No:
OCE- ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Raubenheimer / WHOI Proposal
No: OCE-0239033 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall, long-term scientific and
educational objectives are to develop and validate models for the fluid and
sediment processes in the swash zone (the region where the beach face is
alternately covered and uncovered by run-up from wind waves), to improve the
publics ability to interpret scientific results, and to increase awareness of
the processes that affect the beaches and nearshore. The specific goals of the
proposed work are to investigate swashzone processes, to develop an
undergraduate internship program in nearshore processes open to students at any
university, and to participate in the development of an internet- and field-
based observational oceanography class. The proposed work will evaluate
hypotheses concerning the dependence of flows on beach slope and offshore wave
conditions, bed stresses in the swash, the importance of infragravity energy to
alongshore swashzone flows, the longshore changes in erosion rates, and the
processes important to swashzone sediment transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed 6-month research internships will supplement and extend the existing
2-month Summer Student Fellowship program at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and will allow time for students to become familiar with background
literature and computer analysis and programming techniques, to develop a
detailed research plan, to conduct experiments and collect observations if
necessary, and to analyze the data. The proposed course development is expected
to provide undergraduates at small colleges the opportunity to learn about the
processes that affect the beaches (e.g., erosion, rip currents, and surf) and
the field techniques needed to collect nearshore observations. The development
of course modules will be synergistic with the creation of a prototype set of
distance-learning opportunities for undergraduates and will contain (1) material
on fluid mechanics and sediment transport, (2) information on instrumentation
and sampling strategies, (3) participation in a small field experiment, possibly
in conjunction with the proposed undergraduate research projects. It is expected
that the modular nature of the content will enable the web information to be
used in a variety of courses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall,
long-term scientific and educational objectives are to develop and validate
models for the fluid and sediment processes in the swash zone (the region where
the beach face is alternately covered and uncovered by run-up from wind waves),
to improve the publics ability to interpret scientific results, and to increase
awareness of the processes that affect the beaches and nearshore. The specific
goals of the proposed work are to investigate swashzone processes, to develop an
undergraduate internship program in nearshore processes open to students at any
university, and to participate in the development of an internet- and field-
based observational oceanography class. The proposed work will evaluate
hypotheses concerning the dependence of flows on beach slope and offshore wave
conditions, bed stresses in the swash, the importance of infragravity energy to
alongshore swashzone flows, the longshore changes in erosion rates, and the
processes important to swashzone sediment transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed 6-month research internships will supplement and extend the existing
2-month Summer Student Fellowship program at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and will allow time for students to become familiar with background
literature and computer analysis and programming techniques, to develop a
detailed research plan, to conduct experiments and collect observations if
necessary, and to analyze the data. The proposed course development is expected
to provide undergraduates at small colleges the opportunity to learn about the
processes that affect the beaches (e.g., erosion, rip currents, and surf) and
the field techniques needed to collect nearshore observations. The development
of course modules will be synergistic with the creation of a prototype set of
distance-learning opportunities for undergraduates and will contain (1) material
on fluid mechanics and sediment transport, (2) information on instrumentation
and sampling strategies, (3) participation in a small field experiment, possibly
in conjunction with the proposed undergraduate research projects. It is expected
that the modular nature of the content will enable the web information to be
used in a variety of courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;