* 0239072
* Collaborative Research: Productivity, Biogeochemical Transformations and Cross-margin Transport in an Eastern Boundary Buoyant Plume Region
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Antonio Baptista, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 09/30/2006
* USD 501,419.00

P.I. Hickey, Barbara (UW)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; This
proposal focuses on the highly productive Eastern Boundary Columbia river plume.
This plume is sufficiently large to be of regional importance, yet small enough
to allow determination of dominant processes affecting river plumes, and to
facilitate rate comparisons with regions outside the plume The proposed study
will integrate results from the nearby wind-driven CoOP study, as well as with
those from nearby GLOBEC and ECOHAB projects to provide definitive new
information on alteration of rates of biogeochemical processes by the unique
stratification, turbidity, mixing environment and nutrients of a river plume.
Moreover, because the Columbia River provides no significant terrigneous nitrate
to the plume in the growing season, this study allows plume-endemic processes to
be isolated and hence process results can be directly applied to other plumes.
Results can also be contrasted with more eutrophic, buoyancy-influenced coastal
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will address three hypotheses:
&lt;br/&gt;- During upwelling the growth rate of phytoplankton within the plume
exceeds that in nearby areas outside the plume being fueled by the same
upwelling macronutrients. &lt;br/&gt;- The plume enhances cross-margin transport
of plankton and nutrients. &lt;br/&gt;- Plume-specific nutrients (Fe and SiO4)
alter and enhance productivity on nearby shelves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed strategy is to compare production rates within the plume and outside
the plume, on the more productive shelf to the north of the river mouth
(Washington) and the less productive shelf to the south (Oregon). Results from
this study address important question as to why a shelf with weaker upwelling
winds is more highly productive than a shelf with stronger
winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;