* 0239587
* SBIR Phase II: Development of a Novel Sensing Material for Waterborne Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Mary Reppy, ANALYTICAL BIOLOGICAL SERVICES INC.
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 05/31/2005
* USD 466,762.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project proposes to
develop a method to detect Cryptosporidium parvum oocyst in water using a novel
sensing coating deposited on filters. C. parvum has been responsible for a
number of outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis, including the outbreak in Milwaukee in
1993 that affected 400,000 people. Crytosporidiosis is characterized by
abdominal pain and severe diarrhea, and can be fatal to immune-compromised
individuals. Currently, there is no easy and reliable test allowing the routine
monitoring of drinking water supplies for C. parvum. The approved EPA method for
this purpose is slow, expensive, and requires interpretation by highly trained
personnel. The innovation inherent in the proposed pathogen detection platform
resides in a unique "smart" polymer filter coating that permits pathogen
concentration, detection, and signal generation in a single step. The signal is
generated from interactions between the target and specific antibodies,
resulting in a fluorescent signal. Prior Phase I work has already demonstrated
the effectiveness of this approach. The proposed Phase II effort will focus on
the optimization of the filter coating and the development of the accompanying
hardware and testing protocol needed for commercialization and EPA approval of a
complete water-testing product.

The commercial application of this project is in the market for detection of
pathogens in drinking water supplies. The testing market for C. parvum, the
specific pathogen targeted in this Phase II project, is estimated to be $75
million in the U.S. and $ 100 million worldwide. It is expected that further
adaptations of the pathogen detection technology proposed in this project will
have added applications in the markets for the testing of foods and beverages,
and in medical diagnostics.

