* 0239424
* CAREER: Gold Nanoparticles with Single Copy of Functional Groups - Synthesis and Study
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Qun Huo, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2005
* USD 299,950.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to develop a general methodology for the
synthesis of gold nanoparticles with single surface functional groups through a
unique solid phase synthesis approach. These gold nanoparticles can be treated
as "extended" molecules and traditional synthetic chemistry can be conducted on
them to make complex nanoparticle "polymers" and "macromolecules." In contrast
to the extensively studied self-assembling techniques, our research will
demonstrate an alternate approach of using traditional synthetic chemistry to
develop novel nanomaterials and to "synthesize" nanoelectronic devices such as
quantum cellular automata. The success of this project will open a completely
new direction in the nanoparticle and nanomaterial field. Centered on this
research goal, two educational activities will be pursued to bring the following
advanced chemistry research and industrial applications to student training: (1)
a new graduate course entitled "Topics in Supramolecular Chemistry" will be
developed; and (2) a strong link will be established among nanotechnology
industries through collaborative research and by inviting renowned industrial
scientists to become members of the Industry Advisory Board in our department.
The establishment of a research and education link emphasizing nanotechnology
and industry will facilitate technology transfer and bring unique opportunities
to graduate and undergraduate training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CAREER research
project will develop a novel methodology to synthesize gold nanoparticles with
unique chemical structures. Gold nanoparticles are among one of the most
important nanomaterials for nanoelectronic devices and nanocomputer development.
The development of this research area is not only important for the advancement
of basic science, but also holds enormous potential commercial value. A
"bottleneck" in nanoelectronics and nanodevice research is how to manipulate and
assemble nanoparticles into extremely complicated integrated circuits (IC). Our
research provides an innovative approach to "synthesize" complex nanodevices and
nanoelectronics though traditional chemical reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;