* 0239265
* CAREER:  Near-field optical tomography
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Paul Carney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0239265 Carney

Near-field optical tomography is placed at the nexus of two fields: near-field
optics and inverse scattering. Near-field imaging has attracted considerable
attention as a technique to obtain images of surfaces with subwavelength
resolution. Applications range from the inspection of organic and biological
samples to semiconductor devices. Various experimental modalities are in
practical use. Near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) is practiced in
many variations. Total internal reflection microscopy (TIRM) has been in
practical use for decades. At the intersection of NSOM and TIRM modalities are
the so-called photon scanning tunneling microscopy (PSTM) methods. In all of
these modalities, the connection between the measured field or signal and the
sample properties has proven to be problematic.

To clarify the meaning of the measurements and to provide three-dimensional
imaging capability, it is desirable to find a solution to the inverse scattering
problem (ISP). By solving the near-field ISP two issues are resolved. The
ambiguity in the relationship between the sample properties and the measured
data is removed, and simultaneously three-dimensional, tomographic images of the
sample are obtained. Significant progress in this area has already been made by
the PI and collaborators. The feasibility of near-field tomographic
reconstructions has been demonstrated within the framework of a scalar model.
Moreover, new a modality, near-field optical power extinction tomography
(NOPET), has been proposed to circumvent the phase problem inherent in the ISP.

The aims of the research program are: 1) To develop inverse scattering
algorithms for all of the modalities discussed above in the weak scattering
limit; 2) To apply the algorithms to experiment; 3) To develop inverse
scattering algorithms in the strong scattering regime; 4) To apply the strong
scattering algorithms to experiment; 5) To include the results of research in
the graduate curriculum of the Department.

The PI has outlined specific methods, a timeline, and assignment of personnel to
achieve these aims. He has a proven record of accomplishment in the field of
research, is an experienced educator and is committed to diversity in the
classroom and in his group. The research will translate directly to the
classroom. Furthermore, graduate students will be trained in the course of this
work and undergraduates will be included wherever possible. Results will be
disseminated through the literature and conferences.

The results of this work will have broad impact. The intellectual impact of the
project is significant in that it opens a new field of study. The novel methods
of microscopy developed will impact biology, material science, semiconductor
research and manufacture, optoelectronics, chemistry, and medicine. This work
will also result in a deepening of our understanding of the behavior of light on
very small scale and will have applications beyond imaging in photonics and
optoelectronics. The program of research described here will provide students in
the research group with a broad range of research experience from fundamental
physics to code development and applied engineering. Students outside the group
will benefit from the integration of research results into graduate coursework.
In the long term, the effect of student training will affect the future
development of microscopy.

This work will form the basis for a career in academic engineering. The PI will
contribute to the body of knowledge, educate in the classroom, and foster the
development of young researchers for years to come.

