* 0239068
* CAREER:    Glass/Polymeric Material Systems in Civil Infrastructure
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Katerina Papoulia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 01/31/2008
* USD 408,894.00

Glass windows are important for quality of life of a building's occupants, but
windows can pose a hazard for the occupants when a blast load shatters them.
This is a matter of increasing significance for building security. In addition,
glass is an attractive structural material in settings other than windows
because of its unique aesthetic appeal. This research project deals with the
development of innovative models for fracture and damage to inorganic (silicate)
and organic (Polymeric) glass, and to laminated windows composed of alternating
layers of glass and elastomer. Chief concerns are rate dependence and accurate
prediction of fragment size and velocity. The models will also account for
practical issues like framing and mounting systems and realistic loads. The main
scientific hurdles to be resolved are better models for rate-dependent
viscoelasticity and plasticity, more efficient and accurate use of cohesive
interface models for explicit modeling of dynamic crack growth, and new
homogenization procedures that will capture the results of a very fine-grid
cohesive finite element simulation on a coarser more computationally feasible
mesh. Each of these hurdles poses interesting technical questions; for example,
in the case of cohesive interface models, even the basic matter of valid ranges
for the size of the elements is currently incompletely understood and will be
elucidated in this research effort. The computational models will be verified
using laboratory experiments by industrial and academic collaborators. An
important theme in the research is bridging the various time scales: the fastest
phenomenon under consideration, namely the propagation of a dynamic cracks
through one process-zone length, takes place over an interval that is about 18
orders of magnitude shorter than the interval required for surface damage to
accumulate. Therefore, special attention will be paid to models that are able to
make accurate predictions for many different time-scales and frequencies, and to
homogenization techniques that can obviate the need for very small steps.

The educational aspect of the proposed CAREER plan involves the development of
industrial experience for undergraduates, restructuring of an undergraduate and
graduate course to include more modern coverage of strength of materials
especially inelasticity, creation of a new undergraduate course on advanced
structural systems to cover nonlinear material modeling, and creation of a
graduate seminar on computational solid mechanics with direct links to the
proposed research. For most of these courses, new case studies based on
industrial practice and also new computer codes tailored for classroom use will
be developed. Outcomes of the proposed research plan include computational
models and methods better able to efficiently predict the safety of windows in a
secure building, better models for assessing durability under naturally
occurring loads like wind gusts and damage from small particles, and new insight
into fracture mechanics and the effect of loading rate. Outcomes of tthe
educational plan will be students with a better appreciation for the purposes
and methods of modeling of materials (particularly inelastic and nonlinear) at
different length and time scales, new educationally oriented finite element
codes useful in a variety of classroom settings, and new instructional modules
for outreach to K-12 students.



