* 0239276
* CAREER: Design and Implementation of a Virtual Product Development Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Teresa Wu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 02/28/2009
* USD 412,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (Career) award focuses on Collaborative
Product Development, combining research and education to (1) explore the
information foundation in which globally distributed, collaborating engineers
can design and develop world-class products and (2) develop a framework in which
global engineers can participate and develop products in a real time basis. The
information foundation will investigate an Internet based engineering
information model that will share public and private information to achieve an
integrated multi-partnership environment with focus on how to securely share
collaborator's private information in a consistent way. Once the information
foundation is established, a distributed decision support framework will be
developed that will integrate partner pre-qualification, dynamic analysis of
partner's conflict and negotiation for partners' conflicts resolution. Based on
the model and the framework developed, a Virtual Product Development Environment
(VPDE), a prototype system will be implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VPDE will
illustrate the procedure for enterprises to realize product development in a
collaborative environment. The VPDE prototype system will include an Internet
based information system, Internet based partner pre-qualification, Internet
based Conflict Analysis and Internet based Partner negotiation modules. The
education plan focuses on translating the VPDE into an instructional version
that will integrate the outcomes of the proposed research with undergraduate and
graduate education. This will also be a vehicle for minority outreach education
programs, both at the undergraduate level and for workforce training. Various
"designing active learning methodologies" will be explored to generate Internet-
based exercises to demonstrate the role of engineering information systems and
distributed decision support systems in collaborative product development. An
online graduate course on Distributed Information System will also be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;