* 0239483
* CAREER:  Nature of Pure and Dirty Liquid 3He-Fundamental Investigations and Educational Activities
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Yoonseok Lee, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This low temperature physics CAREER project will investigate the fundamental
nature of pure and dirty superfluid 3He using ultrasound spectroscopic
techniques. The effect of strong magnetic fields (up to 15 T) on the dirty
p-wave superfluid in the presence of magnetic and non-magnetic impurities will
be investigated. This work will provide important information on the phase
diagram of this relatively new system and has the potential to reveal new
phenomena near the critical pressure. The critical pressure is related to
quantum phase transitions, which are of great current interest in a range of
condensed matter systems. Using a transverse sound spectroscopic technique,
direct evidence of a sub-dominant f-wave pairing interaction in the B-phase will
be investigated. This novel spectroscopic technique is believed to be superior
to the conventional technique in searching for the new collective modes whose
existence is guaranteed only by the f-wave pairing interaction. The observation
of the new mode would be the first experimental confirmation of the collective
modes generated by the subdominant pairing interaction in a more general class
of superfluids. Fluctuation effects above the transition will be studied using
zero sound. The known background contribution and an extremely high resolution
in the zero sound velocity measurements will facilitate the direct measurement
of the coherence length.

This low temperature physics CAREER project will investigate fundamental
properties of pure and so-called dirty superfluid 3He using ultrasound
spectroscopic techniques. Dirty superfluid refers to superfluid samples in the
presence of very low-density porous solids, such as an aerogel. The research,
near the absolute zero of temperature, is relevant not only to the quantum
fluids community, scientists who investigate the properties of 3He and 4He, but
to many other areas of condensed matter physics. Recently, many interesting
phenomena related to quantum phase transitions have been discovered and studied
extensively in various condensed matter systems. Unlike conventional (classical)
transitions, which occur at finite temperatures such as melting of solids,
quantum phase transitions are triggered from purely quantum mechanical origins
and accordingly can occur at absolute zero temperature. The dirty superfluid
system is an excellent system to study this quantum phase transitions especially
near the critical pressure. The effect of strong magnetic fields on the phase
diagram of disordered superfluid 3He will be investigated. In other work, the
detailed microscopic origin of superfluidity in pure superfluid 3He will be
investigated via a search for a new excited state of the Cooper pairs (of 3He
atoms) using a novel transverse sound spectroscopic technique. The incipient
superfluidity above, but near, the transition temperature will be studied by
conducting high resolution sound velocity measurements. The incipient
superfluidity is caused by the thermally driven fluctuations of Cooper pairs
with a short lifetime. The research involves extensive participation of both
graduate and undergraduate students, who will be provided a wide range of
rigorous laboratory experience and training for later career opportunities in
academe, industry or government. The research project includes an important
integral component directed toward improving local high school science
education.