* 0239238
* SBIR Phase II:  Exploring Complex Biological Concepts in an Interactive 3-D Learning Environment over the Internet
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Douglas Seifert, Syandus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 01/31/2007
* USD 831,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will create a 3D,
interactive learning system to communicate complex scientific concepts from
biological and medical science, which are difficult to grasp via long narrative
scripts. The detailed technical specifications formulated in Phase I will be
developed into a software solution distinctive from what is available today.
This learning tool allows the user to inquire about objects in a visualization
context, where specific aspects of these objects can be manipulated. Syandus has
adapted sophisticated real-time 3D rendering technology common to video games as
follows: 1) by creating the ability to interact with time driven, 3D process
models of complex scientific phenomena; and 2) by associating textual
information with these visualized objects and processes. At a user's mouse
click, objects intelligently reveal what they are about in deeply layered text,
illustrations and linked files. This interface can aggregate all kinds of
information, such as all of a pharmaceutical company's technical information on
a disease. Finally, Syandus is building the software to be delivered across the
Internet through a standard browser interface or launched from a CDROM and
automatically updated via a narrowband Internet connection.&lt;br/&gt; The
differentiation among pharmaceutical products is ever increasingly grounded in
rapidly evolving complex science, thus making essential a mechanism for
aggregating and communicating scientific information that relates how drugs work
to disease states. Focusing on the pharmaceutical industry as the firm's first
target market, Syandus proposes to create a tool to help physicians understand
the breakthrough medicines to treat complex disease states that adversely impact
people's lives. The firm's custom projects will result in enduring resources for
medical students, professionals and healthcare consumers. As the technology
matures, the firm will pursue higher education markets. Through Internet
connectivity, the product can reach wide audiences across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;