* 0239010
* CAREER:  Research on Convective Snow in the Central United States
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2011
* Patrick Market, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2011
* USD 509,284.00

Thundersnow events (snow attended by lightning and thunder) will be examined
with a multiscale approach using standard meteorological platforms (e.g.,
rawinsonde network, National Lightning Detection Network), observations in the
field (integrated sounding system, snow crystal collection), and with numerical
model simulations. The project will begin by examining archived cases
(1961-1990) of thundersnow to understand the synoptic environment that produces
it. Ensuing years will be spent in the field, in pursuit of thundersnow events
in order to sample them directly and attempt to determine some fundamental
characteristics of the cloud that engenders them. Direct observations of
thundersnow events will reveal not only cloud microphysical structure, but also
the stability and vertical velocity profiles that accompany them. Simulations
with the numerical weather prediction models will help to clarify the synoptic
scale and meso-alpha scale forcing mechanisms for vertical
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Academically, this project will seek to capitalize
on students' natural fascination with dangerous phenomena: in this case,
lightning and heavy snowfall. Summer workshops will be held for area high school
students to introduce them to meteorology and forecasting. Undergraduates at the
University of Missouri-Columbia will be introduced to the project in courses
taught by the Principal Investigator with daily forecasting of thundersnow
incorporated into the class as a lab exercise. During the winter season, the
high school participants from the summer workshop will be invited back to
observe the creation by undergraduates of the routine forecasts and outlooks for
thundersnow, thus reaching beyond prior summer programs in meteorology for
secondary school students. The graduate student participants will venture into
the field to perform the observations of thundersnow occurrence. In so doing,
they will acquire unique experience in the operation and utility of in-situ
rawinsonde and profiler equipment, as well as surface observations and snow
crystal collection. These activities will provide the graduate students with the
gamut of research experience, from data collection in the field, to quality
control in the lab, to the analysis of the final
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work are not
limited to scientific publications or conferences, or the students who are
mentored during the Project, but include a better-protected population through
improved forecasting of dangerous winter weather.