* 0239605
* CAREER: Investigation of the Scattering and Radiative Properties of Ice and Mixed-Phase Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Ping Yang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 04/30/2009
* USD 623,408.00

The goal of this project is to improve the treatment of ice and mixed-phase
clouds in remote sensing applications and in the parameterization of clouds for
climate and general circulation models. The research consists of five broad
components. Principal of these is a fundamental investigation of light
scattering by nonspherical ice particles, including crystals of regular and
irregular shapes characteristic of cirrus clouds and clouds composed of a mix of
ice crystals and supercooled water droplets. This work centers on improving the
accuracy and efficiency of scattering computations by using a combination of the
finite-difference time domain (FTDT) method, T-matrix methods, and the improved
geometric optics method (IGOM). The objective is to generate a data base for
absorption and scattering properties of various ice crystal forms at solar and
infrared wavelengths. The other research components include (1) integration of
the scattering results for individual particles with information of the
composition of cirrus clouds to determine the radiative properties of the clouds
for the purposes of satellite remote sensing; (2) parameterization of the bulk
radiative properties of cirrus and mixed-phase clouds for application to large-
scale atmospheric models; (3) development of retrieval algorithms for inferring
cloud microphysical and optical properties from multispectral satellite
measurements; (4) integration of the light scattering programs, radiative
transfer schemes, and retrieval algorithms in a convenient computational package
for the remote sensing and climate modeling communities. Along with graduate and
undergraduate student supervision, the educational component of the project
comprises developing a curriculum that integrates radiative transfer, cloud
physics, and atmospheric remote sensing, and ultimately establishing a
Laboratory for Radiative Transfer and Remote Sensing, including web-based
instructional material.