* 0239367
* CAREER:  Search for Extra Dimensions in Space
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Greg Landsberg, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joseph Reidy
* 07/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER proposal requests support for an extensive experimental program of
searches for extra dimensions (EDs) in space in the Run 2 data to be collected
by the D0 experiment at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory Tevatron over
the next five years. Most of the proposed searches will be carried out for the
first time. This program is based on those channels expected to be most
sensitive to various EDs models as well as to other new physics. For some of
these channels, a specialized multi-level triggering is required; therefore the
design and optimization of the trigger is among the proposed activities. In the
channels already studied experimentally, the expected sensitivity is 2-3 times
higher than the current best limits for any number of EDs, n > 2, and is
comparable to the reach of tabletop gravity experiments for n = 2. This would
give D0 an excellent opportunity to either find a signal from EDs or to restrict
significantly the allowed parameter space of the various models. While the D0
involvement is the major current activity of the Brown University High Energy
Physics (HEP) group, joining one of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiments
at CERN, Geneva is a natural next step. Recently, S. Dimopoulos and the PI (and
separately S. Giddings and S. Thomas) have proposed a novel signature for large
EDs: a possibility of copious black hole production at the LHC and beyond. As a
part of the proposed activities, the PI plans to work closely with the ATLAS and
CMS collaborations in simulating and studying the phenomenology of black hole
production at the LHC. It is also proposed to continue phenomenological research
on black hole production at future colliders.

This proposal includes a number of synergistic activities, such as the
continuous involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in research at the
cutting edge of modern particle physics. In particular, it is proposed to expand
the newly established ties with the Vietnamese HEP groups via attracting more
students from Vietnam to work in the D0 Collaboration by continuing their
education in the graduate schools of the US universities involved in D0. Other
proposed outreach activities include a number of public lectures and articles in
popular science journals on the exciting subject of EDs in space and black holes
in the lab.