* 0239123
* CAREER: Palladacycles with a Metal-Bonded Stereogenic Carbon - New Tools for Asymmetric Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Helena Malinakova, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2009
* USD 475,000.00

The focus of this research is to develop new annulation reactions for use in the
asymmetric construction of complex molecules of pharmaceutical interest. The
central theme of the approach is the use of Pd(IV) in conjunction with optically
active phosphine ligands. The resulting enantiomerically enriched palladacycles
will be functionalized to produce synthetically useful intermediates. The focus
of the educational effort will be the development of lecture and laboratory
courses in organometallic chemistry. Dr. Malinakova will introduce techniques
for the manipulation of air-sensitive materials into the undergraduate
laboratory in a research-like environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research and educational efforts of Dr. Helena H. Malinakova. Professor
Malinakova will focus her work on the use of palladium in order to produce new
carbon-carbon bonds. The new methods being developed will permit the conversion
of inexpensive starting materials into valuable pharmaceutical intermediates in
the laboratory, and are expected to have an impact on the way in which
pharmaceutical companies manufacture drugs. The educational activities of the
award will include the introduction of some of these methods into the
undergraduate laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;