* 0239861
* CAREER: An Interdisciplinary Approach Toward Understanding Dynamic Glycosylation in the Brain
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Linda Hsieh-Wilson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/29/2008
* USD 540,000.00

This research program focuses on development of an understanding of the role of
O-GlcNAc glycosylation in regulating neuronal function and communication,
including the regulation of transcription and the control of genes important for
learning and memory. The role of O-GlcNAc glycosylation in cyclic AMP response
element binding protein-mediated transcription will be explored. Faciliated by
development of a synthetic chemical probe enabling the accelerated
identification of O-GlcNAc glycosylated proteins on a proteome-wide scale, such
modified proteins will be identified in the brain. The educational experience of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will be enahnced through
tailored course discussion and research involvement, and efforts will be made to
increase the representation of women in the chemical workforce through provision
of support mechanisms and mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of
this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the
Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry Program, Professor Linda Hsieh-Wilson, of
the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the California Institute
of Technology, is exploring chemical changes important for brain function and
dysfunction. Professor Hsieh-Wilson's studies additionally address the means by
which the chemistry of the brain is spatiotemporally regulated to give rise to
the intricate biology of the nervous system. These studies are leading to an
understanding of the structural, functional, and physiological roles of specific
chemical changes in the brain. Professor Hsieh-Wilson is involved in a number of
programs designed to enhance the educational experience of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students through tailored course discussion and
research involvement and to increase the representation of women in the chemical
workforce.