* 0239912
* Middleware and Grid Infrastructure Coordination Committee (MAGIC) 1st Documentation Workshop; August 26-28, 2002; Chicago, IL
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Rick Stevens, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Grid technologies and middleware are in the process of transforming the way
science will be conducted around the globe. There are currently over 100
national and international grid projects involving many different disciplines,
organizations, collaborators, facilities and instruments in literally dozens of
countries. Despite the extensive and on-going development of grids, tools,
applications, and middleware, the long term viability and persistence of these
technologies is uncertain. And, if these technologies and middleware can not be
made persistent, it will not only threaten the future of science and research,
but may severely impact the education community as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is sponsored by the Large Scale
Networking Coordinating Group (LSN CG) of the Interagency Working Group in
Information Technology Research and Development (IWG/IT R&amp;D). The IWG, which
functions under the White House National Science and Technology Council,
coordinates Federal multiagency IT R&amp;D efforts. The LSN CG agencies are
AHRQ, DARPA, DOE ST, DOE NNSA, NASA, NIH, NIST, NSA, NOAA NSF, and ODDR&amp;E.
The workshop is being planned and coordinated by the MAGIC Team of the LSN that
includes representation from the IWG agencies, the university and commercial
communities, including international participants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop's objectives are to develop a vision for middleware and Grid to enable
science applications and cooperation (5 to 10 years out) and to identify needed
Federal networking research to implement that vision. The workshop is intended
to obtain inputs from the university, commercial, and Federal research
communities on needed research to enable middleware and Grids, resource and tool
development, and the need for persistent infrastructure to support researchers
using middleware and Grids and to carry out research on middleware and Grids.
The workshop results will be used to develop a Blueprint for Future Science
Middleware and Grid Research and Infrastructure that can be used by the LSN
Federal agencies in development of their research plans and programs. The
document will also be used to inform decision makers and researchers of the
research needed in middleware and grids and the need for a persistent
infrastructure to support their use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
workshop will be focused on producing a document "Blueprint for Future Science
Middleware and Grid Research and Infrastructure," which will address the service
and software infrastructure required for long-term, persistent, large scale Grid
and Middleware-based technologies to meet the needs of education, research and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;