* 0239450
* CAREER:  Heat Capacity Study on Low Dimensional Electronic Systems at Low Temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Jongsoo Yoon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER project addresses simultaneous heat capacity and transport
measurements on Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) type superconducting transitions and
Superconductor-Insulator Transi-tions (SIT) at temperatures down to ~10mK. The
project includes design and fabrication of a state-of-the-art low temperature
nano-calorimeter. With a SQUID readout, the expected sensitiv-ity of the
calorimeter is expected to be sufficient to detect the electronic heat capacity
contribu-tion from a metal (copper, for example) of ~1 nanogram at 10mK,
corresponding to a monolayer film covering an area of ~1mm in diameter.
Superconducting transitions of ultrathin AuIn, Ta, and Bi films will be
investigated in a continuous flow He cryostat, and a dilution refrigerator.
Experimental techniques to be developed are expected to also impact the study of
thermody-namic properties of other 2D systems such as Fermi liquids, Kondo
systems, and electrons in semiconductor interfaces, providing a foundation for a
lifetime of contribution and education in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves education and training of undergraduate and graduate students
in industry-standard microfabrication techniques and a variety of condensed
matter techniques. Computer-based acquisition and analysis of large data sets
requires training at the frontier of information technology. These opportunities
will help students develop future-oriented perspectives on sci-ence and
technology. The PI will develop a new course to teach principles and
applications of various state-of-the-art devices to science majors and graduate
students from various disciplines of science. The course will offer students
active participation in the class activity in the form of case study, literature
search, and poster presentations. An outreach effort includes creating a
comprehensive website containing educational materials related with research and
educational activities, K12 and community college lectures, demonstration, and
laboratory tours. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;