* 0239629
* CAREER: Towards Synthetic Cytoplasm: Volume Exclusion and Aqueous Phase Separation in Giant Vesicles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Christine Keating, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2009
* USD 513,872.00

This CAREER award to Professor Christine Keating of Pennsylvania State
University is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division and by Cellular Systems in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences. In this project, the properties of aqueous two-phase
systems will be studies as contained within giant unilamellar vesicles.
Questions to be addressed include the partitioning of proteins and other
macromolecules between the two phases, and how this partitioning is affected by
encapsulation within the vesicle. The partitioning could either follow
Michaelis-Menton or may show a sigmoidal, i.e., "switchlike" response curve,
with the latter giving access to unique vesicle properties. One property to be
examined is vesicle locomotion based on the reversible polymerization of
cytoskeletal proteins within these "synthetic cells" with the driving force
provided by a temperature and/or chemical gradient. The overall goal of the
project is elucidation of the functional architectures used by cells, a
knowledge which can then be applied to abiotic
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive education and outreach plan
is described, including outreach to high school students through a high school
biology teacher. High school teachers have already worked in the PI's lab during
summer months and a new teacher is to be supported for one summer with this
award. These teachers have worked with state-of-the-art instrumentation and have
been key in development of new experiments with biosensors and cell structure
appropriate for the high school laboratory. In addition, the PI will develop a
new graduate-level course on biorecognition. &lt;br/&gt;