* 0239463
* CAREER:  Dynamical Systems on Homogeneous Spaces and Applications to Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Dmitry Kleinbock, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 403,233.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DMS 0238463&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D Kleinbock(Brandeis):
Career&lt;br/&gt;The research component of the project deals with
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems and their applications to number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;A dynamical system here stands for an abstract set of
points&lt;br/&gt;together with an evolution law which governs the way
points&lt;br/&gt;move over time. It turns out that many problems
concerning&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous approximation of real numbers by rational
numbers&lt;br/&gt;can be cast in terms of the behavior of certain orbits,
and&lt;br/&gt;various phenomena related to the theory of integer
equations&lt;br/&gt;or inequalities can be better understood once they are
phrased&lt;br/&gt;in dynamical systems language. Furthermore, systems
that&lt;br/&gt;arise in this context are of algebraic nature, which
makes&lt;br/&gt;it possible to use a wide variety of sophisticated tools
for&lt;br/&gt;their investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component consists of several ingredients:&lt;br/&gt;developing new `creative
thinking' courses and supervising&lt;br/&gt;summer research projects for both
undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students, and maintaining an introductory-
style interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;seminar. The goals are to engage students in
challenging research&lt;br/&gt;projects, encourage non-standard independent
thinking, and to&lt;br/&gt;expose them to a broad spectrum of current
mathematical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;