* 0239314
* CAREER:    Microbial-Based Engineering Approaches for Prevention and Treatment of Acid Mine Drainage:     An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Eric Marchand, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,008.00

0239314 Marchand The research described in this proposal aims to study methods
for minimizing acid formation in situ by stimulating heterotrophic microbial
growth. It is hypothesized that if given the appropriate conditions (namely, a
degradable organic carbon source), heterotrophic bacteria will be able to out-
compete the iron-oxidizing microbes responsible for catalyzing acid-forming
reactions at acid mine drainage (AMD) sites. This is an area that has not
achieved much attention and has the potential to be utilized as both a
remediation and prevention technique. The proposed research will provide
fundamental understanding of microbial community structure in a model extreme
environment; however, results may be transferable to community dynamics in other
extreme environments that are subject to similar constraints. This investigation
will experimentally evaluate the influence of supplemental organic carbon
substrate addition on mineral oxidation in fractured or biofilm-based systems.
The specific objectives of the research are: 1. Identify the influence of
enhanced heterotrophic microbial growth on mineral oxidation by acidophilic
microbes in laboratory systems with a high surface area to volume ratio. 2.
Establish the mechanism(s) involved in heterotroph-induced prevention of acid
generation and determine the appropriate conditions to enhance heterotroph-
induced prevention of acid generation in biofilm-dominated systems. 3. Identify
the relative influence of microbial iron and sulfate reduction in acidic
environments for bioremediation of acid mine drainage. 4. Assess the influence
of organic carbon substrate addition on acid generation at a well-characterized
AMD site. The long term and broader scientific and engineering impacts of the
proposed research involves the development of new methods for both prevention
and mitigation of acidic drainage. While current applications focus on treatment
of acidic, metal-containing water streams - typically utilizing chemical
precipitation - the proposed research will attempt to prevent acid formation in
situ before treatment is required. While a primary goal of the proposed research
is to prevent acid generation from occurring in the first place efforts will
also be made to identify the efficacy of achieving in situ iron and sulfate
reduction, particularly in low temperature environments. Scientific outreach
activities associated with this project will include participation of the PI in
regional public meetings aimed at educating the public about issues associated
with acid mine drainage. The PI has already developed a working relationship
with regulators and water quality scientists at the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board - Lahonton Region and will work with these individuals to
disseminate experimental results. The broader education-based implications of
this research involve the development of interactive experiments for
incorporation into the Mobile Engineering Education Laboratory (ME 2 L). Funds
are requested to support undergraduate students while they design and build
interactive displays for the mobile lab. In addition to their utility for the ME
2 L program, these demonstrations will also be incorporated into Engineering Day
and the Science Day programs at UNR, two programs aimed at getting High School
students to think seriously about careers in science and engineering. In
addition to these outreach-based education goals, the PI has also proposed to
develop an undergraduate and graduate coursework series in environmental
engineering that introduces fundamental and applied aspects of environmental
microbiology in an engineering curriculum.