* 0239702
* CAREER:    Selective Patterning and Transport of Functionalized Inorganic Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Mary Williams, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER award to Professor Mary Beth Williams of the Pennsylvania State
University, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses
on the selective patterning of surfaces with nanoparticles by controlled
transport and deposition. At the smallest scales, functionalized magnetic
nanoparticles and semiconductor nanocrystals will be prepared and attached to
surfaces using ligand exchange strategies. The particles will have synthetically
adjustable magnetic and luminescent properties. The magnetic nanoparticles will
be used to produce ultrahigh density magnetic arrays and enable the
interrogation of the magnetic properties of individual nanoparticles via
magnetic force microscopy imaging. The transport of freely diffusing, chemically
functional magnetic nanoparticles in solution will be controlled by applied
magnetic field gradients, making possible the directed transport of
nanoparticles for the delivery of recovery of target analytes. Also,
nanoparticles will be selectively attached to biomolecular motor proteins that,
upon hydrolysis of ATP and alignment with magnetic field gradients, will further
enable selective and rapid particle motion. The long-term applications include
drug delivery, environmental remediation, and electronic devices. The range of
applications is broadened with the independent control of particle magnetism and
particle surface chemistry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Outreach activities include
mentoring at the undergraduate and high school level. The laboratory research
activities are wide-ranging, encompassing a range of laboratory techniques and
including oral and written presentations and attendance at meetings. For the
young scientist, a gap in the accessible scientific literature is noted; as yet,
there is only a single publication on nanoparticles in the Journal of Chemical
Education. Thus, a subproject on nanoparticle synthesis and characterization
will be undertaken, leading to a literature appropriate for the young science
student.&lt;br/&gt;