* 0239370
* CAREER:    Millimeter-Wave Instrumentation Development for Measuring the Redshifts of Submillimeter Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Jason Glenn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 04/30/2008
* USD 684,332.00

Proposal ID: AST-0239370&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Colorado
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;PI: Glenn, Jason&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jason Glenn will use
his CAREER award at the University of Colorado, Boulder to develop new
millimeter-wave instrumentation in order to measure the redshifts of
submillimeter galaxies. These galaxies, discovered by their submillimeter or
millimeter-wave dust emission, are found at high redshifts and are very
luminous. With redshifts determined from the rotational lines of CO, it will be
possible to measure the luminosity function and cosmic formation history of high
star formation rate, dust-obscured galaxies. Dr. Glenn will use mature bolometer
technology and an innovative waveguide-coupled diffraction grating to create a
unique broadband spectrometer called Z-Spec. This new spectroscopic capability
will make it possible to capitalize on ongoing and imminent submillimeter galaxy
surveys. This award will enable Dr. Glenn to turn a laboratory demonstration
facility into an instrument for ground-based submillimeter
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As well as training graduate and undergraduate
students in millimeter-wave instrumentation, Dr. Glenn will conduct an education
and outreach program designed to expose high school students and the public to
astronomy research through a set of classroom visits and lectures. Electronic
presentations on our rapidly evolving understanding of the early universe will
be developed for presentation at the University of Colorado's Fiske Planetarium
and Boulder/Denver-area high schools. These presentations will be written and
given with substantial participation by undergraduate students in the
university's astronomy education track. Dr. Glenn will also work on developing
active learning in the classroom and in the planetarium through the use of
interactive teaching combined to provide real-time feedback on
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;