* 0239764
* CAREER:    Artificial Brownian Motors - Education and Research in Biologically Inspired Physics at the Nanoscale
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Heiner Linke, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2009
* USD 645,196.00

This research project aims at enhancing our understanding of so called molecular
motors. Molecular motors are biological macromolecules that perform mechanical
tasks in living cells, such as the transport of material or the contraction of
muscle cells. The physical environment of molecular motors is strongly
determined by random collisions with surrounding water molecules, and must
therefore have a working principle very different from traditional, man-made
machines. This notion has prompted the development of theoretical models that
incorporate Brownian motion into the mechanism for molecular force generation -
so-called Brownian motors. The present project will experimentally realize some
of these models, using building blocks such as plastic beads, nano-patterned
silicon chips and DNA molecules. The objective is to test theoretical models
such as those that describe how many coupled motors co-operate when a muscle
contracts. The experiments are expected to become a focal point for future
theoretical work aimed at understanding biological phenomena, and may lead to
novel bio-mimetic actuator systems. This research field is at the interface of
biology and physics at the nanoscale, a field in which more trained engineers
and scientists will be needed in the near future. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be exposed to interdisciplinary scientific work, and will learn
skills necessary for a successful career in Nanoscience. A course on the physics
and biology of nanoscale phenomena, aimed at undergraduate and graduate physics
and biology students, will also be developed. Broader impacts of this project
are the training of students in interdisciplinary thinking, and to equip
students from both sides of the biology-physics divide with practical and
theoretical skills from the other field. The educational and scientific program
will be integrated with existing programs in the Materials Science Institute at
the University of Oregon, further strengthening the University's
interdisciplinary research environment. This project is jointly funded by the
Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.