* 0240394
* Dissertation Research:  Research Ethics and Public Values Decision-Making:  Implications for Human Subject Review
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Richard Barke, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 6,835.00

This SDEST dissertation research improvement grant intends to explain the
decision-making process of Institutional Research Boards (IRBs) at six U.S.
research universities and to relate IRB structures and processes to their
efficiency and effectiveness. In many areas of science and technology, human
subjects issues raise fundamental questions about balancing risks and benefits
to research participants and to society. Established to ensure ethical standards
in the implementation of research that involves human participants, IRBs consist
of groups of scientists and nonscientists, from the research institution and the
community. They can approve, alter, or prohibit research protocols. Over 1,800
IRBs exist in the U.S., with a variety of structures, processes, and
institutional contexts. While recent studies have examined IRB workloads and
efficiency, systematic theory-driven empirical research is lacking on the
effects of varying compositions of membership and on how IRB decision-making
varies from institute to institute. This research will examine the relationship
of IRB composition with human subjects decision processes, primarily via
personal interviews with IRB members from a sample of research universities.
Through the interdisciplinary lens of policy studies, this research will
contribute to the development of an IRB decision-making model based on decision
theory, science and technology studies, risk theory, and participatory analysis.

