* 0240078
* Computational Studies in Electrochemical Materials Science by Statistical-Mechanical and Ab-Initio Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Per Arne Rikvold, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

0240078&lt;br/&gt;Rikvold&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a theoretical project
investigating surface electrochemistry. Surface electrochemistry contributes to
the welfare of society in many ways, including metal production, electroplating,
corrosion protection, energy storage, and heterogeneous catalysis for the
chemical and pharmaceutical industries and environmental protection. Despite
these diverse and economically important applications, it is only in the last
two decades that experimental methods have become available that permit
observation and manipulation of electrode/electrolyte interfaces on an atomic
scale without removing the electrode to an ultra-high vacuum environment. These
new, nanoscopic in situ methods include scanning probe microscopies, such as
scanning tunneling microscopy and atomic force microscopy, and X-ray diffraction
using high-brilliance synchrotron sources. In combination with the traditional,
macroscopic methods of electrochemistry, such as cyclic voltammetry and
chronocoulometry, these new techniques have ushered in a new era of atomic-scale
electrochemical surface science. As a consequence, electrochemical methods to
manufacture high-tech materials and devices that derive their properties from
structure on the nanometer scale are being developed and have the potential to
become cost-effective alternatives to current high-vacuum techniques. These
impressive experimental developments are paralleled by spectacular progress in
computer hardware and software. Calculations that required supercomputers a
decade ago are now performed on personal computers, while today's fastest
computers and algorithms can handle billions of atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will apply results and techniques from recent NSF-supported
computational and theoretical studies of dynamical phenomena in electrochemical
materials science to study the dynamics of anions that are electrochemically
adsorbed on single-crystal electrodes. These results and techniques include
theoretical models for specific electrochemical systems, highly efficient
dynamic multiscale simulation algorithms, and ab initio quantum mechanical
methods. The methods will be used and developed further in investigations of
halides electrochemically adsorbed on silver and gold, and the dynamics of phase
transformations of gold surfaces under rapidly pulsed potential. The results
will be compared with experiments in collaboration with experimental groups. In
addition to studies of specific systems, the research will include work of more
general scope on effects of diffusion of adsorbed atoms on the adsorbate
structure, on dynamics of adsorbate systems under conditions of rapidly varying
electrode potentials, and on methods to include the effects of electric fields
and to explicitly include water molecules in ab initio
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work will also continue to develop simulation
algorithms that faithfully represent the effects of adsorption, desorption, and
lateral diffusion that occur on atomic time scales of less that 10-10 seconds,
while enabling simulation of processes on a scale of seconds or longer. This
problem of bridging time scales will be addressed in a hierarchical manner,
using studies of small continuum systems to determine parameters for input in
simulations that can reach macroscopic times with the application of modern
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to result in improved
understanding of nonequilibrium processes at electrode/electrolyte interfaces,
and thereby contribute to the development of new, electrochemistry-based
processes to manufacture nanoparticles, ultrathin films, and other
nanostructured materials. The research is ideal for involving students at all
levels in the discovery process.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a
theoretical project investigating surface electrochemistry. Surface
electrochemistry contributes to the welfare of society in many ways, including
metal production, electroplating, corrosion protection, energy storage, and
heterogeneous catalysis for the chemical and pharmaceutical industries and
environmental protection. Despite these diverse and economically important
applications, it is only in the last two decades that experimental methods have
become available that permit observation and manipulation of
electrode/electrolyte interfaces on an atomic scale without removing the
electrode to an ultra-high vacuum environment. These new, nanoscopic in situ
methods include scanning probe microscopies, such as scanning tunneling
microscopy and atomic force microscopy, and X-ray diffraction using high-
brilliance synchrotron sources. In combination with the traditional, macroscopic
methods of electrochemistry, such as cyclic voltammetry and chronocoulometry,
these new techniques have ushered in a new era of atomic-scale electrochemical
surface science. As a consequence, electrochemical methods to manufacture high-
tech materials and devices that derive their properties from structure on the
nanometer scale are being developed and have the potential to become cost-
effective alternatives to current high-vacuum techniques. These impressive
experimental developments are paralleled by spectacular progress in computer
hardware and software. Calculations that required supercomputers a decade ago
are now performed on personal computers, while today's fastest computers and
algorithms can handle billions of atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
apply results and techniques from recent NSF-supported computational and
theoretical studies of dynamical phenomena in electrochemical materials science
to study the dynamics of anions that are electrochemically adsorbed on single-
crystal electrodes. These results and techniques include theoretical models for
specific electrochemical systems, highly efficient dynamic multiscale simulation
algorithms, and ab initio quantum mechanical methods. The methods will be used
and developed further in investigations of halides electrochemically adsorbed on
silver and gold, and the dynamics of phase transformations of gold surfaces
under rapidly pulsed potential. The results will be compared with experiments in
collaboration with experimental groups. In addition to studies of specific
systems, the research will include work of more general scope on effects of
diffusion of adsorbed atoms on the adsorbate structure, on dynamics of adsorbate
systems under conditions of rapidly varying electrode potentials, and on methods
to include the effects of electric fields and to explicitly include water
molecules in ab initio calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work will also
continue to develop simulation algorithms that faithfully represent the effects
of adsorption, desorption, and lateral diffusion that occur on atomic time
scales of less that 10-10 seconds, while enabling simulation of processes on a
scale of seconds or longer. This problem of bridging time scales will be
addressed in a hierarchical manner, using studies of small continuum systems to
determine parameters for input in simulations that can reach macroscopic times
with the application of modern algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
expected to result in improved understanding of nonequilibrium processes at
electrode/electrolyte interfaces, and thereby contribute to the development of
new, electrochemistry-based processes to manufacture nanoparticles, ultrathin
films, and other nanostructured materials. The research is ideal for involving
students at all levels in the discovery
process.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;