* 0240813
* 4d and 5d Transition Metal Oxides: A New Frontier of Materials with Exotic Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Gang Cao, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2006
* USD 299,971.00

This individual investigator award supports a systematic effort to elucidate
underlying physics of the 4d and 5d transition metal oxides. These systems are a
new class of materials characterized by strong coupling between different
degrees of freedom and the coexistence of different kinds of ordering. Recent
discoveries show a glimpse of intriguing physical properties of 4d-electron
based ruthenates (Sr,Ca)(n+1)Ru(n)O(3n+1) and 5d-electron based iridates
Sr(n+1)Ir(n)O(3n+1), and provide strong motivation for a thorough investigation.
These layered materials exhibit an astonishing dimensionality-dependence of
physical properties and a wide array of exotic phenomena including coexistence
of fermion-quasiparticle and nonmetallic characteristics, inter-plane tunneling
magnetoresistance, colossal magnetoresistance (CMR), drastically different
anisotropies of the CMR and magnetization, p-wave superconductivity,
metamagnetism, "diamagnetism" in an insulating state, etc. These phenomena
reflect new physics, and it is this new physics that needs to be thoroughly
studied. The planned program includes single crystal growth (both flux and
floating zone methods) and experimental studies of thermal, electronic, magnetic
and structural properties of these materials as a function of temperature,
chemical doping, magnetic field and pressure. Graduate students involved in the
research will receive rigorous training with an emphasis on materials
developments, synthesis, and characterizations. This type of training in our
graduate education is particularly needed nowadays as the lack of scientists who
specialize in both developing new materials and growing single crystals has
already hindered advancements in condensed matter physics in the US.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award supports a systematic
effort to elucidate underlying physics of the 4d and 5d transition metal oxides,
which are by and large an uncharted territory rich with novel physical phenomena
that cannot be explained through our conventional understanding. Recent
discoveries show a glimpse of intriguing physical properties of 4d-electron
based ruthenates and 5d-electron based iridates, and provide strong motivation
for a thorough investigation. These layered materials exhibit an astonishing
dimensionality-dependence of physical properties and a wide array of exotic
phenomena including novel superconductivity and the coexistence of different
kinds of ordering, which are conventionally expected to exclude each other, etc.
These phenomena largely defy conventional wisdom and reflect new physics, and it
is this new physics that needs to be thoroughly studied. The planned program
includes materials synthesis and experimental studies of thermal, electronic,
magnetic and structural properties of this class of materials as a function of
temperature, chemical substitution, magnetic field and pressure. Graduate
students involved in the research will receive rigorous training with an
emphasis on materials developments, synthesis, and characterizations. This type
of training in our graduate education is particularly needed nowadays as the
lack of scientists who specialize in both developing new materials and growing
single crystals has already hindered advancements in condensed matter physics in
the United States. &lt;br/&gt;