* 0240450
* Ensuring Access to Mathematics over Time: Cooperative Management of Distributed Digital Archives
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Marcy Rosenkrantz, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2007
* USD 450,116.00

The Cornell University Library and the Gottingen State and University Library
propose to create a distributed, interoperable system for the long-term
preservation and dissemination of digital serial literature in the field of
Mathematics and Statistics. Developing and implementing such a system will
require the partners to bring the principles of the Open Archival Information
System (OAIS) Reference Model to an operational level by establishing protocols
for data ingest, data management, archival storage, archive administration, and
access processes. Persistent access to distributed archives is an important goal
for digital libraries research. Distributed archives will allow libraries and
institutions to invest their resources in expanding content for targeted
communities rather than in developing costly local infrastructure. Persistent
access means that users can trust a digital archive will provide secure,
reliable access to resources over time without constraints based upon geographic
location, language preferences or requirements, or subject discipline. The OAIS
reference model has received a great deal of positive attention in the archiving
and preservation communities, and it has become a dominant and accepted model
for planning and implementing digital archives. By creating an open digital
archive of serial mathematics literature this joint US/Germany project will make
valuable content reliably accessible to a host of other disciplines for which
mathematics is an enabling science.