* 0240375
* Dissertation Research: Metrics of purity: linguistic registers, cultures of waste-reckoning, and the circulation of scientific knowledge in La Paz, Bolivia
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Michael Silverstein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,505.00

This dissertation research offers an ethnographic account of the circulation of
scientific knowledge about water quality and wastewater discharge in La Paz,
Bolivia. Recent ethnographies of science, technology, and society (STS) have
emphasized the laboratory as an important site of cultural production. They have
done so, however, by assuming the pre-existence of laboratory science as an
authoritative institutional form -- research begins in the laboratory and
follows scientists and engineers as they actively extend its sphere of
&lt;br/&gt;application. But how does laboratory science come into being as an
institutional form in the first place? How is the institutionality and
authoritativeness of a laboratory-based science of the everyday and everywhere
-- a science of impurity -- established, or not, in La Paz? This research
addresses these fundamental questions by supplementing STS studies with a
linguistic anthropological analysis of registers (different ways of saying the
same thing associated by speakers with socially-recognizable practices and their
practitioners). Examining the circulation of knowledge in the framework of
registers provides a means for modeling how people use verbal and textual
representations to locate themselves in relation to the authority and
institutionality of laboratory science, and how this self-positioning is
transformative of the very same institutionality and authority. La Paz, a city
of linguistic, ethnic, and demographic differences, is the setting for such
inquiry, as the very existence and authority of laboratory science is rendered
problematic. In the last 10 years, economic reforms in La Paz have led to the
creation of a hotly contested market for scientifically managed water and
wastewater services. Through an examination of speaker's usage and awareness of
differentiable register phenomena used for reckoning waste/water (tractable
formally as distinct linguistic repertoires involving measure-phrases and
specialized lexemes), the objective of this research is to describe how the
laboratory science is carved out (or not) as the authoritative center of a
regime of circulating knowledge about waste/water. NSF is supporting data
collection using ethnographic and linguistic methods in two research sites: at a
private waste/water company in La Paz; and in an indigenous Aymara neighborhood.
This research intends to make a practical contribution to debates about the
growing worldwide waste-crisis, offering a cross-cultural perspective which
includes documentation of an underrepresented people's lived-experience of an
endemic waste-problem. It will also contribute to building an interdisciplinary
bridge between STS and linguistic anthropology. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;