* 0240260
* Recreating the Rhone: Nature, Technology, and the State in France Since 1945
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Sara Pritchard, University of Pennsylvania
* Fixed Price Award
* Keith R. Benson
* 05/31/2004
* USD 16,682.00

While recent approaches within the history of technology have largely focused on
technological artifacts and systems as cultural or political objects, this
project examines the history of post-World War II industrialization with
particular attention to how these objects manifest evolving relationships
between humans, nature, and technology. In particular, it traces the development
of France's Rhone River since 1945 by examining the history of river management
technologies. Of central interest is how these technologies embodied,
constituted, and prescribed shifting interactions between users of the Rhone,
different uses, and the river itself. Such a historical ecological view of
technology allows scholars to explore the recent history of industrialization
not only in terms of technical change or shifts in the organization of work and
production, but also as a fundamental transformation in the way modern societies
interact with the natural environment. Complementing earlier approaches in
science and technology studies that have centered on the idea of systems or
networks, this project focuses on the interrelated processes of technological
development, environmental management, and state building in France since World
War II. Analyzing the technological artifacts built on the Rhone since 1945
illuminates larger transitions within not only river management technologies,
but also the relationship between humans, nature, technology, and the state in
contemporary France. Over the second half of the twentieth century, the Rhone
was a literal site for debates between French engineers, bureaucrats, writers,
and citizens over the proper balance of industry and agriculture; hydroelectric
and nuclear energy; urban and rural spaces; development and environmental
preservation; and if the Rhone should serve regional, national, or international
interests. These groups also considered the proper role of the state in pursuing
these different, and often competing, objectives. At its core, then, the
development of the Rhone manifests conflicts over the ideal environmental and
technological basis of the nation and national identity. This case study will,
therefore, be of interest to historians of technology, scholars in technology
studies, and environmental historians while its methodological and theoretical
contributions also speak to the broader community of science and technology
studies. This proposal will permit travel to France for two months during the
summer of 2003 to conduct essential new research in relevant archival
collections in France, including Paris, Lyon, and Nimes as well as municipal and
departmental archives in southeastern France. Documents in these collections
will help to analyze and develop such themes as shifting political, economic,
and institutional objectives for the Rhone; technical designs of specific
projects; conflicts between different groups within the state, between state
agencies and users, and among users; and responses by local communities to these
projects. This new research will lead to a book, published articles, conference
presentations, and invited talks.