* 0240409
* Activation of Oxygen: Mechanistic Aspects of Electron Transfer and Atom Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Andreja Bakac, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/28/2007
* USD 375,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by James Espenson and Andreja Bakac, Department of Chemistry,
Iowa State University. The project will explore the chemistry of transient and
metastable oxyl radicals, their interactions with transition metal complexes and
their role in organic oxidation reactions. More specifically, the phthalimide-N-
oxyl radical, PINO*, will be examined as a potential promoter in industially
important reactions such as the oxidation of para-xylene and other aromatic
compounds. PINO* could potentially replace the corrosive promoter bromide
currently in use. Detailed mechanistic studies of these complicated oxidation
reactions, including hydrogen atom abstractions and electron transfers, will
help us better understand these fundamental processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work has potential implications for the commodity and fine chemicals industries.
The research will also include studies of a group of inorganic compounds that,
in the process of oxygen activation, exhibit chemical transformations typically
observed only in complicated enzymatic systems. Oxidation and free radical
chemistry are involved in oxidative stress, aging, heart disease, cancer and
inflammatory illnesses, so a better understanding of these very reactive species
will benefit medicinal chemistry and toxicology. Chemists trained in free
radical chemistry can contribute to both the chemical industry and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;