* 0240009
* Redox-dependent Regulation of the Structure and Function of HSF1 in Mammalian Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Alice Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 02/29/2008
* USD 382,438.00

It is well known that the structure and function of proteins and consequently
the activity of cells can be regulated by reversible and covalent modification
of specific amino acid residues in proteins, and that post-translational
modification reactions, such as phosphorylation, provide important biological
switches in cells. The goal of Dr. Liu's research project is to establish the
posttranslational, oxidation- and reduction- (redox) dependent thiol-disulfide
exchange of cysteine-SH as a cellular mechanism regulating the structure and
function of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), an important and ubiquitous
transcription factor that responds to stress. Specifically, Dr. Liu and her
research team will evaluate if oxidation and covalent crosslinking of cysteines
may: (a) provide a mechanism to restrain the inadvertent activation of HSF1 in
cells grown under a normal, unstressed condition, or (b) represent a
pathophysiological manifestation of oxidative stress that limits the activation
of HSF1 and induction of the cellular stress response as Dr. Liu and her
colleagues have previously observed in a number of aging cells, tissues, organs,
and animals. The successful completion of this research will provide useful
information on the relationship of redox-dependent protein modification,
transcription factor regulation, and the molecular basis of transcription factor
dysfunction under a variety of physiological and pathophysiological conditions.
It is anticipated that this research will contribute to the emerging concept
that redox-dependent modification of proteins can provide a versatile epigenetic
mechanism by which cells regulate important biological processes. The active
participation and involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in this
research will help to accomplish an important goal of research universities,
namely the teaching and training of future research scientists.