* 0240194
* Infrared Spectroscopy of High-Tc Superconductors in High Magnetic Field
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Dimitri Basov, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2007
* USD 315,000.00

This individual investigator project is focused on investigations of the
electrodynamics of high-Tc superconductors in high magnetic fields using
infrared (IR) spectroscopy. Through the use of systematic spectroscopic
measurements, in a challenging parameter space involving high magnetic fields,
low temperature, IR frequencies, it is expected that some of the long-standing
issues in the area of high-Tc superconductivity will be resolved. Proposed
measurements will focus on the examination of the vortex state in high-Tc
materials, emergence of the electronic transport across the boundary of the
insulator-superconductor transition as well as on the investigations of the
normal state response in the regime where superconductivity is suppressed by
high magnetic field. The integration of research and education within a
challenging experimental project will aid the preparation of highly skilled
personnel with expertise in the area at the merger of condensed matter physics,
optics and materials science. Training of graduates will tremendously benefit
from the use of national facilities at the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin of high-Tc superconductivity in the
copper oxides is one of the central unsolved problems in contemporary physics.
The search for the high-Tc mechanism involves a large fraction of the condensed
matter community and has already led to entirely new concepts in condensed
matter science. New initiatives described in this proposal will significantly
advance our present understanding of the high-Tc phenomenon by way of addressing
critically important questions. Specifically, the proposed program is aimed at
detailed investigations of the electrodynamics of high-Tc superconductors in the
previously unexplored parameter space involving high magnetic fields, low
temperatures and infrared frequency range. The research activities will
naturally merge the boundaries of condensed matter physics, optics and material
science. This particular combination has been identified as "critical enabler"
of future technology that "promises to have a pervasive impact on life in the
21st century" in a recent report of the National Research Council. This
challenging research program will serve as a unique training ground for graduate
students. NSF funding will broaden participation of groups currently
underrepresented in graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;