* 0240151
* Degeneration, Regeneration and the Inheritance of Acquired Characteristics:  The Steinach-Kammerer Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Cheryl Logan, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2006
* USD 76,750.00

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the cultures of Europe and
America eagerly and often used the biological world as a metaphor for explaining
the social and psychological. Among the most prominent of the biological
concepts used to structure society was the concept of degeneration. Degeneration
was believed to be a fundamental physiological process that produced the gradual
decay of life, a process by which inherently progressivist processes such as
evolution, growth and development, could be reversed by an equally powerful and
immanent process of decay. Conceived in terms of heredity and physiology, the
concept dominated society during an unprecedented period of growth in biology,
and by the1890s, the full authority of the science of degeneration had been
extended from biology to people. Many-- homosexuals, the mentally retarded and
mentally ill, non-European indigenous cultures, alcoholics, the poor, women-were
considered degenerate. The same period also saw much scientific analysis of
regeneration, degeneration's less well-known biological opposite. But there were
few social 'regenerates': the concept of regeneration rarely saw social
application. Analyses of the socially degenerate were linked to the study of
heredity. Social scientists and policy makers believed that degenerate
individuals displayed damaged and progressively deteriorating heredity. And
their damaged heredity, it was thought, could contaminate their children and,
indeed, the entire human species. This assumption was widely associated with
belief in the inheritance of acquired characteristics, a concept hotly debated
in biology from 1880-1930. Within the sciences of heredity, however, debates on
the inheritance of acquired characteristics and the process of degeneration were
matched by debates on the process of regeneration. But most physicians,
psychiatrists and social thinkers ignored regeneration in their efforts to save
humankind. The scientists working from 1904-1925 at the Institute for
Experimental Biology in Vienna were an exception. The proposed project will
explore the social, political and intellectual influences that led to their
emphasis on regeneration and its application to society. The proposal focuses on
the collaboration between Paul Kammerer and Eugen Steinach. Their research dealt
with sexuality, a traditional bastion of the concept of degeneration. The
emphasis will be that the rejection of nationalism, class, and race theory
associated with Kammerer's socialist and communist views led to an equally
strong emphasis on regeneration produced by the inheritance of acquired
characteristics. He viewed use inheritance as a process that could counter the
negative effects of degeneration and, through regeneration, restore and improve
society. Kammerer and Steinach's research on climate and masculinity was an
empirical attempt to enact this restoration. Few issues in science have seen
more debate among both experts and policy makers than the nature-nurture issue.
Growth in contemporary knowledge of genetics and the publication of the genome
project have once again placed these issues in the forefront, as several
approaches now challenge the relationship between genotype and phenotype implied
in Crick's central dogma. The word is no longer used, but, as philosopher Ian
Hacking notes, the degeneracy research program is still in evidence: "Biological
stigmata of degeneracy are back, not as Lombrosian physiognomy, but as serotonin
depletion or genetic markers. . . . Only in one respect is . . . the degeneracy
program significantly different from earlier days. It comes from the cachet of
genes" (2001, p. 152). Complicated scientific and ethical issues are raised by
the application of biology to important human problems. One of the most
informative ways to address them is through the historical perspective offered
by thinkers who illustrate how social influences have altered the solution of
similar problems in the past.