* 0240482
* Dissertation Research:  Taming the Hypervariable Witness: The Introduction, Contestation, and Regulation of Forensic DNA Evidence in the American Legal System
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* John Beatty, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2004
* USD 5,062.00

This dissertation grant supports research to examine the introduction,
contestation, and regulation of forensic DNA analysis within the context of law
enforcement institutions, biotechnology companies, and the American legal
system. The primary objective of this research is to construct a historical
narrative that answers questions about how the technique evolved from an
academic invention in late 1984 to a highly commercialized tool of forensic
science by early 1995. The investigator will focus on the disputes and
negotiations among biotechnology firms, forensic scientists, law enforcement
agencies, lawyers, academic scientists, and legislators over the proper means to
ensure the quality, reliability and admissibility of DNA evidence in an
adversarial legal setting. The intellectual merit of this project is that it
critiques the most prevalent argument about the relationship between science and
law: the notion that there is an inevitable culture clash when these two
powerful institutions interact. In opposition to this theory, the investigator
will argue that the history of DNA typing represents the hybridization of
knowledge and practice from various legal sources, corporate culture, and a
multiplicity of scientific disciplines. Thus, DNA &lt;br/&gt;typing was not
simply a product of science being introduced into the legal system; instead, it
was co-produced by actors in multiple disciplines over the course of a decade.
The investigator has both the opportunity and challenge to supplement the
published and archival record with oral history interviews. To this end, about
40 interviews have already been conducted with a diverse array of historical
actors. In addition, the investigator has collected patents, court transcripts,
technical reports, protocols and instruction manuals from law enforcement
agencies and biotechnology companies, news articles, conference proceedings, as
well as transcripts of testimony before legislative bodies and policy
committees. The NSF dissertation improvement grant will allow the investigator
to complete this research by funding trips to California, New York, and
Washington, DC to interview historical actors and to examine their private
materials. It will also allow him to make use of the DNA Fingerprinting Archive
at Cornell University's Kroch Library, which was collected with the support of
the NSF. The broader social impact of this project is that it will provide much-
needed insight into how science and law interact with one another. This
knowledge will be useful in training judges and lawyers who must deal with
scientific and technical issues, as well as scientists who increasingly find
themselves involved in legal disputes. The results of this project will be
disseminated not only through the investigator's dissertation and articles in
scholarly journals, but also through articles in law reviews and scientific
journals like Genetics and Journal of Forensic Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;