* 0240944
* SGER:  Operational and Organizational Change with Applications to Stopping Terrorism
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Willard Zangwill, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 10/31/2004
* USD 54,316.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will apply the concepts of
process analysis, which provides a systematic and well-known means to improve
the manufacturing and systems in organizations, to the challenge of obtaining
intelligence information for stopping terrorism. To complete almost any activity
requires a series of steps from beginning to end, and process analysis considers
the totality of those steps including their individual performance and how they
interact. In manufacturing applications, for example, the process starts with
raw material and continues through various specific steps until the product is
made. Process analysis enables one to identify bottlenecks, delays, where
defects are created and so on. Most importantly, it can identify the critical
few leverage points where small changes can quickly produce big improvements.
Indeed, that is the hallmark of good process analysis, achieving a significant
improvement fast, in just a few months. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intelligence
cycle has many powerful similarities to the manufacturing process, with the
product being an excellent report instead of a quality item. The raw material is
the raw data obtained from human intelligence, signal intelligence, satellites
and so on. Clearly, if the raw material is poor, so will be the intelligence
report. After collection the information must be filtered since much of it is
noise, just a raw material must often be processed into usable form. Then the
analyst does the analytical work by putting the components together into a
coherent whole, just as modern manufacturing might create an advanced
specialized semi-conductor. Given the similarities and abundance of knowledge
about improving processes, this research hopes to identify a few critical
leverage points in the production of intelligence. These leverage points then
could be improved quickly thereby producing an improvement in the quality and
excellence of intelligence against terrorism.