* 0240310
* Temporal Changes in the Spatial Variablility of Snow Stability
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Katherine Hansen, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2007
* USD 160,293.00

Snow avalanches are a significant hazard in the mountainous environments of the
western United States and in alpine regions around the world. Knowledge of
spatial variations in snow stability and snowpack properties is critical for
understanding and predicting snow avalanches. Although previous research has
investigated spatial variability on individual slopes, most studies have simply
looked at a single snapshot in time of an extremely dynamic system. This project
attempts to fill this gap in fundamental knowledge by measuring and analyzing
how the spatial variability of snowpack properties and snow stability vary
through time. Preliminary work on this topic suggests that snow stability on a
given slope may diverge or become more spatially variable over time as the
snowpack stabilizes in the absence of external influences. If a slope is
perturbed to the edge of instability, however, the snow stability may converge
or become more spatially uniform. This study will utilize a new snow stability
test and a sensitive instrument co-developed by the Swiss Federal Institute for
Snow and Avalanche Research and the U.S. Army Cold Regions Engineering
Laboratory to measure temporal changes in snow stability. Adjacent 900-square
meter plots will be sampled through time at variety of field sites. Data
analyses will focus on how well snow stability measured in snowpits represents
the mean of their respective plot and how spatial patterns of weak layer
thickness, strength, and microstructure change through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address a pressing
question for snow avalanche research and prediction, and it will offer new and
important information for scientists about how the snowpack evolves and how
avalanches release. On a practical level, the work will provide critically
relevant insights for avalanche professionals working to protect life and
property. The results of this research will enhance techniques for avalanche
forecasting. The results also will improve avalanche mitigation efforts that
protect ski areas and highway corridors. Finally, this work will benefit society
by providing important new information for all people playing in, working in,
living in, and traveling through mountain environments. &lt;br/&gt;