* 0240197
* Intermolecular and Intramolecular Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Stephen Nelsen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2006
* USD 405,000.00

With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports the on- going work of Professor Stephen Nelsen in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin- Madison. This work by Professor Nelsen
outlines several mechanistic studies of electron transfer in various bridged
donor-acceptor compounds, primarily bis-hydrazines. Professor Nelsen seeks to
continue his work on the mechanistic and energetic aspects of intramolecular
electronic transfer using a synthetic, measurement, and modeling approach to
focus on six well-defined questions. In this proposal he has identified the most
important technical and conceptual problems in the electron transfer field, and
success with this proposal will go a long way toward solving these problems.
Investigation of chemical reactivity in physical organic chemistry has long been
the realm of electron pair transfer reactions. However, single electron transfer
has attracted increasing attention where the interest has been concerned with
outer- sphere reactions and with more complex processes where electron transfer
is coupled with bond breaking or bond formation. There is much to be discovered
in this field in terms of mechanisms and reactivity and Professor Nelson's work
will go a long way toward making these discoveries. Electron transfer reactions
are very important in both chemistry and biology, and are found, for example, in
photosynthesis and respiration, two very important life processes. In general,
science as a whole and society will naturally benefit from the training that
Professor Nelsen will provide younger scientists in this important area of
chemical research.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry supports the research activities of Professor Stephen
Nelsen in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin- Madison.
Professor Nelsen continues to be a world leader in understanding electron
transfer reactions. In addition to answering some fundamental questions in
physical organic chemistry, post-doctoral and graduate students will receive
unique training in synthesis, measurement, and modeling of important chemical
reactions.