* 0240646
* Biology--A Capstone Science Course:  Proposal for a Conference
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* April Gardner, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2004
* USD 60,000.00

A conference is planned to investigate the opportunities and difficulties that
exist in changing the typical high school science course sequence from Biology -
Chemistry - Physics to Physics - Chemistry - Biology. In 1998, Dr. Leon Lederman
developed a project called "American Renaissance in Science&lt;br/&gt;Education
(ARISE)" in which he proposed that the traditional sequence of science courses
in high school was an outdated idea that no longer fits our modern understanding
of these disciplines. Project ARISE advocates a revised physics-chemistry-
biology science sequence as one that better accommodates the dramatic advances
that have occurred in science over the past century. The physics community has
best addressed this shift in sequence by developing curriculum materials
specifically for the ninth grade science student, but no one has yet addressed
the changes necessary for a biology course that follows physics and chemistry.
As increasing numbers of school systems adopt the physics-chemistry-biology
sequence, they must consider the appropriate content and approach for the
biology capstone course. The conference will bring together the voices of those
teachers, scientists, and science educators most familiar and experienced with
the challenges and opportunities of the revised science curriculum sequence;
synthesize the implications for a biology course within this new sequence;
specify the goals for a biology capstone course designed to follow physics and
chemistry instruction; and develop a set of recommendations for those
individuals and institutions who implement the revised science sequence, for
curriculum developers who would create the biology capstone course, and for
professional development providers who would work with biology capstone
teachers. The recommendations developed at the conference will inform not only
curriculum developers and teachers of a capstone biology course, but also those
who provide professional development for teachers and science education
researchers seeking to evaluate the impact of the physics-chemistry-biology
sequence on the scientific literacy of high school students.&lt;br/&gt;