* 0240560
* Dissertation Research: Exploring Cultures within University-Industry Partnerships: A Case Study of the California Institutes for Science and Innovation
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Alexander Astin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

While related literature highlights several issues pertaining to university-
industry partnerships, the possible consequences of bringing together
individuals from academic and corporate cultures to implement long-term research
programs are poorly understood. Moreover, it is unclear how academic and
corporate partnerships ultimately affect the process of scientific research.
Accordingly, the objective of this dissertation improvement grant will be to
examine how collaboration between individuals within the California Institutes
for Science and Innovation shapes organizational culture and scientific
research. The study will employ a multi-site case study approach, which will
include in-depth interviews, participant observation, and open-ended surveys
with both faculty members and corporate professionals at three of the
institutes. An initial pilot study at the fourth institute will provide
guidelines for developing the research protocol and interpreting the findings.
Finally, document analysis of printed and audio-visual materials from each of
the four the institutes will be conducted to highlight the history, structure,
and development of the institutes. Given that little is known about these
partnerships, this study will provide a better understanding of how such
collaborations work, how organizational culture develops within the institutes,
and how these partnerships affect scientific innovation. Understanding how
academic and corporate cultures collaborate in joint ventures has the potential
to impact practice, policy, and theory. On a practical level, this study can
inform the institutes and others who are interested in forming similar
partnerships as they set priorities and make organizational decisions. In
addition, since the investment in these institutes is substantial and designed
to be a long-term commitment to these partnerships, the findings from this study
can lay the groundwork for future research on the California Institutes for
Science and Innovation in later stages of development. On a policy level, this
study will hopefully contribute to an understanding of how these institutes are
working to fulfill the needs of the state. From a theoretical perspective, this
study will contribute to the understanding of scientific cultures and the
blending of cultures in the implementation of a joint venture.