* 0240056
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge Systems and Social Networks: The Delaware Nation and Its Neighbors
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Don Wyckoff, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2005
* USD 8,036.00

0240056&lt;br/&gt;Jackson / Fair&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research project of
a cultural anthropologist investigates the different types of knowledge,
traditional and non-traditional, that exist within an American Indian community
in Anadarko, Oklahoma. This community forms a social network containing members
of the Delaware Nation and expands to include members of the Caddo and Wichita
tribes. The primary hypothesis is that people who are more central within the
community have a higher level of traditional knowledge. However, these same
individuals may not always have less familiarity with non-traditional knowledge
systems, (such as science or non-Native ways of speaking). For example,
traditional tribal knowledge and science might exist as complementary ways of
knowing. In order to test these statements, the researcher, will map out the
social network of the Delaware, Caddo, and Wichita community. Next, the
traditional and non-traditional knowledge levels of individuals will be assessed
using quantitative and qualitative measures. Correlating individuals' position
in the social network with their levels of traditional and non-traditional
knowledge will demonstrate where knowledge in located in the social network. The
results of this project will clarify several important issues in the
anthropological study of knowledge and social systems. First, the study
addresses the manner in which communities maintain and preserve traditions over
time and within regional social networks. Second, the project investigates the
impact of historical circumstances on the creation and re-creation of
traditions. Finally, it will revise and refine existing models of cultural
change in American Indian communities. Current models, developed in the 1950s
and 1960s, generally posit the deterioration of tribal and community specific
traditions in the face of pan-tribalism and assimilation. Newer research
suggests that these models are grossly inadequate. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project include a newer, more sophisticated understanding of
contemporary American Indian social and cultural life. The new knowledge created
by this project will help undermine popular stereotypes about Native American
traditionalism and its presumed opposition to Western knowledge. Furthermore,
the results of this project will assist tribal governments in more efficiently
allocating funding and resources for cultural preservation programs. In
addition, the project contributes to the training of a young social scientist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;