* 0240380
* The Stability of Colloidal Metallic Nanoparticles in Reactive Chemical Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2009
* USD 390,000.00

Abstract CHE-0240380 El-Sayed/Georgia Tech

The synthesis and characterization of transition metal nano-particles is the
focus of this research project, being carried out at the Georgia Institute of
Technology by co-P.I.'s El-Sayed and Wang and their coworkers. With the support
of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, the structure, formation
mechanism, and thermal and photothermal stability of tranisition metal
nanocrystals are being examined. Methods for controlling and affecting the
growth morphology of these nanocrystals are examined using electron microscopy
and spectroscopic probes. The dependence of the nanoparticle stability on the
type of metal, the shape of the particle, the type of the capping ligand, and
the nature of the chemical environment is examined. The results of these studies
will be useful in evaluating nanoparticle materials for use in heterogeneous
catalysis applications.

Metal nanoparticles show great promise for applications in heterogeneous
catalysis. The rational understanding of the growth, the control of size and
shape, and understanding the stability of these materials is the focus of this
research project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program.
Professors El-Sayed and Wang and their coworkers at Georgia Tech are combining
synthesis, spectroscopic characterization, and electron microscopic
characterization of these important materials to gain this understanding.