* 0240956
* A Facility for Dynamic-Response Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Raymond Schmitt, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2005
* USD 221,366.00

0240956 Schmitt&lt;br/&gt;A large tank capable of long-term maintenance of a
sharp temperature-salinity interface has been developed and applied to
measurements of the dynamical response of oceanographic sensors. Matching the
dynamic response of conductivity and temperature sensors has been a long-
standing problem in the computation of salinity, and this tank offers a new
approach to its solution. This project will improve the existing tank, evaluate
a number of available CTDs., and provide improved algorithms for the estimation
of salinity. The new tank uses a two-layer salt-stratified system 4.7 m deep
that is heated from below and cooled from above. This generates two convectively
mixed layers with a thin double-diffusive interface separating them. A
temperature jump of 5-10 degrees C can be maintained over 1-2 cm (a vertical
temperature gradient of order 103 degrees C/m) for ~2 weeks. A variable speed
lowering system allows testing of the dynamic response of conductivity and
temperature sensors in full-size oceanographic instruments. An acoustic echo
sounder and an optical shadowgraph system provide non-disruptive monitoring of
the interface and layer microstructure. Linear and nonlinear fitting routines
have been developed to determine thermometer response times that are a strong
function of the speed. A method for the optimal design of lag-correction
filters, based on an imposed linearity of the conductivity-temperature
relationship across the interface, has been developed to accurately match
temperature and conductivity sensors for the computation of salinity. Sensor
response characterization is especially important for autonomous instruments
where data processing and compression must be performed in-situ, but is also
helpful in the development of new sensors and in assuring accurate salinity
records from traditional wire-lowered and towed systems. This project will
implement a number of improvements to the tank, evaluate several existing CTDs,
suggest improved algorithms for the computation of salinity and establish the
tank as a dynamic response facility for use of the oceanographic community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work stems in part from its
contributions to the pressing societal need for improved ocean observations for
climate change research. Also, the dynamic response facility will be a
community-wide resource for improving the state-of-the art in salinity
observations for both the profit and non-profit sectors. Finally, it will
continue to utilize and train graduate and undergraduate students in its
operations. &lt;br/&gt;