* 0240097
* Ergodic Properties of Nonuniformly Hyperbolic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Huyi Hu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 89,100.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0202999&lt;br/&gt;PI: Huyi Hu
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is devoted to
the study of ergodic properties of&lt;br/&gt;nonuniformly hyperbolic systems. We
focus on almost&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic systems and some related systems. An smooth
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;system is almost hyperbolic if it is hyperbolic everywhere
except&lt;br/&gt;at a finite set of points. Such systems may have quite
different&lt;br/&gt;ergodic behaviors from uniformly hyperbolic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;In this project we will study existence of equilibrium
states,&lt;br/&gt;including SRB measures and absolutely continuous
invariant&lt;br/&gt;measures in multidimensional spaces; rates of convergence to
the&lt;br/&gt;equilibrium states for both finite and infinite measure
cases,&lt;br/&gt;and some related topics such as rates of decay of correlations
of&lt;br/&gt;the systems and the central limit theorem; some other
ergodic&lt;br/&gt;properties of the systems such as stochastic stability,
Gibbs&lt;br/&gt;properties, topological conjugation. We are also interested
in&lt;br/&gt;using these or similar systems to construct varies examples
of&lt;br/&gt;systems that have given properties, for instance,
diffeomorphisms&lt;br/&gt;or flows on any manifolds that preserve the
Riemannian&lt;br/&gt;volume, have nonzero Lyapunov exponents almost everywhere,
and&lt;br/&gt;have countably many ergodic
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ergodic theory concerns the
statistic behavior of systems.&lt;br/&gt;Ergodic properties of uniformly
hyperbolic systems were the main&lt;br/&gt;research subject in smooth dynamical
systems from 60's to 80's.&lt;br/&gt;The behaviors of such systems are regarded
as chaotic.&lt;br/&gt;Now nonuniformly hyperbolic systems become a main research
topic&lt;br/&gt;in the field. This project is devoted to the study of
ergodic&lt;br/&gt;properties of almost hyperbolic systems and some other
related&lt;br/&gt;systems. Almost hyperbolic systems are smooth dynamical
systems&lt;br/&gt;in which hyperbolic conditions are violated at only
finitely&lt;br/&gt;number of points. These systems lie on the boundary of the
set&lt;br/&gt;of uniformly hyperbolic systems, and are the simplest
but&lt;br/&gt;nontrivial nonuniformly hyperbolic systems. Earlier studies
on&lt;br/&gt;examples of such systems, such as systems on the intervals
and&lt;br/&gt;torus, show that some ergodic properties may change
dramatically.&lt;br/&gt;In this project we try to develop some theorems for
general&lt;br/&gt;almost hyperbolic systems rather than individual
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;