* 0240781
* Quantile Regression
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Roger Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 247,749.00

This project extends the domain of applicability of quantile regressions to
three important and fast growing areas of economic research---survival analysis,
models with endogeneity, and portfolio theory. Besides theoretical extensions,
the research project will also areas continue working on problems broadly
relating to quantile regression and its applications. This research project
relies on the penalty method. Quantile regression, as introduced in Koenker and
Bassett (1978), is gradually evolving into a comprehensive approach to the
statistical analysis of linear and nonlinear response models. It is capable of
greatly expanding the flexibility of both parametric and non-parametric
statistical methods. Research is proposed on a broad range of problems related
to quantile regression. Panel, or longitudinal, data analysis is still
predominately the province of Gaussian random effects models, however there is
often a strong motivation in applications for estimating conditional quantile
models. Exploiting the close relationship between random effects estimation and
penalty methods research is proposed on a L1 approach for quantile regression
random effects estimation.

Considerable progress has been made on inference in quantile regression over the
course of the PI's current (2000-02) grant. The objective of the 1999 proposal
was to extend the theoretical developments in Koenker and Machado (1999) for
inference based on the quantile regression, extending the results to composite
null hypotheses involving unknown nuisance parameters. Koenker and Xiao (2002)
describes a general approach to such problems based on an ingenious suggestion
by Khmaladze (1981). The classical Doob-Meyer decomposition is employed to
transform a parametric version of the quantile regression process, rendering it
asymptotically distribution free. In related work on survival analysis, Koenker
and Geling (2001) and Koenker and Bilias (2001) attention is focused on more
general hypotheses about covariate effects on the scale and tail behavior of the
response, motivated by the Lehmann (1974) quantile treatment effect. Related
software has been made available on the web.

Although there is already quite an extensive literature on quantile regression
methods for time-series, most of the attention has focused on iid error, pure
location shift model. In collaboration with Zhijie Xiao, work will be done on
more general specifications, focusing initially on a class of models that
exhibit some features of persistent "unit-root" behavior, while also exhibiting
a sporadic form of mean reversion. These models pose serious technical
challenges, but offer considerable potential for broadening the scope of applied
time series analysis. The results of this research could have enormous impact on
time series and panel data analyses.