* 0240810
* Mechanism Based Design of Novel Inhibitors of Dinuclear Hydrolases
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Richard Holz, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 12/31/2005
* USD 345,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry and the
Molecular Biochemistry programs supports research by Professor Richard B. Holz
at Utah State University to determine a detailed catalytic mechanism for the
leucine aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica (AAP) and the dapE-encoded
N-succinyl-L,L-diaminopimelic acid desuccinylase (DapE) from H. influenzae and
to design and syntheize potent inhibitors of DapE. . This research involves an
interdisciplinary approach that incorporates biochemical, spectroscopic, and
X-ray crystallographic methods and the synthesis of small molecule inhibitors of
DapE. The work addresses five key areas: (1) Which residues in the active site
of AAP play catalytically important roles? (2) The development of Laue X-ray
diffraction methods to study the catalytic mechanism of AAP. (3)
Characterization of how substrate- and transition-state analog inhibitors
interact with DapE. (4) Preparation of altered enzymes of proposed active site
residues in DapE. (5) The development of a detailed mechanism of action for AAP
and DapE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrolases that contain dinuclear metal centers
are central to numerous biological processes and, consequently, characterization
of their structure and function is a problem of outstanding importance. They
play important roles in tissue repair, protein maturation, hormone level
regulation, cell-cycle control, as well as cell wall synthesis. Several
dinuclear aminopeptidases have broad substrate specificities and are widely
distributed in both plant and animal tissues. Their biological and medicinal
significance is extensive due to their roles in the degradation of proteins and
biologically active peptides, including hormones. The importance of
understanding the reaction mechanism of leucine aminopeptidases is underscored
by the fact that leucine aminopeptidase activity has been observed on the
surface of tumor cells, and such activity is known to play key roles in
oncogenesis. In addition, the naturally occurring peptide analog inhibitor,
bestatin, significantly decreases HIV infection in males by inhibiting leucine
aminopeptidase activity. For DapE's, the emergence of several pathogenic
bacterial strains that are resistant to all currently available antibiotics
emphasize their importance, since both products of the mDAP/lysine biosynthetic
pathway, mDAP and lysine, are essential components of the peptidoglycan cell
wall for Gram-negative and most Gram-positive bacteria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims toward a detailed understanding of
hydrolytic reactions catalyzed by dinuclear metal centers, which may lead to the
development of new antibiotics and also supports the development of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;