* 0240286
* World Archaeological Congress 5 Participant Support Grant
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 29,499.00

In June of 2003 the World Archaeological Congress (WAC) will hold its first full
international Congress in North America in Washington D.C. WAC 5 will bring
together hundreds of scholars, Indigenous Peoples, and others genuinely
interested in the past to promote the exchange of the results of archaeological
research; professional training and public education for disadvantaged nations,
groups, Indigenous groups and First Nations peoples; and the conservation of
archaeological sites. The Congress is expected to attract about 1100 people who
will meet together for five days, attending approximately 800 presentations from
as many as 70 different countries. The National Science Foundation will support
attendance at the congress by 5 Third World scholars and Indigenous People. WAC
5 is being held in partnership with the Smithsonian Institution's National
Museum of Natural History, and National Museum of the American Indian and in
collaboration with the Getty Conservation Institute. Supporters of WAC 5
include: US National Park Service, Archeology and Ethnography Program, US Dept
of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Flinders University,
South Australia, American University, Library of Congress, Society for American
Archaeology, and the US Bureau of Land Management.

The Congress will focus on three major issues of international importance to
archaeology: 1. programmatic/policy issues concerning future directions in the
practice of global archaeology. 2. practical/ technical knowledge to increase
self-reliance and responsibility in protecting sites, artifacts and intellectual
property. 3. theoretical frontiers and research results with relevance across
national boundaries.

WAC 5 will contribute to advancing knowledge and understanding in archaeology
and it will have broader impacts on the world. WAC congresses have been unique
in their ability to bring together international researchers for the sharing of
research results, the forging of theoretical advances, and the development of
archaeological methods. They have facilitated international cooperation on
issues of heritage management, the conservation of archaeological sites, and on
relations between archaeologists and indigenous peoples. WAC 5 will continue
this tradition by bringing together archaeologists and Indigenous People from
around the world in a structured program to advance knowledge and understanding
in archaeology. The Congress will also include public programs, workshops on the
curation and conservation of archaeological materials, and symposiums on
heritage management designed to promote teaching, training, and learning and to
develop international infrastructure for networks and partnerships on these
themes. WAC 5 will help broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
archaeology. The governance structure of WAC gives Third World Scholars and
Indigenous people a prominent role in the organization. Third World Scholars and
Indigenous people have made up a third to a half of the participants in previous
congresses. WAC 5 can only achieve these goals with the participation of many
people from underdeveloped countries and Indigenous People who cannot afford the
high travel costs to Washington D.C.