* 0240378
* Proposal to Organize a Workshop on Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education, Sept. 11-12, 2002
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Thomas Manning, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 08/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

Attention to the development of interdisciplinary education programs that engage
the interest of students of all ages, but especially at the undergraduate level,
is critical to ensure leadership in the area of nanotechnology. The NSF Workshop
on Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education is jointly supported by the
Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate
of Mathematics and Physical Science, and the Directorate of Engineering. The
workshop focuses on new examples of introductory undergraduate courses that are
presented through the development of text, software, laboratory and
demonstration experiments, and web-based resources; the development and
dissemination of new teaching modules for nanoscale science and engineering that
can be used in existing undergraduate courses; and the incorporation of
undergraduate research opportunities based on nanoscale science and engineering
into the curriculum at any level, particularly during first and second year
studies. The workshop will involve participants from various scientific
disciplines involved in nanotechnology and from all levels of undergraduate
education to present and discuss ways to enhance the education and training of
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the workshop is driven
for the demand for nanotechnology workers in at least three industrial sectors.
First are the established industries that traditionally use micro- and
nanotechnology, such as microelectronics, information storage, optoelectronics,
and others. Second are the industries that have been newly created by this
technology, among which are the micro-electromechanical industries and the
emerging nanobiotechnology and nanoelectronics start-ups. The third driving
sector is composed of the major industries that have never used this technology
but are now actively embracing it. Among these are giants such as the
pharmaceutical and chemical industries. The emergence of nanobiotechnology, the
application of the tools and processes developed for micro and nanofabrication
to create devices to explore biology, may have a greater impact than has already
been realized in the electronics industry. In addition to these product-
producing industry sectors, there is a growing workforce demand coming from
micro- and nanotechnology research centers housed in industry, universities, and
national laboratories that are advancing understanding of this new field of
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will also discuss
the need for outreach activities to promote nanotechnology education and career
opportunities at the K-12 level, and to provide professional development
opportunities in nanotechnology for educators at all levels, including pre-
service teachers. Meeting the need for a skilled nanotechnology workforce will
thus require that larger numbers of K-12 students in general pursue science,
mathematics, engineering and technology education, especially students from
traditionally underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;