* 0240458
* Theory of Composite Fermions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Jainendra Jain, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

0240458&lt;br/&gt;Jain&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical
research and education involving the fractional quantum Hall effect. The PI will
continue his work on composite fermions, electrons bound to an even number of
quantized vortices. Most of the qualitative phenomenology of the fractional
quantum Hall effect can be understood by neglecting the residual interaction
between composite fermions. In recent years, improved experiments have revealed
subtle features that go beyond this model. The main goal of this research is to
study the effects of interaction between composite fermions to explain existing
experimental anomalies and make predictions for future experiments. The PI will
also use recently developed techniques to further refine the quantitative
accuracy of the theory, which should shed light on several interesting
questions, for example, the competition between the Wigner solid and the
fractional Hall liquid, and the physics of edge states. Broader impacts of this
work include graduate level training of the next generation of condensed matter
theorists in the areas of quantum mechanics, many body physics, nanophysics.
Students will also learn a wide range of modern numerical techniques, including
the Monte Carlo method and gain proficiency in the use of parallel computers.
Fundamental research on two-dimensional electron systems has helped drive
spectacular improvements in materials quality, especially in GaAs
semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;A system of many electrons may act in
surprising ways that cannot be extrapolated from the knowledge of the behavior
of a single particle. Its understanding requires fundamentally new concepts.
This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education on one such
system, electrons confined to two dimensions at the interface between two
semiconductors, cooled to low temperatures and exposed to a strong magnetic
field. Electrons in this system exhibit integral and fractional quantum Hall
effects, and at the same time provide realizations of subtle quantum mechanical
states including Wigner crystals, skyrmions, stripes, and Tomonaga-Luttinger
liquids. While progress has been made toward understanding various aspects of
the fractional Hall effect, this research focuses on new regimes where many new
quantum mechanical states are likely to be discovered and will focus on
advancing the theory of composite fermions, electrons bound to an even number of
quantized vortices, which currently captures the qualitative features of the
fractional quantum Hall regime. Anomalies observed in recent experiments provide
motivation for this work. &lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to the education of
the next generation of condensed matter theorists in the areas of quantum
mechanics, many body physics, and the physics of nanoscale systems. Students
will also learn appropriate related numerical techniques, including the Monte
Carlo method, and gain proficiency in the use of parallel computers. Fundamental
research on two dimensional electrons systems has helped drive spectacular
improvements in materials quality, especially in GaAs semiconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;