* 0240865
* Masticatory Biomechanics and the Primate Face
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Callum Ross, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2005
* USD 165,590.00

The research proposed here entails the initial phase of a comprehensive analysis
of primate masticatory biomechanics. The primary goals are (1) to determine how
patterns of facial bone strain are influenced by major biomechanical variables
(skeletal geometry, material properties, and external forces), and (2) to test
hypotheses purporting to explain the pattern of similarities and differences in
facial strain observed among living primates. Several types of primary data will
be collected that are fundamental to a complete understanding of primate feeding
mechanics. These data include (1) in vivo and in vitro bone strain, (2)
electromyography, physiological cross-sectional area and muscle fiber
orientation of the muscles of mastication, (3) three-dimensional information
about craniofacial geometry, and (4) material properties of craniofacial bones
and sutures. Functional hypotheses will be tested by integrating these data
using finite element analysis, a widely used engineering technique designed to
examine how objects of complex geometry deform under load.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial phase of this research has two components. The
first component will entail the modification of a finite element model of the
craniofacial skeleton of Macaca to incorporate new data (muscle and bone
properties, EMG, and in vitro and in vivo bone strain) to develop a model
approach to the study of primate craniofacial structure and function. This phase
will enable the researchers to demonstrate the viability of the proposed
methods, their ability to integrate vast amounts of diverse types of data, and
the significance of the various types of data for understanding adaptions
related to the functional morphology of the craniofacial apparatus. The second
component will include preliminary analysis of the significance of structural
and functional differences between anthropoids and strepsirrhines through
initial studies of Eulemur fulvus and Cebus capucinus. Following analysis of the
results of this initial project, the investigators will apply for funds to
expand the sample sizes and/or the taxonomic scope of the study, as indicated by
our findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a broad social
impact. It will: (a) provide the broadest examination yet of facial
biomechanics; such basic science research will find applications in clinical
sciences related to the craniofacial development, growth, pathology, and trauma,
(b) using FE models, limit the need for, or at least increase the analytical
power of, future experimental studies requiring the use of live animals, (c)
demonstrate the inherent interdisciplinarity of physical anthropology, (d)
provide an example of how complex systems can be analyzed using a combination of
empirical data and computational modeling, (e) strengthen collaborations between
anthropologists in five universities, and (f) provide funding to graduate
students at three universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;