* 0240909
* The ORION Center for Advanced Accelerator and Beam Physics Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Chan Joshi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal is one of two linked proposals from a collaboration of Stanford,
UCLA, USC, and SLAC to fund a Center, called the ORION Center, devoted to
advanced accelerator and beam physics research. Together they include performing
a wide range of pioneering experiments, building a shared, user-oriented
facility, and developing and using supercomputing expertise and resources that
are equivalent to experimental facilities. The physics will be diverse,
including high energy-density plasma physics, beam physics of ultra-short pulse
electron sources, direct laser acceleration, x-ray generation via beam-plasma
interactions, and simulation and visualization integrated with
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
foundation of the ORION Center will be specialized accelerators and
infrastructure at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) that will be
available to the Center. Research will begin with experiments at the Final Focus
Test Beam (FFTB), which is an extensively instrumented beamline at the end of
the SLAC main linac that can deliver 30 GeV electron and positron beams. It is
an exceptional facility for experiments in non-linear positron/matter and
electron/matter interactions. Understanding these interactions is crucial for
plasma based high-energy colliders, and these experiments are an integral part
of the ORION Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the longer term, experiments will
be concentrated at the ORION Research Facility, which will be based on the Next
Linear Collider Test Accelerator (NLCTA), an operating linac at SLAC capable of
providing beams from 50 to 350 MeV. The ORION Facility will be user-oriented and
open to experimenters studying all aspects of advanced accelerator science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
accelerator research is attractive to young scientists because of the
combination of forefront experimental, theoretical and computer-based research,
state-of-the-art technologies, many opportunities for creativity, and the
potential contributions to particle physics. For similar reasons, undergraduate
and graduate research and education programs have proven quite attractive. The
groups involved with this proposal have traditions of high-quality education as
integral parts of their activities. The education outreach program will go
beyond these traditional educational activities through partnerships with
interested, local community colleges that involve their faculty and students and
with a website describing ORION research projects.