* 0240174
* Collaborative Research:    Investigation of Paleoenvironment, Geomorphic Processes, and Carbon Stocks of Drained Thaw-Lake Basins, Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Kenneth Hinkel, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 210,837.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Universities
of Wisconsin-Madison and Cincinnati. About 20% of the Arctic Coastal Plain is
covered by thaw lakes developed over ice- rich permafrost and a larger
proportion of this landscape is also scarred by drained thaw-lake basins, which
become sites for the accumulation of organic carbon as peat deposits. The
Principal Investigators will study of the origin of thaw-lake basins and
associated geomorphological, biological, and pedological processes, building on
work done on the Barrow Peninsula during 2000-2002. High-resolution
multispectral satellite data will quantify the size frequency distribution and
derive morphometric characteristics for lakes and drained thaw-lake basins
across the Coastal Plain. In addition, drained lake basins will be selected for
intensive ground-based analysis between Barrow and Atqasuk. The PIs will use the
vegetation to select an equal number of young, medium, old and ancient drained
thaw-lake basins. Ground-penetrating radar and extensive winter soil coring will
be used to map unconformities between underlying lake sediments and the post-
drainage organic deposit. Combined with satellite imagery to determine the areal
dimensions, the volume of organics within the 40 basins will be estimated to
determine the amount of soil carbon stored in the organic layer and upper
lacustrine deposits. These results will estimate the amount of carbon
sequestered in drained basins. Radiometric dating of the in situ peat above the
clastic lake basin sediments will estimate of the date of lake drainage and
basin inception. There is evidence to suggest that these events may be related
to climatic change, while other lakes have drained in response to coastal
erosion. The research will use paleoecological indicators to reconstruct the
spatial and temporal response of vegetation and soil to climate on the Coastal
Plain during the Holocene. High-frequency core dating will be used to derive
carbon accumulation rates and organic soil chemistry and state of decomposition
to determine whether carbon accumulation rates respond to regional changes in
climate or if they are influenced to a greater degree by local rates of plant
succession. Extensive spatial and temporal analysis of thaw-lake basins will 1)
add to our understanding of the basic processes responsible for these important
elements of the northern Alaskan landscape, 2) provide new information on
landscape-scale response to climate change, and 3) help develop and validate
causative models of environmental change and carbon sequestering.

Broader impacts include 1) accessing traditional knowledge of local elders in
Barrow, who have primary and secondary information on recent lake drainage and
flooding events; 2) enhancing education of students at the Barrow High School
through the recently established NASA-funded Alaskan Native Remote Sensing
Education Project; 3) strengthening links with other U.S. agencies; and 4)
continuing to provide scientific training to undergraduate students through
several NSF programs. All satellite imagery, core stratigraphy, Global
Positioning System transects, and pollen/microfossil data will be made publicly
available through web sites, archives at the National Snow and Ice Data Center,
and the Paleoenvironmental Arctic Sciences web site.