* 0240020
* SGER:  Miniature Temperature Sensors for Harsh Environments and Studying Energy Transport at Microscales
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Thomas Mackin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 06/30/2004
* USD 53,382.00

This research advances the capabilities for performing thermal measurements at
small scales, which in turn, facilitates the design, development, and production
of devices and systems for commercial and government applications based on
micro- and nanotechnologies. Micro- and nanosystems are enabling innumerable
exciting and beneficial applications for society; however, many challenges are
created by miniaturization including thermal measurement at small scales, below
100 microns. The development of alternative and easy to use thermal metrology
methods is necessary for the design, development, and optimization of
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS).
The temperature sensors are based on the thermomechanical response of a
structure when heated so that it thermal expands differently than the underlying
substrate. Since only optical access is needed to make the measurement, this
temperature-sensing scheme can be used in harsh environments, e.g. high
temperatures, where electrical signals can no longer be obtained. Additionally,
these microsensors will be used to study fundamental issues of microscale energy
transport such as the amount of convection and radiation at small scales. This
research program will train students in fabrication and characterization skills
needed in micro- and nanotechnology industries, and the results will be broadly
disseminated to the scientific community and public. The award is funded by the
Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division.

