* 0240807
* Dissertation Research: Envisioning a Technological State:  Reactor Design Choices and Political Legitimacy in the Soviet Union and Russia
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,430.00

This project supports dissertation research to investigate the interweaving of
technology and politics in the early stages of the Soviet civilian nuclear
program. It will analyze the technological, social, economic and political
factors that influenced the choice of particular reactor types, and show how
these design choices set the parameters for further technological developments.
First, it will explore the history of the two major Soviet reactor types and
attempt to unpack the technological and political discussions surrounding the
decision to adopt these types as standard reactors for the Soviet civilian
nuclear industry. It will then identify these reactors' "techno politics," i.e.,
how reactor designers, engineers, and nuclear power plant operators appropriated
particular versions of this history, and how scientific and technological
success was deployed as a powerful tool for political legitimacy. The project
aims at reconstructing how the contingent, controversial, and sometimes
arbitrary sets of decisions concerning reactor designs were transformed into
linear, logically developing narratives of technological progress. In order to
understand the state endorsed representations of nuclear power in relation to
"unofficial" stories, it will combine archival documents relating to the early
stages of the Soviet civilian nuclear program with in-depth interviews of
reactor designers and nuclear power plant operators. The social history of
Soviet reactor design is a unique site to understand decision-making processes
at the interface between science, technology, and the state. It intends to
clarify the connections between technological choices and political agendas by
showing how technological artifacts like nuclear reactors served as powerful
rhetorical resources to challenge or sustain the political and social order.
This project can contribute to our understanding of contemporary notions of
reactor safety, and it can illuminate the quandaries of a state-enacted
popularization of science and technology.

