* 0240273
* Dissertation Research: Medium and Message in the Consumption Junction: Retailers, Consumers, and the Invention of Movies on Video
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Ronald Kline, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2004
* USD 7,975.00

In its first sixty years, the US motion picture industry evolved a clearly
defined structure incorporating specific technical artifacts and social
practices into a system stretching from cameras to distribution networks to
theater projectors, from Hollywood studios to audiences around the world.
However, in the past two decades, new technologies and new social practices have
altered the industry dramatically. We now watch movies in theatres, airplanes,
cars and our own living rooms, and we encode them on celluloid, on videotape, on
DVD, and as streams of electricity. The socio-technical system that constitutes
the motion picture in America has not so much shifted as exploded in complexity,
and yet the idea of a movie seems as unproblematic in American culture as ever.
This dissertation research project is studying one of the major sites where new
understandings of both the nature of motion pictures as well as their proper use
were constructed - the network of video retail stores of the 1980.s. Video
retailers created and facilitated a new distribution network that served as a
consumption junction (Cowan 1987) of users, movie studios, and manufacturers
where the groundwork was laid for much of our current understanding of
entertainment and media technologies. Ultimately, the story of how motion
pictures came to be viewed on videotapes in the home rather than simply in
theaters is largely the story of how these mediators managed to construct the
idea of a message (a motion picture) that was completely distinct from the
medium on which it was played, an idea which was essential to the establishment
of one technical system (translation of magnetically encoded tapes into pixels
on a cathode-ray tube) as equivalent to another (projection of celluloid
prints). NSF funds will support data collection at various research sites: The
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences library; trip to Blockbuster
Entertainment; and the Video Software Dealers Association.

