* 0240165
* Chloroplast-Localized N-terminal Protein Processing by Peptide Deformylase
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Lynnette Dirk, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 04/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

Peptide deformylase (DEF), an essential co-translational protein-processing
enzyme that catalyzes the removal of the N-formyl group from nascent
polypeptides in prokaryotic organisms, has been identified in plant chloroplasts
and mitochondria. Inhibitors of DEF are phytotoxic, exhibiting characteristics
of broad-spectrum herbicides, but the mechanism by which DEF is essential for
cell viability is unknown. Because chloroplast-translated proteins are
relatively limited in number and many have been extensively characterized both
functionally and physically, this organelle provides a unique opportunity to
study the essential nature of protein processing by DEF. Understanding
chloroplast-localized DEFs and their role in establishing the mature
biologically active form of newly-translated chloroplast-proteins is important,
and can be achieved by fulfilling the following objectives: 1) identifying amino
acid residues instrumental in active-site metal ion coordination and catalysis
utilizing high-resolution NMR analyses coupled with site-directed mutagenesis;
2) elucidating the functional significance of chloroplast N-terminal protein
processing through comparative 2D-PAGE analysis of a T-DNA insertional
Atdef2-knockout mutant; and 3) determining the authentic subcellular and
suborganellar location of Arabidopsis DEFs using full length GFP
fusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diverse chloroplast processes critical to plant
survival rely on proteins produced in the chloroplast which interact directly
with imported proteins. Thus, how these proteins are processed by peptide
deformylase and the relationship with other protein processing events define a
fundamental determinant of chloroplast function. The understanding gained by
completing this research will validate peptide deformylase as a viable target
for a new class of broad-spectrum herbicides without mammalian toxicity, and
create predictive rules governing chloroplast protein processing that could
substantially enhance the success of chloroplast-targeted foreign gene
expression for enhancing crop productivity. Exposure of undergraduate, graduate,
and post-doctoral scholars to these interdisciplinary studies and the multi-user
facilities required will provide unparalleled, multifaceted research and
learning experiences, including participation in the commercialization and
technological transfer of ideas and discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;