* 0240303
* SGER: Forest Fires and Soil Weathering: Do Extreme Wildfire Events Impact the Weathering of Soil Mineral Components?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Gregory Pope, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 07/31/2004
* USD 17,067.00

Catastrophic burning of conifer forests during wildfires frequently results in
surface temperatures in excess of 600 degrees C. This presents an extreme and
unique environment with consequences for weathering of rocks and minerals in the
soil. Changes in mineral and rock weathering affect erosion, water infiltration,
and nutrient availability and are important impacts of wildfire. This research
will address how mineral constituents of the soil react to the extreme heat of
forest fires, and how this impacts the physical properties of the soil The
research compares weathering characteristics of soil components (minerals and
particles) from recently burned sites with weathering characteristics of soils
in unburned areas, using the Hayman (Colorado) and Rodeo-Chedeski (Arizona)
fires of summer 2002 as case studies. About 25 sites from each fire will be
surveyed in areas varying in topography and degree of fire impact. A field
survey will assess (1) environmental impacts (erosion, vegetation loss); (2)
soil profiles; (3) soil physical properties; and (4) weathering of rock outcrops
and cobbles. Samples will be taken throughout the soil profile for laboratory
analysis. Laboratory analysis will include: (1) particle size analysis; (2)
backscatter electron microscopy to assess mechanical and chemical weathering of
soil particles and minerals at small scales; (3) inductively-coupled plasma
optical emission spectroscopy to assess the soil's chemical composition and
nutrient depletion due to leaching, (4) x-ray diffraction to identify clay
minerals and post-fire alteration of these minerals; (5) water loss on heating
to identify the amount of water held at the molecular level; and (6) tests using
high temperature (oven) exposure of unfired soil samples in order to simulate
and model fire conditions. It is expected that severe fires will have a
significant impact on weathering of soils including alteration and
disintegration of minerals, aggregation and cementing of soil particles, and
release and leaching of elements and nutrients from the soil.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of soil weathering processes will
lead to more comprehensive information for management of the soil and the
ecosystem, and aid reclamation efforts following catastrophic fires. This
research project will provide a laboratory assessment of weathering
characteristics that will be linked to associated field characteristics; this
information will be able to be applied by forest and watershed managers. For
example, where soil weathering has produced particle disintegration due to
enhanced weathering, forest managers might anticipate soils of finer texture,
with less water infiltration and higher surface runoff and erosion rates.
However, finer soils tend to resist water repellency often observed after fires,
and may promote an increase in nutrient availability. These soils would be most
suitable for revegetation if surface runoff can be controlled. If fires promote
the weathering-related release of cementing agents like iron, aluminum and
silica, soil particles could combine into larger aggregates, resulting in a
coarser soil. Coarse soils would have higher infiltration rates (with less
surface runoff), but higher water repellency, and a greater susceptibility for
nutrient leaching. Recovery of such soils from wildfire may be harder.
Recognizing how these disparate processes occur is not well understood at
present. This project will address these unknowns by applying advanced
instrumentation and detailed field survey with modern knowledge sense of how
soil, vegetation, and atmospheric systems interact. &lt;br/&gt;