* 0240358
* Engineering and Exorcism in Counter-Reformation Rome: Power, Knowledge and Urbanization, 1562-1612
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Pamela Long, Long, Pamela O
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 01/31/2005
* USD 130,015.00

In the 50 years following the Council of Trent, fundamental reforms of the
Catholic church were accompanied by numerous major projects of construction and
engineering in the city of Rome. The streets were redesigned, paved, and in some
cases newly constructed. The ancient columns of Trajan and Marcus Aurelius were
repaired. Obelisks that the ancient Romans had carried from Egypt were excavated
and transported to new locations at the center of important squares. With
elaborate public rituals, Pope Sixtus V (1585-1590) exorcised the columns and
obelisks of their pagan spirits and topped them with Christian symbols. Between
1562 and 1612 three great aqueducts were built on the ruins of the ancient Roman
aqueducts, allowing for the expansion of the population and an abundant supply
of water for fountains, drinking, and industrial uses such as mills. New
palaces, churches, and other buildings were constructed, and the Pontine marshes
in the countryside surrounding Rome were drained. Other projects emphasized the
foundation of knowledge that supported the papacy and other centers of power in
Rome. Cartographical and natural history projects included the hall of metals
and minerals in the Vatican palace, described by papal physician Michele
Mercati, and the great Hall of Maps designed by Ignazio Danti. Both the popes
and the Farnese family created botanical gardens. Such projects of cartography
and natural history combined with great construction and engineering projects to
enhance the temporal and spiritual power of the papacy and of other centers of
power in Rome, including the courts of the cardinals. This project undertakes
the extensive archival research that is necessary for the completion of a book
that consists of a cultural history of engineering in counter-reformation Rome.
The approach seeks to explicate technical methods, materials, and other aspects
of the process of building and engineering. It also seeks to understand the
decision-making that brought about engineering projects, the actual work of
completing them, and the ways in which ordinary people living in Rome were
affected by such endeavors. It includes investigation of surveying, cartography,
and natural history projects that formed part of the broader context of
engineering, construction, and the development and display of knowledge in these
decades. The study entails investigation of numerous archival documents and rare
printed books. Technology, engineering, and construction as well as disciplines
such as cartography and natural history will be investigated as integral aspects
of the cultural and religious life of the city and as essential modalities of
early modern urbanization. This project's broad conceptualization combined with
its foundation in extensive archival research will make it an important case
study for urbanization. It will provide a model study for teaching and for
further research on Rome and on other cities. The wider understanding that it
will bring to the subject of urbanization and its relationship to engineering,
technology, and other aspects of culture will be extremely valuable, given the
importance of cities to early modern and modern history.