* 0240328
* Classical Concepts in Quantum Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Alisa Bokulich, Trustees of Boston University
* Fixed Price Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 98,202.00

The rapidly growing body of scientific literature in fields such as semi-
classical mechanics, mesoscopic physics, and quantum chaos is raising new
questions about the relationship between classical and quantum mechanics. Far
from being obsolete, the concepts of classical mechanics are playing a central
role in discovering new phenomena and coming to a deeper understanding of
quantum theory. Despite these important developments there still does not exist
a book in the history and philosophy of science literature devoted to an
examination of the relationship between these two theories. The objective of
this research is to produce such a book. This project begins with the
realization that the traditional frameworks for understanding intertheoretic
relations are inadequate. The complex and subtle relationship between classical
and quantum mechanics is not captured by the well-known models of reductionism,
pluralism, nor the classical limit. In searching for a new framework, Bokulich
turns to the history of physics, examining how the founders of quantum theory
viewed the relationship of that theory to classical mechanics. Her work will
provide an important contribution to the history of physics literature by
showing how Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and Paul Dirac, all members of the
so-called Copenhagen interpretation, each had a distinctive philosophy of the
relationship between classical and quantum mechanics. Of these three views she
proposes that Dirac's philosophy of intertheoretic relations provides the best
framework for understanding recent developments in quantization and
semiclassical mechanics. Building on this historical work, Bokulich considers
how recent developments in are a continuation of Dirac's program to make precise
the similarities between the mathematical structures of classical and quantum
mechanics. Her investigation will provide a new and important testing ground for
the philosophical view known as structural realism. To further build her case,
Bokulich next turns to an examination of semiclassical theory and its
application in the field of quantum chaos. She focuses her investigation on a
particular area of experimental research in which classical orbits are being
used not only to investigate, but to explain causally, quantum phenomena. These
experiments raise pressing philosophical questions about the epistemological
status of classical concepts in quantum theory. These two case studies,
quantization and quantum chaos, provide examples of scientific discoveries that
come only through a careful study of the relationship between classical and
quantum mechanics. Bokulich contends that these two case studies will also shed
new light on the traditional philosophical problems of reductionism and realism.
As an interdisciplinary work that integrates historical, philosophical, and
scientific perspectives, Bokulich's book will help further the fruitful dialogue
between researchers in these diverse fields.