* 0240410
* Investigating the Self-Standards Model of Defensive Self-Justification
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Jeffrey Stone, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2004
* USD 40,468.00

Why do otherwise intelligent and well-adjusted individuals, like the CEOs of
major corporations, engage in immoral or foolish behavior, but then fail to
learn from their mistakes and make amends for their transgressions? According to
the well-known theory of Cognitive Dissonance, discrepancies between behavior
and important attitudes or beliefs cause people to feel discomfort (i.e.,
cognitive dissonance) that they are motivated to reduce. Research indicates,
however, that people do not always reduce their discomfort by owning up to the
discrepancy. Instead, they reduce their discomfort by rationalizing or
justifying their behavior -- that is, by changing their attitudes or beliefs to
accommodate the undesirable outcome. Indeed, decades of research show that to
reduce dissonance, people can convince themselves that their lies are really
truths, that difficult decisions and other struggles are always wise and worth
the effort, and that the innocent victims of discrimination or aggression
deserve what they get. Justifying negative behavior allows people to defend
themselves without having to confront their mistakes or transgressions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal will test a new model
designed to address several unresolved issues concerning how and why people
engage in defensive self-justification. For example, there is no consensus among
psychologists about who is most vulnerable to defensive self-justification, how
behavioral discrepancies are perceived, what emotions influence the process, or
what defensive strategies are most preferred for reducing the discomfort.
According to the proposed Self-Standards Model of Cognitive Dissonance, once
people have acted, they evaluate their behavior against a relevant self-standard
for judgment, the content of which determines for whom the behavior is likely to
arouse feelings of general discomfort, guilt or shame. Furthermore, once
dissonance is aroused, the model predicts that the accessibility of different
aspects of self can influence the need to justify the discrepant act. Two
experiments will manipulate the accessibility of different self-standards and
self-attributes following a discrepant behavior and measure the motivation to
justify the behavior or trivialize the discrepancy by reducing its perceived
importance. In addition, the research will examine the mediating effect of self-
attribute accessibility and self-conscious emotions on the justification of a
discrepant act. By investigating how different people interpret a discrepant
behavior, and then seek a way to reduce their discomfort, this research will
provide new insight into the causes and consequences of defensive self-
justification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;