* 0240955
* Nuclear Resonance Spectroscopy of Biomolecules
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Paul Champion, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 03/31/2007
* USD 358,275.00

This experimental program will exploit technological advances that establish
nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy (NRVS) as a site-specific,
quantitative probe for vibrational dynamics in iron- containing proteins and
model compounds. Ultrahigh resolution synchrotron-based measurements of X-ray
absorption near the 14.4keV 57-Fe Moessbauer resonance reveal the complete
vibrational spectrum of Fe.. NRVS provides quantitative information on
vibrational amplitudes as well as frequencies and allows one to deduce the
direction of Fe motion from measurements on oriented samples. Observations will
include structurally sensitive modes, or vibrational spectators, that are not
easily measurable using other techniques. A theme of particular interest is the
identification and characterization of vibrational participants, modes directly
involved in biological reactions. Fe is the reactive center of many biological
reactions, and reactive modes involving the Fe must contribute to the NRVS
signal. Measurements on Fe porphyrin powders and single crystals, coupled with
normal mode analysis, will establish the character of observed modes, including
participants, and provide a basis for interpreting measurements on proteins. An
issue of particular interest in the protein studies is whether vibrations remain
localized at the active site, or acquire a more global character by vibrational
mixing with the surrounding polypeptide, and the structural factors responsible
for this local or global character. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have
a broad impact in at least three areas: (1) Work on this project is an
outstanding training opportunity. (2) The project establishes collaborative ties
between disciplines and institutions, necessitating diverse expertise in
synthetic chemistry, molecular biology, and modern computational approaches. (3)
Development and dissemination of next-generation instrumentation at a multi-user
facility is an integral aspect of the proposed work, as Instrumental advances
developed in support of the proposed work become available to other synchrotron
users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-sponsored by the Physics Division
in the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate and the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;