* 0240156
* Workshop:  Construction Engineering Professional 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Anthony Songer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 34,127.00

This award supports a planning meeting, which brings together industry,
academic, government, and association representatives to define and outline
roadmap that delineates the requirements to achieve the objectives of the larger
project initiative entitled "Construction Engineering Professional 2020
(CEP2020) objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge to the multi-billion
dollar construction industry is how to succeed in the next 20 years. The changes
and forces currently impacting the constructing industry, suggest strongly that
the traditional perspective of the industry, both from professionals within the
industry and from observers outside the industry, must be altered. Globalization
will render obsolete long-held family and corporate traditions in industry
enterprises. Current growth trends of faculty and departments of Construction
Engineering suggest the need for universities to reexamine the educational needs
of future professionals. The traditional viewpoint that a basic understanding of
scheduling, estimating, contracts, and engineering is a satisfactory foundation
no longer is sufficient. Rather, the question for industry and academia alike is
how to address the construction engineering profession and professionals of the
future. Where will these professionals emerge? How will they be educated? What
tools will they use? What will be their primary focus as professionals? Will
these individuals be the integrators of the design-construction process, or will
they be the technology experts focusing on satisfying customer requirements, or
maybe they will be the surrogate owners, financing, building, and operating
projects on an international scale. The time to develop the vision to answer
these questions is now.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CEP2020 effort is designed to
address three specific objectives:&lt;br/&gt;What is the current state of the
construction engineering professional?&lt;br/&gt;What will the construction
engineering professional be in 2020?&lt;br/&gt;What is the evolutionary path
required to enable the construction professional to achieve the 2020
vision?&lt;br/&gt;