* 0240144
* Fundamental Understanding of Deformation Mechanisms in Nanocrystalline Superplasticity
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Amiya Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2008
* USD 521,000.00

This proposal is designed to gain a fundamental understanding of the deformation
mechanisms of plasticity in nanocrystalline materials. The nanostructured
metallic materials will be produced by several processing methods that include
high-pressure torsion of cast material, pulsed electrodeposition, and
crystallization from metallic glass. The phenomenon of sliding along the grain
interfaces is one of the dominant rheological characteristics in elevated
temperature plasticity. The ultrafine-grained nanocrystalline materials contain
a very large density of interfaces and they offer a unique opportunity to study
the structural state of grain boundary and its role on grain boundary sliding in
elevated temperature plasticity. The intellectual merit lies in attempting to
correlate the microstructural information with the mechanical data obtained from
such nanoscale materials in the context of plasticity in really diminished
length scales. Special emphasis will be given to the difficulty of intragranular
dislocation generation inside the matrix in truly nanoscale structure and its
implication to slip accommodation processes in current models of nanocrystalline
plasticity at elevated temperatures.

The grant explores whether the observed increase in superplasticity with
decreasing grain size is a general phenomenon or not. Increasing superplastic
strain rate will decrease forming time and will make it an economically viable
process. Lowering superplastic forming temperature will allow utilization of
some of the existing forming technology for shop-floor practice in industrially
significant intermetallic structural materials. The results are expected to be
technologically significant in forming of sensors and devices with complex
shapes that can benefit from the nanocrystalline matrix with large ambient
temperature strength and hardness.