* 0240149
* Demonstration of the Performance Characteristics of the Rain Imaging System (RIS)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Carlton Ulbrich, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 02/28/2006
* USD 206,884.00

A recently developed instrument called the Rain Imaging System (RIS) offers
promise of an improved capability of measuring the size, shape, and spatial
concentration of raindrops. This information is critical for precipitation
physics and certain applications in atmospheric remote sensing. Developed by
NASA, RIS consists basically of a halogen light source and a CCD camera
separated by a distance of 4 m. It records the forward-scattering image of
individual drops as they fall through the scattering volume using a very short
exposure time to "freeze" the drops in position and eliminate smearing of the
image. Drops are counted and measured as they fall in the focal region of the
camera. The size of the depth of field is crucial, because it determines the
volume in which drops are measured. Drops within the focal region are
identifiable as dark silhouettes with the light source appearing as a "hole"
within them. Drops outside the focal region do not have the hole. Knowing the
distance of the focal region from the camera enables determination of drop size
from the image size. In a typical setup, the system has the camera lens focused
at a distance of 2 m with an aperture of f/8. With these settings the camera
images a region nominally 32 mm x 24 mm in cross section with a 175 mm depth of
field. The purpose of this project is to evaluate and quantify the performance
of RIS using laboratory-generated water drops of known size dropped through
different parts of the focal volume. The experiments will determine (1) the
smallest drop measurable by RIS and its dependence on position in the focal
region; (2) the 3-D shape of the focal region and its possible dependence on
drop size and position; (3) the accuracy with which RIS can measure drop size
and shape. Answers to these questions will document the performance of RIS and
enable the improvement of data processing algorithms. The work will be carried
out at Clemson University in collaboration with Dr. Larry Bliven of NASA, who
originally developed the instrument.