* 0240816
* Preliminary Analysis of Perishable Artifacts and Ecofacts from Franktown Cave, Colorado
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Kevin Gilmore, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 28,407.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Sarah Nelson and Mr. Kevin Gilmore
will analyze and date some of the most important prehistoric artifacts and
ecofacts from Franktown Cave (5DA272), a dry rockshelter located on the western
edge of the High Plains. Excavations at Franktown Cave recovered one of the best
preserved collections of perishable artifacts and plant remains known in the
western Great Plains region. Basketry, woven yucca sandals, moccasins, pieces of
a possible rabbit fur robe, a small sinew net, pieces of stitched leather
clothing, 140 pieces of cordage, maize kernels and cobs are only a part of the
collection of perishable artifacts and plant remains associated with the Late
Prehistoric occupations. Franktown Cave is one of a cluster of sites in an area
that is thought to have been an enclave whose unique environment allowed maize
cultivation. This area is somewhat isolated from the Southwest and Central
Plains culture areas, yet the ceramics and stone tools exhibit influences from
the Central Plains, while the textiles from the site most closely resemble those
from the Southwest and Colorado Plateau, and a complete moccasin is most similar
to those manufactured historically by Algonkian speakers of the northeastern
U.S. These factors make the site ideal for investigations into the cultural and
environmental forces that result in the integration of cultigens into existing
hunting-gathering economies.

Dating the Franktown Cave artifacts in conjunction with detailed analysis will
allow us to ask questions concerning the transmission of information between
groups and determine points of origin. NSF funding will allow direct AMS dating
of many of the artifacts and the maize, including the prehistoric textiles and
hide artifacts, which are among the most culturally distinct artifacts.
Determining the age of the maize is an important initial step toward
understanding the role of this important cultigen during the Early/Middle
Ceramic Period transition in a geographic area for which maize is not well
documented. The project is significant because Franktown Cave contained the most
complete collection of maize and perishable artifacts from the western High
Plains, and analysis will provide an excellent case study of the factors that
lead to the development of agricultural systems by hunter-gatherers.

NSF funding of the preliminary analysis of this unique collection will have
broader impacts in two ways. First, the AMS dates will allow for placement of
both the perishable and the stratigraphically associated non-perishable
artifacts into temporally meaningful contexts, which will immediately create
opportunities for student researchers to make significant contributions to our
knowledge of the prehistory of the Great Plains through projects, theses and
dissertations. Second, the NSF funds will provide the matching funds required
for a Colorado State Historical Fund grant sufficient to fund student and staff
analysis of the entire Franktown Cave collection. Besides providing crucial
baseline data and an unprecedented view into the lifeways of the prehistoric
inhabitants of the western High Plains of Colorado, these initial investigations
will provide the framework for future detailed analysis.

