* 0240964
* Collaborative Research:    Mining SCICEX Geophysical Data in the Arctic Ocean to Constrain the Structure and Geological Development of the Amerasian Basin
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* James Cochran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2006
* USD 96,673.00

Abstract OPP-0240964 Cochran OPP-0241004 Coakley OPP-0241188 Edwards

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at Lamont Doherty
Earth Observatory and the Universities of Hawaii and Alaska. Between 1995 and
1999, the U.S. Navy carried out five nuclear submarine cruises to the Arctic
Ocean for civilian scientific research through the SCICEX (SCience ICe EXercise)
program. The Seafloor Characterization and Mapping Pods' (SCAMP)instrument
package, an integrated geophysical survey system providing gravity, swath
bathymetry and sidescan, and chirp sub-bottom profiler data was installed on the
submarine for the 1998 and 1999 cruises. During those two cruises, SCAMP
geophysical data were acquired over the major Arctic Ocean floor features. These
data were used to determine the morphology, structure and tectonics of the
Gakkel Ridge which occupies a singularly important position as the slowest
spreading portion of the global mid-ocean ridge system, and to test the
hypothesis of the existence of a Pleistocene Arctic ice sheet by imaging shallow
portions of the Arctic Ocean for glaciogenic features. The purpose of this
project is to allow continued mining of this unique and rich data set and to
address important questions related to the origin, structure and development of
the Amerasian Basin. The primary foci of the proposed work will be the Lomonosov
Ridge, a sliver of continental crust extending across the Arctic Ocean
separating the Mesozoic Amerasian Basin from the Tertiary Eurasian Basin, and
the Chukchi Borderland, a high-standing area of extended continental crust
jutting into the Canada Basin. Geophysical studies of the SCICEX data from the
Amerasian Basin emphasizing those features allow investigation of a very simple,
but unanswered and extremely fundamental question: How did the Amerasian Basin
come into being? The origin and tectonic development of the basin has been very
controversial. Published data from the basin is inconclusive and can be used to
support radically different models. Principal Investigators will determine the
structure and the type of rifting and distinguish among the different models.
The Chukchi Borderland is a block of continental crust protruding into the
Amerasian Basin. Different models for the development of the Amerasian Basin
propose different modes of formation for the northern and eastern (Northwind
Escarpment) margin of the Borderland. SCAMP data will provide the necessary data
to determine the structure of the margin and the form of rifting and to allow
further tests for the models for the origin of the basin.