* 0240525
* Network Virtualization Mechanisms for Mobile Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Jason Nieh, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2007
* USD 249,999.00

This project focuses on creation and deployment of the new network
virtualization mechanisms to support mobile communication and, in particular,
efficient transparent migration of end-to-end live network connections without
any changes to existing network protocols. To this aim, novel mobile
communication architecture is proposed, called Virtual Network Address
Translation (VNAT), which enables connection mobility for a spectrum of
computation units, ranging from a single process to the entire host. Three key
mechanisms are used to enable transparent live connection mobility: connection
virtualization, connection translation, and connection migration. Connection
virtualization virtualizes end-to-end transport connection identification by
using virtual endpoints rather than physical endpoints (e.g., IP addresses and
port numbers). As a result, connection identifications no longer depend on lower
layer network endpoints and are no longer affected by the movement of network
endpoints. Connection translation translates virtualized connection
identifications into physical connection identifications to be carried on the
physical network. As connections migrate across the network, their virtual
identifications never change. Instead, they are mapped into appropriate physical
identifications according to the endpoints' attachment to the physical network.
Finally, VNAT connection migration keeps states and uses protocols to automate
tasks for connection migration such as keeping connection alive, establishing a
security key, locating migrated end-point (s), and updating virtual-physical
endpoints mappings. In this project, the VNAT architecture is implemented and is
fully compatible with, and does not require any modifications to, existing
networking protocols, operating systems, or applications. The results of this
research will have a fundamental scientific impact by providing crucial
networking mechanisms for future innovations in mobile networking
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;