* 0240727
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Strawberry Notch
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Utpal Banerjee, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2007
* USD 345,000.00

Notch (N) signaling is important for many different intercellular
communications events that are critical for proper development. This pathway has
been conserved from worms to humans and has functional consequences for many
different tissues types. Mutations in the members of the Notch pathway in humans
have been implicated in the development of cancer, Alagille syndrome, CADASIL
and in Alzheimer's disease. Two different kinds of Notch signaling have been
described in the literature. The first, called lateral signaling, is a mechanism
by which cells that are initially equivalent, interact through this pathway and
create a pattern in which only a fraction of the cells are biased to assume a
differentiated fate. This involves an interactive process that requires repeated
Notch signaling via feedback loops. In contrast, during inductive Notch
signaling, the signaling cell is intrinsically distinct from the one receiving
the signal. The signaling causes the activation of fate-specifying molecules in
the cell receiving the signal. Most identified members of the Notch signaling
are widely expressed and participate in both inductive and lateral inhibition
pathways. What then causes the distinction between these different signaling
events? Genetic analysis in Drosophila has shown that Strawberry Notch (sno)
functions as a positive component of the Notch signal transduction pathway. The
sno gene encodes a highly conserved nuclear protein that is expressed in all
ectodermally derived tissue. Studies aimed at determining the function of this
gene showed that sno participates in many different inductive signaling
processes initiated by the Notch receptor, but does not have any function in
lateral signaling by Notch. More recently, sno has been shown to be important
for the expression of the Notch ligand, Delta in R cells of the Drosophila eye.
The RTK signal mediated by the EGF pathway was also shown to contribute
positively in this process. Two proteins, Sno and Ebi, are responsible for
alleviating this repression. These results suggest that Sno and Ebi function in
conjunction with the EGFR pathway to depress Su(H) through proteasome mediated
degradation of co-repressors. Thus, the difference between the lateral
inhibitory and inductive Notch signaling does not reside in events downstream of
Notch. Rather, this distinction is a result of the differences in the way the
Notch ligand Delta is controlled. Sno is an important link between RTK and Notch
pathways in this process. The current proposal is aimed at studying the
biochemistry of Sno function in S2 and cl-8 cells to determine if it indeed
directly participates in the derepression of Su(H) targets. Genetic studies
suggest that deltex (dx) exhibits strong genetic interaction with sno. This
proposal is aimed at studying the possible role of dx in the regulation of Delta
in association with Sno. Finally, the sequencing to the Drosophila genome has
led to the identification of a gene similar to sno called sno-related (snor).
Genetic and molecular characterization of this gene are proposed. Taken
together, we expect to unravel the mechanism for proteasome mediated regulation
of multiple signaling pathways by Sno-like proteins.