* 0240524
* Collaborative Research:  Characterizing Protocol Interaction in NEWS:  A Network Environment Wireless State Service
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Violet Syrotiuk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2009
* USD 233,324.00

This collaborative project concentrates on four main research thrusts: (i) a
detailed study to statistically characterize protocol interaction, (ii) a
scalable agent-based service to provide all nodes with state information, (iii)
a Media Access Control (MAC) protocol utilizing smart antennas, and, (iv) the
usage of inverse optimization as a framework for characterizing algorithmic
protocol interaction. The focus on the network and MAC layer protocol
interaction in wireless mobile ad-hoc networks is in the context of a
generalized location service that provides a mechanism to obtain the current
position of a mobile node by using smart antennas. This service, called Network
Environment Wireless State service (NEWS) service, is generalized to obtain
other aspects of node state, such as its local traffic characteristics,
velocity, and energy usage, in addition to its location; it provides current
"news," i.e., state, to the rest of the system. Such a service can improve the
performance of protocols and provide information for emerging services based on
location and other state information. This project also aims at identifying the
impact of protocol interaction, both algorithmic and statistical, first in an
implementation of a NEWS service wherein different network and MAC solutions are
mixed and matched. Furthermore, this project defines a hierarchical agent-based
NEWS service that uses local traffic conditions and node density to spawn (slay)
agents to operate in a recursively defined grid area. The design of this
protocol complements a MAC layer solution that can take advantage of location
and the ability to control transmit power level to directionally transmit within
the appropriate grid level. Finally, this project will use a framework based on
inverse optimization to decide when to spawn agents at the network layer to
obtain successful transmissions at the MAC layer, i.e., to optimize the
interlayer interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;