* 0240182
* Sequential Lineups:  Contributions of Distinctiveness and Recollection
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Scott Gronlund, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 08/31/2005
* USD 162,151.00

The advent of DNA testing has demonstrated that innocent people are in prison,
and faulty eyewitness identification has been shown as the primary contributor
to the conviction of the innocent. However, a set of procedural safeguards now
exist that can improve the reliability of eyewitness identification. Among the
most promising is the use of sequential lineups. A sequential lineup (i.e.,
viewing suspects one at a time) is thought to be superior to a simultaneous
lineup (i.e., viewing all suspects at the same time) because it leads a witness
to compare each successive person in the lineup to the witness' memory of the
perpetrator. In contrast, a simultaneous lineup leads a witness to choose the
person in the lineup who looks most like the perpetrator, which is problematic
if the police have the wrong man and the actual perpetrator is still at-large.
Without an theoretical understanding of the mechanisms underlying the sequential
lineup advantage, however, the nationwide adoption of sequential lineups as a
procedural safeguard will be hampered. The goal of this research is to develop a
quantitatively specified model of the mechanisms underlying the sequential
lineup advantage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator hypothesizes
that the sequential lineup advantage is due to: 1) enhanced encoding of
distinctive information and 2) use of a recall process to access that
information. This project comprises experiments that test these hypotheses. In
one line of experiments, the encoding conditions will be modified to make the
originally distinctive stimulus (i.e., height) no longer distinctive. If the
model is right, this should make the sequential lineup advantage disappear. To
evaluate the contribution of recall, attention is divided during lineup testing.
Dividing attention nullifies the use of a recall process, and the sequential
lineup advantage should disappear. Procedural safeguards are available that can
enhance the accuracy of eyewitness identification, but without full
understanding of what these safeguards do and why, their influence will be
limited. This grant will redress this limitation by developing and testing
quantitatively specified explanations of the mechanisms underlying one such
procedural safeguard, sequential lineups. Finally, an improved understanding of
how a sequential lineup protects the innocent may point to other improvements to
eyewitness identification procedures that will further enhance the reliability
of eyewitness identification. &lt;br/&gt;