* 0240230
* Nonlinear Signal Analysis Approach to Protein Structure/Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Charles Webber, RUSH UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2007
* USD 374,308.00

0240230&lt;br/&gt;Zbilut&lt;br/&gt; This project takes a unique and somewhat
novel approach by treating the amino acid code as a "signal." In so doing it
uses recurrence analysis, a method derived from nonlinear dynamics. An important
feature of this method is the absence of mathematical assumptions: proteins are
relatively short, nonlinear and nonstationary, thus precluding the uninformed
use of more traditional signal analysis methods. This strategy seeks to uncover
unforeseen "singularities" of hydrophobicity in proteins and related function.
The main steps of this signal analysis approach can be summarized as follows: 1)
use of an hydrophobic code for primary structures; and 2) treatment of the
hydrophobicity distribution along the sequence like a time series, with the
corresponding use of nonlinear signal analysis techniques, in order to underpin
fine position-dependent properties of the hydrophobicity profiles. It is posited
that singularities in the code identify important loci at which proteins may
fold correctly vs. aggregate. Moreover, the direction chosen is dependent upon
local factors, or boundary conditions, which force a stochastic understanding of
the process in terms of combinatorial probabilities. There is also a suggestion
that these folding choices describe natural processes of aging and/or pathology
The main aims of the project are: 1)the development of a preliminary taxonomy of
these hydrophobic singularities; 2)a cataloguing of the singularities' protein
context; i.e., a determination of their boundary conditions(e.g., secondary
structure, absolute values, scaling etc.); and 3)an evaluation of their
correlation with physico-chemical properties especially electrostatic variables
The entire structure of the protein is fitted to perform many tasks but possibly
only local patches (and consequently peculiar local hydrophobicity
singularities) may be crucial for a given action or structure.&lt;br/&gt; From a
chemical viewpoint, proteins, which are important elements in all forms of life,
are made of amino acids. The majority of proteins "fold" as relatively small
self-contained structures. Each protein found in nature has a specific three-
dimensional structure and this structure is determined by the sequence of amino
acids and their attendant degrees of aversion for water. This makes the
particular linear arrangement of amino acids constituting a protein an efficient
recipe for the solution of a chemico-physical problem that basically is the
folding to a given unique three-dimensional structure in water solution. What
the sequence must attain in order to be a real protein is basically to be water-
soluble, having a well-defined (if not necessarily static) three-dimensional
structure allowing for motions in solution (proteins do their work in a
dynamical way by coordinated motions of their scaffolds) while at the same time
maintaining their global shape. This is not an easy task and only a relative
minority of linear amino acid arrangements are effective solutions to this
problem. This is equivalent to saying that the "code" linking a sequence to its
particular structure is not immediately apparent. Nevertheless it is known that
the three-dimensional structure of a protein is in some (still obscure) way
encoded in its amino acid order. Indeed, this question is more intriguing given
the evidence that any protein can "misfold," causing possibly diseases such as
Alzheimer's, "mad cow" or "aging" in general. Thus, the most basic problem in
the sequence/structure puzzle is: "What particular linear arrangement of amino
acids makes a real protein. This project seeks to answer this question by using
unique "signal analysis" techniques which may uncover peculiarities in the
sequence. Clearly, should distinctive conditions be discovered which promote
particular protein folding behavior, enhanced understanding (and control) of
pathology, senescence, and therapeutics could result. This grant is made under
the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of
Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health.&lt;br/&gt;