* 0240575
* Women in the Global Information Technology Workforce:  Customer Service Call Centers in India
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Winifred Poster, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2004
* USD 83,901.00

Information and communication technology (ICT) jobs are the fastest growing
forms of employment in the global economy. While the largest proportion of jobs
are low status services, many scholars and policy makers argue this technology
is the solution for global unemployment, especially for women. Many development
projects sponsored by organizations like the United Nations and World Bank
center around ICTs. Critics argue that these ICTs are responsible for the rise
of new global sweatshops, which are dominated heavily by women in the South.
This project seeks to assess the potential of such development projects, and
whether these new technologies are empowering or disadvantageous for women in
the global South. The research is based on case studies of call centers, which
provide "customer service agents" for corporations in the North. By the year
2008, these call centers are projected to hire 18 million workers, most of them
female. This relatively new workforce, emerging largely in the last five years,
is almost completely unexplored academically. This project intends to fill this
gap, focusing on India where the growth of the global IT workforce has been
especially dramatic. Through on-site fieldwork in New Delhi, the investigator
will study three call centers, including interviews with 300 workers, as well as
industry, governmental, and non-governmental association leaders. The evidence
will be used to adjudicate between competing perspectives on this phenomenon: a
modernization paradigm that sees technology as gender neutral, or else
beneficial for women; a critical or feminist paradigm that sees technology as
disadvantageous for women; and an organizational paradigm that sees size and
structure as mediating factors which vary outcomes in different corporate
settings. In addition, this study assesses competing theories of global culture
in ICTs, by asking whether the requirement for Indian workers to pose as
Americans in calls to the U.S. results in assimilation or disjuncture in their
sense of national and ethnic identity. Thus, this study advances scholarly
literatures in many areas, including technology, gender, development,
stratification, work, race and ethnicity, globalization, and business
management. This project contributes to enhancing equity in use of information
technology, especially for women in Southern countries like India. It informs
organizational policy and practice involving technology. The broader impact
includes training opportunities for students, expanding opportunities for women
faculty in science, and improving the infrastructure of scholarly networks
between the U.S. and India (through collaboration with a university in New
Delhi). This project will also contribute to U.S. policy research on the gender
digital divide within the information technology workforce, for government
bodies like the National Coordination Office for Information Technology Research
and Development, as well to international policy for ICT development programs of
the United Nations and World Bank.