* 0240187
* Collaborative Research: Lagrangian Studies of the Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Thomas Frazer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2009
* USD 391,377.00

P.I. Chant, Robert (Rutgers) Proposal #: 0238957&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Lagrangian studies of the transport,
transformation, and biological impact of nutrients and contaminant metals in a
buoyant plume &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; The PIs propose a
coordinated program of field and numerical experiments to examine processes that
control the fate and transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants in the
Hudson River plume. Urban estuarine plumes such as this one represent a major
pathway for the transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants to the coastal
ocean. The fates and transports of this material are controlled not only by the
plume dynamics but also by biological and chemical processes coupled to the
dynamics of the plume. To investigate these processes, the PIs propose to
conduct a series of dye experiments along with continuous underway chemical and
biological sampling using a towed vehicle. These experiments will occur within
the framework of the LEO-15 Observatory to enable interpretation of the dye
study by placing the Lagrangian surveys in context with shelf-wide observations
from satellite imagery, surface currents and far-field subsurface hydrography.
LEO-15 will be augmented by a cross shelf array of moored instruments to provide
detailed estimates of subtidal circulation, stratification and Reynold stresses.
In addition, data-assimilative numerical simulations will provide high
resolution and realistic hindcasts of the coastal ocean during the field
experiments. The modeling will assimilate the dye-tracer data into a 3-D coastal
circulation model and guide future efforts to assimilate other tracers into
circulation models with complex sources and sinks. &lt;br/&gt; The major aims of
this work are to distinguish between physical processes that transport/mix
material in a buoyant plume from biological and chemical transformation
processes as well as the quantification of biological and chemical interactions
in a Lagrangian perspective to provide a means to assess their importance in
determining the fate and transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants in a
buoyant plume. The proposed experimental plan will contrast the response of
physical, biological, and chemical processes in the Hudson plume during
upwelling and downwelling conditions. A major outcome of this work will be the
determination of the extent and biological impact of contaminants in the plume
along the New Jersey coast and Middle Atlantic Bight and will improve the
ability to predict the fate and transport of contaminants and the rate that they
enter the base of the food chain in the coastal ocean.&lt;br/&gt;