* 0240309
* Transcriptional Adaptors and Histone Acetyltransferases in Arabidopsis Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Steven Triezenberg, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 410,000.00

Transcriptional adaptor or coactivator proteins play central integrating roles
in regulating eukaryotic gene expression. These proteins function in part to
overcome the barrier to transcription imposed by the packaging of eukaryotic
genomes in the form of chromatin. The ADA2 and GCN5 proteins are two components
of multiprotein coactivator complexes. The biological roles of these coactivator
proteins are largely unknown in plants, but the available evidence suggests
significant differences from the corresponding mechanisms in yeast and animals.
Therefore, the long-term goal of this research project is to define the roles of
transcriptional adaptor proteins in regulating gene expression in plants. The
mustard cress Arabidopsis is used extensively as a model organism for genetic
and molecular biological studies in plants. The genome of Arabidopsis encodes
two ADA2 proteins and one GCN5 protein, each with some features in common with
yeast and animal homologs and other features unique to plants. Mutations in the
ADA2b and GCN5 genes have similar and also distinct effects on plant growth and
development, suggesting that the corresponding proteins have both common and
distinct biological functions. This project will characterize plant-specific
features of these adaptor proteins using genetic and molecular genetic
approaches. To identify features of GCN5 or ADA2 proteins that are required for
biological activity, specific mutations will be tested for the ability to
complement existing gcn5 or ada2 T-DNA disruption mutations. The distinct
biological roles of the two ADA2 genes (ADA2a and ADA2b) will be defined by
identifying tissue- or cell-specific expression patterns, and by domain-swap
experiments. Similar genes from important crop and experimental plants will be
characterized to lay the foundation for future genetic and biochemical
investigations. This project will fill an important gap in the understanding of
the diversity of genetic regulatory mechanisms and may be valuable in future
agricultural or biotechnological applications. In addition, this project
provides training opportunities specifically tailored for undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral scientists.