* 0240827
* Interactions Among Observations of Laterally Advected Heat and Moisture, Cloud Properties, Surface Temperature, Surface Radiation Fluxes, and Net Precipitation in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Steven Ackerman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 11/30/2006
* USD 170,000.00

In the proposed investigation the PIs will examine interactions and feedbacks
among five fundamental components of the Arctic environment: horizontally
transported heat and moisture, cloud properties, surface temperature, net
precipitation, and surface radiation fluxes. Conventional meteorological data
are sparse over the Arctic Ocean, and other than surface pressure fields and
temperatures there is relatively little information with which to investigate
these issues in a pan-Arctic sense. Newly available satellite-derived data sets
from the NOAA/NASA Pathfinder Program offer an unprecedented opportunity to
observe the Arctic climate by providing measurements of atmospheric quantities
spanning two decades. Preliminary calculations using these data indicate that
significant, cohesive changes have occurred in surface temperature, advection
patterns, and cloud properties, but how are they related to each other? How do
these apparent trends relate to changes in the surface radiation balance? Can
the observed trends be explained by large-scale atmospheric circulation
features, such as the Arctic Oscillation, North Atlantic Oscillation, North
Pacific Oscillation, or others? These are the questions the PI's expect to
address in this investigation. The proposed study speaks directly to three of
the four hypotheses targeted by the new multiagency initiative called the Study
of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH): 1) Unaami (the name given to the suite
of observed pan-Arctic changes) is related to the Arctic Oscillation, 2)Unaami
is a component of climate change, and 3) Feedbacks among the ocean, land, ice
and the atmosphere are critical to Unaami. Using two newly-available, 20-year,
satellite-derived data sets in combination with surface observations, the PI's
will diagnose patterns of and interactions among change in transported heat and
moisture, cloud properties, surface temperature, net precipitation, and surface
radiation fluxes, and test the hypothesis that these patterns are interrelated
and aligned with large-scale circulation features in the atmosphere. The broader
impacts of this activity are 1) to contribute toward understanding and
predicting global climate processes and change, 2) to involve graduate students
in the research, and 3) to provide material to be included in undergraduate
course material for classes in remote sensing and cryospheric processes.