* 0240536
* Dissertation Research:  Digital Aspirations: Malaysia and the Multimedia Super Corridor
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Susan Roberts, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 11,949.00

This dissertation project intends to expand our knowledge of the role of
information technology (IT) in large-scale state development projects in the
non-Western world by focusing on the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC), a new high
technology urban region being built in Malaysia. The MSC is the linchpin of a
state sponsored national development strategy intended to make Malaysia a
developed nation by the year 2020. Through the provision of a wide spectrum of
IT infrastructure, including broadband and wireless Internet access for all
businesses and households located in the MSC, the Malaysian government intends
to create its vision of an ideal nation and citizenry that can take advantage of
the so-called Information Age. This large scale provision of IT infrastructure,
then, is about more than the creation of a technology hub for economic
development. It is envisioned as the key to creating a zone for the
reimagination of Malaysia and Malaysians as a nation and people. Consequently,
the provision of IT infrastructure in the MSC involves a radical transformation
of the social and physical landscape of the region that is directly linked to
national development and national identity. This research is focused on three
questions: (a) how are IT, national development, and national identity linked
through the MSC; (b) how are access to, and use of, IT in the &lt;br/&gt;MSC
socially differentiated; and (c) how do groups in the MSC, defined by their
different positions in relation to access and use of IT, perceive the present
and future consequences of IT-led development for nation building and national
identity? The project seeks to examine how assumptions about the transformative
power of IT and its actual use affect: (a) the economic goals of national
development and the political goals of nation building in Malaysia; (b) existing
and emerging social differences in accessibility to, and use of, IT; and (c)
groups. perceptions of the present and future consequences of IT-led development
for nation building and national identity in Malaysia. The research will provide
insights into how &lt;br/&gt;state and non-state actors represent and use IT to
build and contest the imagination of a technologically developed nation in the
Information Age. NSF funds will support data gathering from: (a) a discourse
analysis of state planning documents; (b) an institutional and household survey
of differences in access to and use of IT by groups living and working in the
MSC; and (c) in-depth interviews with subsets of these groups defined by their
differences in access to and use of IT. The broader impacts of this project will
be to: (a) contribute to key theoretical and conceptual issues in contemporary
scholarship in technology, geography, and development studies through the
publication of journal articles, participation in scholarly meetings, and a book
manuscript; and to (b) address issues of IT-led development strategies to wider
academic and non-academic audiences through a variety of media. Along with the
publication and presentation of research results in scholarly journals, at
professional meetings, and in the classroom, a series of articles in non-
specialist magazines is anticipated. Through the specific example of the MSC,
these articles will discuss the implications of the increasingly wide scale
adoption of information technology into many aspects of people's lives in both
the 'West' and 'non-West.' &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;