* 0240320
* Dissertation Research: Construction and Deployment of "Deviance" in Neoliberal Philadelphia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Judith Goode, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,106.00

This dissertation research by a cultural anthropologist will investigate
development in two working class neighborhoods of Philadelphia. Focusing on the
most stigmatized and "deviant" population - substance using and/or mentally ill
adults - the research will examine how community members and development
specialists understand deviance, as individuals who are at risk and under
stress, and who present risk and act as stressors to the community. The research
will study how deviance is understood by "Community-Based Organizations" (CBOs)
and medical and social service providers to mentally ill and substance using
adults, as well as by local institutions and community members. The research
builds on three years of preliminary research with local CBOs and residents.
Current research focuses on service provision to recipients in order to assess
how they, their communities, and community organizations are targeted for
development in ways that construct them as "deviant," and how these actors
interpret the label of deviance to acquire resources. The research advances
understanding by exploring the effects of economic processes such as structural
adjustment, privatization, and market-based development. It also examines the
effects of the medicalization of social life beyond the realm of biomedicine.
The project analyzes social and medical services provided to recipients within
the larger context of what - and who - should be included in "community
development." Identifying the various models of "community" and "development" -
that are used to understand poverty and substance use - can point out factors
that may hinder community development, service provision, and grassroots
struggle. The broader impact of this project lies in its practical applications
for community development and service provision. The new knowledge to be created
will be useful to community development planners, as well as community members
and organizations. The project will also contribute to the training of a young
social scientist.