* 0240254
* Financial Support for the International Conference "GMOs in 2030: Reaping the Promise While Leaping the Pitfalls?", October 14-18, 2003
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Norman Ellstrand, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;SES 0240254&lt;br/&gt;"GMOs in 2030:Reaping the
Promise While Leaping the Pitfalls?"&lt;br/&gt;Norman Ellstrand, University of
California, Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"GMOs in 2030: Reaping the Promise
While Leaping the Pitfalls" will be convened by the Biotechnology Impacts Center
at the University of California, Riverside (UCR) October 14-18, 2003. The
organizers are Norman C. Ellstrand, Professor of Genetics and Director of the
Biotechnology Impacts Center, and Richard Sutch, Distinguished Professor of
Economics. Nearly everyone who has looked at the issue, from biologists and
agronomists to economists and ethicists to ordinary thoughtful people, agree
that there is tremendous potential in the new discoveries occurring in
biotechnology. At the same time, there is uncertainty over the environmental,
social, ethical, legal, economic, and cultural consequences of the new
technologies emerging now and those yet to come. The objective of "GMOs in 2030:
Reaping the Promise While Leaping the Pitfalls?" is to take a visionary and
mindful approach to the use of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) for the
benefit of humankind and the environment by identifying principles and protocols
that will serve as a framework for a civilized, respectful and informed dialog
on the myriad issues facing society in the application of biotechnology. The
conference will be distinctive from others exploring issues associated with
biotechnology in that it will integrate leading scholars from a variety of
disciplinary perspectives, as opposed to most conferences on the topic, which
typically involve life scientists exclusively with one or a few token humanists
or social scientists, or vice versa. Conference participants will examine such
over-arching topics as the responsibility of humankind in stewardship of the
biosphere vs. the ability to manipulate life at the gene level and public
participation in the assessment of biotechnology applications. Case studies
examining the genetic modification of rice to provide enhanced nutrition and of
mosquitoes to provide protection against certain insect-vectored diseases will
endeavor to illustrate the complexity and interrelatedness of the issues raised
by the GMO revolution. The conference organizers intend to present these and
other compelling questions in a format that will be attractive to world-class
thinkers both from within and outside of the United States. To insure that
conference outcomes reach policy makers, biotech industry representatives, non-
governmental organizations and other interested scholars, a book on possible
policy approaches to the issues, with chapters authored by the major
participants, will be published, as will policy briefs on specific issues. The
proposed conference will advance the teaching and training of young, promising
researchers and scholars; postdoctoral scholars and graduate students, including
those from underrepresented groups, will be particularly encouraged to
participate. This proposal seeks partial financial support of the conference
from the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;