* 0241274
* Constructing a Model of Abrupt Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Jose Rial, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2007
* USD 157,527.00

This award supports the development and use of a mathematical model using
coupled nonlinear differential equations to help explain the physical mechanisms
underlying signals of abrupt climate change found in paleoclimate records. The
LOgistic-Delayed nonlinear Differential Equation (LODE) model will be used to
capture some important aspects of the physics of climate change at orbital and
millennial scales, aspects of mid-Pleistocene climate, and Dansgaard-Oeschger
oscillations of the last Ice Age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LODE model possesses
simplicity in its formulation (i.e., two equations, small number of adjustable
parameters) and sufficient complexity in its dynamics (i.e., infinite-
dimensional nonlinear delay differential equation) to simulate details of
climate change that other simplified models cannot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will validate the LODE model, expand its scope, and computerize and
disseminate the final version. Validation will involve comparing LODE's output
with intermediate-complexity coupled ocean/ice sheet/atmosphere models that
realistically treat ice cap evolution and greenhouse gas fluctuations. The
validation process will include stability analyses to determine the sensitivity
of the model to variations in the adjustable parameters, probe the limits of
predictability, and determine the phase-space structure and bounds of the
attractor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final model is expected to be of mid-range
intermediate complexity and include Earth's geometry and land/ocean
distribution. It is planned that the model will be applied to data on centennial
and decadal time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a simple
and user friendly mathematical model for the paleoclimate science research
community that can be used help explain some aspects of abrupt climate signals
extant in the paleoclimate record. The model can also be used as an important
teaching tool for students in paleoclimate science. Furthermore, this award will
provide support for a post-doctoral researcher working under the mentorship of
the principal investigator.