* 0241505
* Analysis of the Guiana Abyssal Gyre Experiment [GAGE] Dataset
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Michael McCartney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2006
* USD 418,953.00

0241505 McCartney&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Guiana Abyssal Gyre Experiment (GAGE)
placed a moored array of current meters across the Guiana Basin, to measure the
deep boundary current and to attempt to detect and quantify the hypothesized
northward flow to its east. As implemented the array was placed at 16 N for 27
months, and GAGE was enhanced through collaboration with a German .Meridional
Overturning Variability Experiment. (MOVE, based at U. Kiel). Together the
GAGE/MOVE program fielded 10 moorings with 72 current meters (measuring
temperatures and currents) and 48 moored temperature/salinity instruments
(CTDs). Considerable shipboard CTD measurements were made in the Guiana Basin in
concert with mooring deployments and recoveries. GAGE completed its fieldwork in
May 2002, with the exception of one GAGE mooring that failed to release and will
be recovered in March of 2003. A first look at the results from the moored
instruments, confirms the Gambia Abyssal Gyre hypothesis. The deep western
boundary current at 16 N is strong, estimated as 38 Sverdrups. It has an
unexpected two-regime structure in hydrography and in measured currents: an
onshore regime with strong southward flow near 1600 m, declining with depth to
weak flow near 4000 m, and an offshore regime with strong flow near 3600-4600 m,
declining in strength upwards and reversing to northward flow at 1600 m. The
hypothesized northward recirculation is found in three regimes. Immediately
offshore and adjacent to the deep western boundary current the entire water
column between 1600 m and 5400 m flows northward. On the opposite side of the
Guiana Basin adjacent to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge northward flow extends from the
seafloor at 5400 m to 3600 m. All array instruments across the Basin at or below
3600 m, except one in the deep boundary current, exhibit northward flow. This
yields a surprisingly strong flow of what is called Antarctic Bottom Water, the
coldest abyssal water. Together these northward flow elements are preliminarily
estimated as 19-23 Sverdrups, yielding a net transport of 15-19 Sverdrups, the
expected amplitude for the cold limb of the overturning circulation. The large
GAGE/MOVE datasets will be worked up in collaboration with the MOVE scientists.
The measured currents and the measured hydrography will be combined to produce a
complete quantitative characterization of deep flow at 16 N, including its
variabilities in amplitude and structure. With that as a powerful constraint,
the full hydrographic dataset within the Guiana Basin will be reexamined to
fully characterize the Guiana Abyssal Gyre and establish its role in the cold
limb of the meridional overturning circulation.&lt;br/&gt;