* 0241958
* Explaining Political Clientelism: Evidence from Argentina
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Susan Stokes, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 03/31/2005
* USD 99,990.00

This investigation assesses the causes and dynamics of clientelist political
mobilization. Under clientelism, political parties offer low-income voters
individualized payoffs in return for political support, rather than (or in
addition to) programmatic benefits or public goods. The focus of the research
funded by the National Science Foundation is Argentina, where scholarship
suggests that parties adopt clientelist, programmatic, and other strategies when
they attempt to generate electoral support. In Argentina, the researcher
conducts interviews with party officials and operatives, expand an ecological
database she is constructing that contains electoral, fiscal, and demographic
data, and conduct a sample survey, to test theory-driven hypotheses about the
conditions leading political parties deploy clientelist strategies and leading
voters to be receptive to these strategies. The study evaluates the effects of
economic structure, electoral rules, district size, and the density of social
networks in encouraging parties to adopt clientelist strategies at the
provincial and local levels, and the effects of risk-aversion, norms of
reciprocity, and intimidation in encouraging voter receptivity to
clientelism.&lt;br/&gt;The study has a broader impact for scholars of Argentine
politics and for political and economic reformers in that country and in new
democracies elsewhere. Regarding the first kind of impact, the study generates a
large database with information on electoral returns, demographics, and
budgetary and fiscal information, measured at the level of the municipality, for
a number of Argentine provinces. This database would enter the public domain.
Regarding benefits for economic and political reformers, theorists show that
clientelism creates an incentive for parties to keep their constituents poor and
dependent, even as they provide some valuable goods to these constituents.
Clientelism in developing countries and new democracies therefore may create a
poverty trap, feeding on and perpetuating poverty. Clientelism also diminishes
the ability of voters to make autonomous electoral choices, hence tarnishing the
quality of democracy. Studies such as this, that identify the causes of
clientelism and the factors that undermine it, can serve as guides to reformers.
&lt;br/&gt;