* 0241604
* Invasion of Semiarid Grasslands by Shrubs
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Eric Small, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2005
* USD 75,477.00

0003514&lt;br/&gt;Small&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semiarid American
Southwest experienced a dramatic vegetation change during the 20th century-
perennial grasslands were invaded by shrubs. Similar transitions have occurred
worldwide. As shrubs replace grasses, nutrients become increasingly concentrated
in widely spaced "islands of fertility" around individual plants. In addition,
the top layer of soil is eroded from between shrubs, reducing infiltration and
enhancing runoff. Both processes may inhibit plant growth between shrubs,
enhancing the initial vegetation change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-water
interactions may also play an important role in the shrub invasion process, so
we will test the following hypothesis. The invasion of semiarid grasslands by
shrubs enhances the convergence of overland flow and infiltration beneath plant
canopies. The most dramatic effects exist during high-intensity rainfall events
and on steep slopes. Compared to grasslands, infiltration is enhanced beneath
shrub canopies because runon from upslope interspaces increases-interspaces are
larger and the interspace infiltration capacity is reduced. The result is that
soil moisture is elevated for longer periods of time beneath shrub canopies.
Convergence of overland flow also yields net transport of soil from interspaces
to beneath plant canopies. If this hypothesis is correct, then a positive
feedback exists between shrub invasion and hydrologic changes. Other ecosystem
links may be important. Enhanced convergence of surface water and soil beneath
canopies will yield higher concentration of nitrogen and carbon. Deeper and
longer-lived infiltration will enhance N mineralization. Both of these
mechanisms will intensify the islands of fertility observed beneath shrub
canopies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will test this hypothesis via long-term
monitoring and sprinkler experiments carried out in grass, shrub, and mixed
environments on both gentle (2%) and steeper (7%) slopes (6 sites total). Runon
and runoff from interspace and canopy areas will be collected. We will also
measure surface flow convergence, infiltration, and soil moisture via a water
balance approach. This requires observations of the effects of vegetation
shading and interception. We will identify the causes of the observed changes in
two ways: (1) mapping the interspace areas that contribute water to plant
canopies, using tracers and photography; and (2) measuring variations in soil
hydraulic properties in the field and in the lab. Transport of soil by surface
water will be measured in the collected runon and runoff and grain size will be
analyzed. We will use erosion bridges to further constrain source and sink areas
for soil redistribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here will
enhance our understanding of plant-water interactions in semiarid regions. Our
results are important for quantifying historical changes in basin-scale water
balance and recharge through desert vadose zones. Our data will be useful for
ecologists and hydrologists working at the Sevilleta LTER and elsewhere, and
therefore it will be distributed on the Sevilleta web site.&lt;br/&gt;