* 0241531
* Characterization of Salicylic Acid-Binding Proteins in Plant Defense Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Daniel Klessig, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 07/31/2005
* USD 288,294.00

&lt;br/&gt;Plant disease causes an estimated loss worldwide of $100B annually. A
variety of strategies are being developed to protect plants against disease. One
approach is to induce the plant's own natural defenses. This strategy is
attractive since it can provide protection against a broad spectrum of
pathogens. Broad-spectrum resistance to a wide array of pathogens, know as
systemic acquired resistance (SAR), can be activated by infection with a
pathogen or treatment with SAR-inducing natural chemicals such as salicylic acid
(SA) and its synthetic functional analogues, INA or BTH. The development of
strategies that control disease by manipulating endogenous plant defense
responses will be very important for sustaining agricultural production and
improving our environment and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now well
established that SA plays a key role in the development of resistance in many,
but not all, plant-pathogen systems. While our understanding of SA function in
disease resistance is far from complete, it is becoming increasingly clear that
its role is complex. This increase in the complexity of SA functions in defense
is matched by the discovery in tobacco of multiple proteins with which SA
interacts. An understanding of SA functions in defense against microbial
pathogens will require the identification and characterization of these
proteins, the major objective of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this proposal is to characterize two SA-binding proteins, SABP2 and
SABP3 from tobacco. SABP2 is a very low abundance lipase whose activity is
stimulated by SA binding. Silencing of SABP2 suppresses several disease
resistance responses. Major emphasis is placed on defining SABP2's role in
defense responses. A second objective is to begin an analysis to determine which
member(s) of the 18-member Arabidopsis family of SABP2-like proteins corresponds
to the tobacco SABP2. Preliminary characterization of SABP2's enzymatic
activity, a third objective, will be continued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fourth
objective involves further characterizing SABP3. This protein is the
chloroplastic carbonic anhydrase (CA), and based on yeast complementation
analysis, it appears to have antioxidant activity. Initial studies have
indicated that silencing SABP3 expression alters the HR and local resistance to
several pathogens. These findings will be extended by assessing the effects of
SABP3/CA silencing on defense gene expression and resistance to other pathogens
in Arabidopsis, as well as in tobacco.&lt;br/&gt;