* 0241396
* Dissertation Improvement Grant Proposal: The Ecology of Oldowan Lithic Technology: Oldowan Behavior at Kanjera South and Koobi Fora
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2003
* John W. Harris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2003
* USD 11,661.00

Under the direction of Dr. J. W. K. Harris, Mr. David R. Braun will conduct his
doctoral research on the ecology of stone artifacts in the time period known as
the terminal Pliocene (~2 Ma). He will initiate excavations at new localities in
the world famous Koobi Fora region known for its wealth of early human fossils
and artifacts. These excavations will provide a comparison with one of the most
exciting new finds in early human archaeology: Kanjera South. The site of
Kanjera south has several thousand well-preserved bones and artifacts. With
possible evidence of animal butchery and long distance transport of artifacts
this site is on par with the Olduvai localities of Tanzania in its potential to
elucidate early human behavior. Mr. Braun will compare interpretations of early
human behaviors at these sites, as viewed through the window of lithic (stone
tool) analysis. Lithics are a behavioral trace of the interface between early
humans and their environments. Paleoenvironmental reconstructions at Koobi Fora
paint a picture of a lake- and river-dominated ecosystem, with areas of swampy
woodlands. Meanwhile, Kanjera is reconstructed as an open savannah grassland. A
focus of Mr. Braun's analysis will be to compare the behaviors of early humans
in the variable environments of the terminal Pliocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Braun's analysis of these artifacts will incorporate various new techniques to
understand the importance of stone tools to these proto-humans. To determine the
distances that early humans traveled to collect stones to make artifacts
geochemical techniques (Energy Dispersive X-Ray Flourescence) will be used to
link artifacts to rock outcrops. This analysis is the result of an important
collaboration between American researchers and the Institute of Nuclear Science
at the University of Nairobi. Furthermore, his analysis will incorporate digital
imaging of stone artifacts. These techniques have not previously been employed
on materials of such antiquity. Preliminary results from digital imaging
analysis suggest evolution in early human ranging patterns and landscape
use.&lt;br/&gt;Crucial to an understanding of early human behavior is
investigating the need and use of stone tools. Mr. Braun's analysis will
approach stone artifacts using experimentally derived models to test theories of
optimality in early human stone tool use. By applying an evolutionary ecological
framework to the study of artifact assemblages in varying environments it is
possible to further our understanding of the heterogeneity of early human
behavior. The support of this project will provide vital new insights into the
evolution of human behavior and further the career of a student committed to the
study of African archaeology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;