* 0241637
* Collaborative Research: The Nature and Role of Chemical Weathering and Pedogenesis in Regional Landscape Development, Western Tornetrask Basin, Arctic Sweden
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2006
* John Dixon, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2006
* USD 31,209.00

High-latitude alpine environments are among the most fragile in the world, but
they are also among the least understood. Current global circulation models
project the greatest temperature changes to occur in the high latitudes. The
possibly consequences of this change on local and regional landscapes are
uncertain, however. This research project builds in conceptual, spatial, and
temporal dimensions on a single-valley project to create a robust regional model
of the role of surficial chemical weathering and pedogenesis in landscape
development. The study will take place the western end of the Tornetrask basin
plus two tributary valleys and their confining ridges in northwestern Sweden at
approximately 68-degress N and roughly between 18-degrees and 19-degrees E. The
investigators aim to develop a comprehensive investigation of landscape
development that recognizes variation in regional glacial history and will
contribute to that history by providing more detailed information. They will use
cosmogenic dating to develop information on glacial history as well as baseline
data with which to determine rates of chemical weathering. This information will
be linked to radiocarbon dating of abutting depositional zones to directly link
development of adjacent erosional and depositional elements of the landscape.
During this phase of the project, the investigators will retrieve crushed
dolomite and granite pebbles and buried, machine-polished disks of dolomite,
granite, and limestone that were placed in field sites five years earlier in
order to assess weathering microvariability by vegetation cover type. These
samples will be analyzed using microprobe analysis and scanning electron
microscopy and will be compared with control samples that have been stored at a
nearby field station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of a decade-long
effort to examine the processes of weathering and soil development in a cold
region. This project will build on previous investigations into the nature of
chemical weathering and pedogenic processes in the Arctic/alpine landscape of
Swedish Lapland. This effort will encompass a broader range of lithologies and
start to couple the process studies with well-constrained age control of both
bedrock surfaces and soils. The project also offers prospects for contributing
to reconstruction of the glacial history of a portion of the Fennoscandian ice
sheet. The project will continue development of international collaborative
partnerships with French and Swedish researchers.&lt;br/&gt;