* 0241011
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Eddies and Mixing on Plankton Community Structure and Biogeochemical Cycling in the Sargasso Sea
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* David Siegel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2009
* USD 265,732.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0241310 / OCE-0241399 / OCE-0241023 / OCE-0241340 / OCE-0241011

The currents, fronts and eddies that comprise the oceanic mesoscale, sometimes
referred to as the "internal weather of the sea," are highly energetic and
ubiquitous features of ocean circulation. Dynamical consequences of these
phenomena include perturbation of the chemical and biological environment that
can dramatically impact biogeochemical cycling in the ocean. The processes that
regulate this response are extraordinarily complex, challenging us to understand
how the physical, biological and chemical processes are functionally related.

Recent evidence suggests that mesoscale eddies are an important nutrient
transport mechanism in the oligotrophic waters of the main subtropical gyres.
Numerical simulations and satellite-based statistical estimates indicate that
the magnitude of the eddy-driven nutrient flux could be sufficient to balance
geochemical estimates of new production, which far exceed that which can be
sustained by traditional mechanisms of nutrient supply. Relatively few direct
observations of this process are available, owing to the spatial and temporal
intermittency of the events that drive it. Available data demonstrate that
isopycnal displacements associated with certain types of eddies can transport
nutrients into the euphotic zone, resulting in the accumulation of chlorophyll
in the overlying waters. However, the nature of the biological response and its
impact on coupled biogeochemical cycles and export has yet to be elucidated.
Furthermore, the relationship between eddy-induced upwelling and diapycnal
mixing in and below the mixed layer remains obscure; the strength of this
interaction determines the degree to which the eddy-driven effects are
irreversible and thereby effect a net biogeochemical flux.

In this project, a team of oceanographic researchers will document phytoplankton
physiological response, changes in community structure, export and the
biogeochemical ramifications of eddy-induced upwelling and mixing in the
Sargasso Sea. Target features will be identified prior to field deployment via
remote sensing. High-resolution surveys will be undertaken with an undulating
towed instrument package that includes a Fast Repetition Rate Fluorometer. This
suite of instruments will facilitate simultaneous assessment of photosynthetic
parameters and the species assemblage of phytoplankton and zooplankton. These
measurements will be accompanied by discrete water sampling of biogeochemical
properties in sets of stations along cross sections of the chosen features.
Export will be measured at selected locations within the mesoscale structure.
Rates of mixing between the surface mixed layer and waters at the base of the
euphotic zone will be inferred from the Helium flux gauge and measured directly
with a sulfur hexafluoride tracer release. Taken together, these observations
will be sufficient to test the hypothesis that eddy-induced upwelling increases
photosynthetic rates, changes community structure and increases export from the
euphotic zone, thereby playing an important role in biogeochemical cycling of
the subtropical oceans.

The research will be carried out in a collaborative effort among ten principal
investigators from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, the Bermuda
Biological Station for Research, Rutgers University, University of California,
Santa Barbara, and the University of Miami. The work plan consists of two years
of field observations followed by a final year of synthesis.