* 0241230
* Collaborative Research:  A Real-Time Nearshore Seafloor Seismic Station
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 10/31/2007
* USD 429,744.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: A Real-Time Nearshore Seafloor Seismic
Station Funds are requested to develop and test a mooring system to collect real
time, high bandwidth seismic information from the coastal ocean, which at active
margins presents a variety of fundamental scientific questions related to
tectonics and earthquake mechanics. This region is also characterized by seismic
and volcanic hazards that can be better monitored using offshore stations. The
proposed Real Time Offshore Seismic Station (RTOSS) consists of three elements:
a buried seismometer with real-time output, a hardwired compliant connection
from the seismometer to a surface buoy, and a solar powered RF telemetry link
from the surface buoy to a shore station. LDEO will develop the seismic
instrumentation and the deployment/burial mechanism for the sensor and the USGS
will implement the data archiving and web-based data dissemination system. WHOI
will develop the mooring system, RF telemetry system and lead the mooring
operations field efforts. The key element in the mooring design is a 30-meter
long hose that connects the anchor to the vertical part of the mooring. This
hose is capable of stretching to 2.4 times its unstretched length under normal
mooring tensions giving the mooring the capability to respond to waves, tides
and currents while maintaining tension in the mooring cable. Electrical
conductors are spiraled in the hose interior to transfer signals to the E/M
mooring cable and then to the surface buoy. The seismometer, which is deployed
some distance from the mooring anchor and connected to it by armored cable, will
be installed into the sediments to shield it from damage and provide for better
coupling to the ground. Full rate data from the seismometer will be sent to the
surface via the mooring cables and hose and telemetered to shore using an RF
modem. The system will also collect seafloor pressure and pressure gradient data
that will be used to suppress noise from ocean waves. Power for the sensor and
RF link are generated by solar panels on the surface buoy. System development
and prototype fabrication is scheduled for Year 1. During Year 2, a long-term
test of the system will be conducted at a site near Woods Hole. The mooring will
be deployed in Year 3, and operated near Kick'em Jenny, an underwater volcano
with high levels of seismic activity located offshore of Grenada.

