* 0241096
* Dissertation Research: Civilian Application of Military Aeronautical Technology in Japan, 1920s-1960s
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* James Bartholomew, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation project will offer a new non-Western perspective that will
contribute appreciably to greater international and social understanding about
transfer of engineering knowledge from war to peace. Specifically, it focuses on
the transformation of aeronautical technology in Japan from the 1920s through
1960s and for its completion requires data collection and analysis in Tokyo,
Kanagawa and Aichi prefectures in Japan for five months. By linking Japan's
rapid postwar economic growth during the 1960s to development of wartime
technology and engineering culture, this project argues that the wartime
engineers rather than civilian engineers shaped postwar, peace-oriented
technological development in Japan, as represented in high-speed ground
transportation like the bullet train. It will examine the institutional cultures
and individual engineers that encouraged the civilian application of military
aeronautical technology in trans-World War II Japan, which is an intricately
tangled history of war and peace in the social history of technology. The
intellectual and social merits of this project are twofold. First, this case
study of Japanese aeronautics will expand the range of national comparison in
the field, which has exclusively drawn from Western experiences, to a non-
Western society that has made a successful contribution. It will redress the
imbalance in an area of scholarship where non-Western societies, such as Japan,
are underrepresented. Secondly, it will suggest an alternative configuration of
social networks between research and educational institutions for successful
technological development.

