* 0241475
* Parties, Factions, and Incumbency in State and Federal Elections, 1870 to 2000
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* James Snyder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2006
* USD 263,904.00

Extensive study of U.S. federal elections has deepened understanding of the
politics of representation. Empirical analysis of presidential and congressional
elections has aided in the development of theories of party voting and party
alignments, economic voting, personalistic politics, and the responsiveness of
public policy to election outcomes. Publicly available data on federal elections
has greatly facilitated the research programs surrounding the study of
representation. This project is to assemble data on election returns for state
legislatures and state executives for the period 1870 to present. General
election data for gubernatorial elections are available in existing data sets.
However, publicly available data on state legislative elections are only
available for the period 1968-1988 and 1993-1994, and no comprehensive database
on statewide elective officers other than governor exists. A publicly available
state elections data base will be broadly useful to scholars of American
politics and representation. These data will allow scholars to consider how
voting patterns differ across varying economic, social, and legal contexts and
to measure how short-run fluctuations in the economy, long-run shifts in
demographics, and changing election laws affect election outcomes. These data
will also allow researchers to relate election results to policy outcomes. The
researchers' interests in collecting these data are to better understand party
voting and state party cleavages, incumbency advantages, and electoral
accountability. Comprehensive state election data will allow for improved
measures of party competition at the state and county level. Specifically, with
many offices observed at a give election within a county or state it is possible
to estimate the normal party division within a county or state. Measures of the
normal vote at the state level are used for many purposes-e.g., to study the
changing party alignments, to examine the connection between electoral
competition and participation, and to test conjectures about the electoral
responsiveness of public policy, such as Key's (1949) hypothesis that less
electoral competition leads to policies that benefit wealthier voters and
interests. The researchers focus on comparing national and state party
cleavages, testing hypotheses about when and why these cleavages differ, and
relating these differences to the strength of party vs. personal voting. State
election data also provide unique opportunities for determining the sources of
incumbency advantages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These data will be of value to
numerous other scholars interested in the topic.&lt;br/&gt;