* 0241848
* Welfare Reform and Migration of Poor Families
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,09/30/2007
* Deborah Graefe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2007
* USD 306,469.00

SES-0241848&lt;br/&gt;Gordon F. De Jong&lt;br/&gt;Deborah J. Graefe,
&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study examines whether devolution of welfare policy in the 1996 welfare reform
legislation created new state benefits and rules inequalities that engender
inter- and intra-state migration among distinct groups of welfare poor families,
specifically African American and white single mothers and immigrant families.
This study uses data from three sources-- the 2001-2004 panel of the Survey of
Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the Urban Institute's Welfare Rules
Database and a local labor market characteristics file created from 2003
American Community Survey census data. These databases will be merged to create
a longitudinal, two-stage specification of welfare-benefit "push" and "pull"
impacts on poor immigrant and single-mother-headed families' migration behavior.
Using a state welfare policy inequality framework, the investigators will use
factor analysis to develop measures from post-2000 textual policy manuals to
operationalize multiple welfare benefit and eligibility rule dimensions and to
test hypothesized state program effects on migration. A discrete-time event
history analysis will be used to predict migration events (inter- and intra-
state migration) in the SIPP data. The investigations will use a multi-level
hierarchical modeling strategy, which is an integrated, and previously untested,
micro-macro analysis of three determinant-of-migration hypotheses for welfare
poor families. These tests evaluate effects of 1) time-varying state welfare
policy characteristics; 2) individual and family characteristics, including
fixed-time immigrant and marital status and race, from the information-rich SIPP
files, and 3) local labor market-level economic opportunity structure
indicators. Similar to previous studies, a separate analysis of push and pull
migration effects of hypothesized co-variates will be completed first through, a
"destination model" for identifying pull effects, and then, a "departure model"
which identifies push effects for potential migrants' origin locations grouped
by class of states according to state policy criteria. This two-stage model with
state welfare policy, local labor market, and individual and household
indicators will provide a strong test of the welfare policy impact on migration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;