* 0241559
* The Markets for Children's Services
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2006
* USD 187,894.00

SES-0241559&lt;br/&gt;Joseph Galaskiewicz&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues a program of research
conducted on the non-profit sector in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area
over the past 17 years. There is a long and spirited debate in academic and
policy circles about the differences among charitable, for-profit, mutual
benefit, and public organizations, with some past research finding differences,
other studies finding little or no differences. The current study investigates
the thesis that the matching of providers and consumers in the various markets
for children's services-broadly construed-does not always follow an economic
logic. On the supply side, many providers are not free to respond to changing
market conditions and to react to opportunities because of legal norms and rules
that restrict what they can do, how they can do it, and who can they serve. In
short, legal constraints should explain differences in organization strategies,
service mix, people served and performance. On the demand side, because of
"imperfections" in the marketplace in certain markets, public, charitable, and
mutual benefit organizations enjoy competitive advantages over for-profits and
are seen by consumers as more effective and desirable. Study findings should
shed light on whether charities, membership organizations and public agencies
provide children's services better than for-profits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will collect data from 600 households, with full-time residents and
children between the ages of 5 and 12. Phone interviews will be conducted with
400 households and on-site interviews with an additional 200 households. The
purpose of the survey is to identify service providers that households use for
various kinds of children services. The on-site interviews will collect more in-
depth information on one particular service activity (i.e., quality, location,
price, trust identity, role social networks played in selecting a provider, and
satisfaction with service). Lastly, a sample of service providers (n=250) will
be interviewed to gather data on their legal status, mission/purpose, services,
clients/customers, competitors, organizational strategy and institutional ties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to several fields, including
organizational sociology, market behavior, institutional economics, public
administration, and consumer research. The research has important public policy
implications in that government contracts, charitable deductions, various
subsidies and tax status are premised on the assumption that sector (e.g., for-
profit, public agencies, or non-profit) matters. Also, the research involves a
population that has previously been understudied. A large percentage of the
Phoenix-Mesa metro population is Hispanic (about 25%). Thus, the research will
have much to say about the urban living conditions of Hispanics in the
Southwest. &lt;br/&gt;