* 0241699
* American State Constitutions:  An Historical Series
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2009
* John Wallis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2009
* USD 177,500.00

Since 1776, American states have written over 150 constitutions and amended them
over 10,000 times. States have experimented with a wide variety constitutional
arrangements governing suffrage, representation, legislative structures,
judicial structures, corporate law, and public finance. The constitutions
themselves record fundamental institutional change in American history, a record
reflecting changes in the way Americans think about their governments and the
changing political constraints on the American society and economy. Because
constitutions have changed so much over time, they provide a fascinating
laboratory for social scientists. But because they have changed so often, an
enormous written record has accumulated: the complete constitutional texts and
their amendments would fill up 15,000 printed pages. Since 1997, we have been
assembling the texts of the state constitutions and their amendments, correcting
the errors and omissions of earlier editors, and bringing the complete series up
to 2000. To date, the complete texts of constitutions for twenty states are
available on our web site, http://www.bsos.umd.edu/constitution, and we will
have a complete set by early 2006. One drawback of printed volumes is the
difficulty in sorting through the voluminous mass of text. The constitutions on
the web site can be searched by state, year, article and section number, and by
keyword. This enables readers to immediately access those parts of the
constitutions they wish to examine. The web site is designed around a data base
search engine. This allows us to associate amended text with the article and
section it amends, making it much easier to track constitutional changes through
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating sustainable governments that respect the
rights of individual citizens and provide a stable environment for economic
growth is a fundamental challenge in the modern world. The European Union is
currently struggling to write a workable constitution, as are the transition
economies of Eastern Europe and Asia. The United States not only has the oldest
written constitution continuously in force (the Massachusetts constitution of
1780), but it has the widest and richest constitutional history of any nation in
the world. Until now, however, much of that experience has been locked away in
inaccessible volumes, volumes literally too heavy to carry. This rich history
has had relatively little impact on how social scientists understand how
institutions evolve. Our project opens this tremendous national resource for
everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;