* 0241791
* Ride Integrated Studies at 9degN East Pacific Rise: Establishing a Role for Fe and S Microbial Metabolism in Ocean Crust Weathering
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Katrina Edwards, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 385,759.00

This integrated field and laboratory studies is investigating the role of
chemosynthetic microbial communities in ocean crust alteration and biomass
production in the deep-sea. The studies are based on preliminary studies
concerning the early stages of ocean crust weathering and fluid-rock
interactions in the shallow sub-seafloor. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal
hypothesis tested in this project is that the activities of autotrophic Fe- and
S-oxidizing prokaryotes play important roles in the initial colonization and
weathering of ocean crust. This process results in: 1) the development of sharp
redox gradients associated with the surface crustal rock (seafloor-exposed
surfaces, or subseafloor surfaces exposed to circulating fluids along
fractures), and 2) a flux of fresh organic C (Corg) to ridge flanks that may be
used for respiration by endolithic heterotrophic (including Fe- and S-reducing)
prokaryote communities. These communities likely play a role in the development
of secondary alteration zones rich in reduced Fe and S mineral phases (pyrite,
magnetite), but their role in promoting crustal weathering is not yet known, and
is being investigated in this project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research has
four principal components: &lt;br/&gt;1. Using culture-dependent and culture-
independent methods, examining the phylogenetic and physiologic diversity of
endolithic Fe and S microorganisms associated with the early stages of ocean
crust weathering (field-based). &lt;br/&gt;2. Using geochemical techniques
(elemental and isotopic), examining the progressive weathering of ocean crust
along weathering rinds; correlate finding with (1) (field-based). &lt;br/&gt;3.
Conducting field-incubation studies for 6 mo. to 1 yr. using a suite of pre-
characterized natural crust material (basaltic glass, basalt, varying
compositions). Analyze according to (1) and (2). &lt;br/&gt;4. Conducting
laboratory experiments using existing and anticipated new strains of Fe and S
microorganisms exploring the kinetic relationships between crust alteration and
biomass production, and to determine elemental portioning and speciation effects
attributable to biology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fieldwork is based on two
cruises: one cruise to EPR scheduled for Spring 03 (OCE-9819261, Drs. Fornari,
Tivey, and Schouten, PI.s), and a second cruise to return to the same region
6-12 mo. later. The first cruise initiated field incubation experiments and
collected some preliminary samples along transects at 9degreeN on basalt flows,
of ages from ~0-20,000 yrs. The purpose of the follow-up cruise is to collect
the field incubation samples and to collect fresh environment samples in a
controlled manner that insures biological integrity of the material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;