* 0241152
* Semiparametric Bootstrap Methods for Time Series
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Bruce Hansen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 251,281.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0241152 INSTITUTION: University of Wisconsin, Madison NSF
PROGRAM: ECONOMICS PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hansen, Bruce PROPOSAL TITLE:
Semiparametric Bootstrap Methods for Time Series

The bootstrap is a method of statistical inference is growing in popularity in
applied econometrics due to its broad applicability and success in improving the
accuracy of statistical inferences. Bootstrap methods for time-series data are
fundamentally different from those for random samples, as the bootstrap needs to
replicate the dependence structure in the data. The theory for flexible and
practical bootstrap methods for time-series is sorely lacking. A promising new
bootstrap method for time-series is the Markov bootstrap (MB), which is based on
nonparametric estimation of the one-step-ahead conditional distribution
function, and uses this estimator to construct the bootstrap distribution.

This research extends the MB method to time-series. It investigates theoretical
structure of the bootstrap, leading to concrete methods of implementation. The
research discusses how to construct the ergodic density of the MB and how to
calculate bootstrap parameters and moments from the ergodic density. This is
essential for practical implementation of the MB, as these calculations are a
necessary input in its application. It also investigates the imposition of
constrained on the ergodic density. This is necessary for efficient inference,
as a full nonparametric estimator does not make use of the available information
about the model. Furthermore, constraints must be imposed when the bootstrap is
used to construct efficient confidence intervals.

The accuracy of the MB will depend on the accuracy of the nonparametric
estimator of the conditional distribution; accordingly the research develops
methods to improve estimation efficiency. In this connection, new high order and
low-bias kernel estimators explored. The improvements in density estimation lead
to improved rates of asymptotic refinements for bootstrap inference. This
improvement in density estimation requires theoretical investigation of the
methods developed, which this research investigates. The theory and methods
developed by this research will have broad impacts on bootstrap applications and
will be useful to applied economists in both academic and public sectors.

