* 0241781
* Will Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel Data
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Lee Branstetter, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 124,417.00

Despite the dedicated efforts of many respected scholars over the last 20 years,
the international impact of intellectual property rights (IPR) remains an
understudied area within international economics. The proposed study will take a
novel approach to the analysis of the impact of changing IPR regimes on
innovation and international technology transfer. Over the past two decades, a
number of countries undertook extensive unilateral reform of their IPR systems,
often in response to diplomatic pressure from the United States or other major
trading partners. By employing data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis's
survey of U.S. multinational activity, this study will be able to examine the
responses of individual multinational enterprises to a series of these
reasonably well-documented recent IPR regime changes. The use of firm-level data
on exports, investment, affiliate sales, and, especially, technology transfer
abroad provides the authors with a number of dimensions of variation within
which we can explore these issues. In principle, one can observe the same firm
responding to various kinds of IPR reform in different countries, allowing for
much better measurement the differential impact of national characteristics and
particular aspects of patent reform on the variables of interest. This wealth of
data will allow this study to avoid many of the problems that have plagued
previous efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This improved empirical approach has the
potential to deepen understanding of the effects of IPR on firm-level decisions
and further inform the current policy debate over the manner in which recent and
highly controversial international treaties on intellectual property rights
should be implemented. The most significant of these treaties, The TRIPs (Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights) Agreement, concluded in the
1990s, requires a large number of developing countries to strengthen their
patent and other intellectual property rights (IPR) systems. While some
signatory states still have several years to fully comply with the terms of
TRIPs, there is already sharp disagreement between developing and developed
nations concerning the impact of TRIPs. Many policymakers in developing nations
believe that the policy changes mandated by TRIPs will work against their
national economic interests, transferring rents to multinational corporate
patentholders headquartered in the world's most advanced countries, especially
the United States. Advocates for strong IPR counter that strengthening IPR in
developing countries will induce more innovation, both in the developing world
and in the developed world, fostering more rapid economic growth. These
advocates also believe that a strengthening of IPR will accelerate the transfer
of technology from the developed world to the developing world, ensuring a
relatively equal distribution of gains from this policy change. As important as
this debate is, the competing claims of the opposing sides have been
insufficiently grounded in empirical research. By examining the response of
multinational firms to international IPR agreements that predated TRIPs, this
study will provide invaluable evidence to guide the ongoing international policy
debate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;