* 0241834
* Measurements of Controlling Factors for Air-Sea Fluxes with High-Resolution Ocean Surface Sensors
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Wade McGillis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 09/30/2006
* USD 405,856.00

P.I. Ward&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 0241834&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to
develop a profiling instrument for the study of air-sea gas exchange. The Air-
Sea Interaction Profiler (ASIP) will be equipped with sensors to measure
temperature, conductivity, turbulent velocity, oxygen, and the abundance of
biological species. Measurements will be confined to the upper 10 m of the
ocean, with a focus on surface layers. ASIP will be completely self-contained
and will be capable of making upwardly-rising, autonomous profiles during
deployment. The objectives of this work focus on the close interplay between
physical, chemical and biological processes at the ocean surface. This
instrument will significantly enhance the scientific understanding of air-sea
gas exchange, which has far-reaching societal ramifications due to factors such
as the buildup of greenhouse gases and their affect on future climate. If
successful, the data collected using this instrument will help elucidate the
role of the ocean in absorbing CO2. Accurate knowledge of gas exchange is also
important for monitoring ecosystems such as those in coastal regions, rivers,
lakes and estuaries, as these data are required for determining ecosystem
parameters such as net ecosystem production and gross primary
production.&lt;br/&gt;