* 0241946
* Effects of Photodegradation on the Composition, Optical Properties and Bioavailability of DOM in Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Kenneth Mopper, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2005
* USD 498,896.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0241946&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River-transported
dissolved organic matter (DOM) is the main source of terrestrial dissolved
organic carbon in the sea. Chemical, photochemical and microbial processes that
occur in estuaries can dramatically alter the molecular composition, reactivity
and optical properties of riverine DOM before it is discharged into the oceans.
Many rivers and estuaries are net heterotrophic as indicated by CO2
supersaturation and efflux, which in turn indicates that terrestrial DOM is
being respired at high rates. High rates of respiration imply that terrestrial
DOM undergoes structural degradation and loss of source specificity. Thus,
without a better understanding of the chemical and photochemical alterations
that riverine components undergo in estuaries, we may be incorrectly
interpreting the chemical signatures (i.e., source specificity) and optical
properties of DOM ultimately discharged to the coastal zone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the Old Dominion University
will attempt to quantify variations in the molecular size distributions,
molecular-level characteristics, microbial availability, and optical properties
of riverine and estuarine DOM as a function of light exposure and initial DOM
composition. The proposed experiments will test the following hypotheses: (1)
Photochemical alteration of aquatic DOM will lead to measurable shifts in
molecular-weight distributions and functional group composition; the types and
magnitudes of the shifts will depend upon the chemical characteristics of the
initial DOM. (2) Photochemical alterations of the DOM will change its
bioavailability; whether the bioavailability increases or decreases will depend
upon the chemical characteristics of the initial and photochemically altered
material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multiple molecular-level approach, including
direct temperature-resolved mass spectrometry (DT- MS), pyrolysis-gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (PyGCMS), Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR), and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), will be
used to characterize light-mediated changes in molecular-level composition
within estuarine DOM and representative source materials believed to contribute
significantly to estuarine DOM. DT-MS and PyGCMS will be performed on both
ultrafiltered size fractions (UDOM) and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)
fractions isolated from the water samples. Changes in DOM structure,
composition, functional groups and oxidation as revealed by spectroscopic,
chromatographic, and MS techniques will then be related to photochemically
induced changes in DOM bioavailability (incorporation and respiration).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study will be the first attempt to evaluate in
detail the role of photochemical degradation/alteration processes on modulating
the composition, microbial availability, and optical properties of DOM
discharged from rivers and estuaries to ocean margins. By combining mass
spectrometry, FTIR, NMR, and optical property measurements with microbial
availability determinations, the investigators expect to identify the functional
groups and higher order structures responsible for varying both the optical
properties and the bioavailability of the DOM pool. The use of SEC and
ultrafiltration to provide information on DOM size will indicate whether the
size spectrum shifts significantly during photodegradation and whether this
shift impacts DOM bioavailability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;