* 0241552
* Collaborative Research:  Spatial Averaging of Oceanic Rainfall Variability using Underwater Sound
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Emmanouil Anagnostou, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2007
* USD 189,436.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Nystuen / UW Proposal
No: OCE-0241245&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Anagnostou / UConn Proposal No:
OCE-0241552&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Amitai / UMBC Proposal No:
OCE-0241186&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inherent spatial and temporal
variability of rainfall makes rain one of the most difficult geophysical
quantities to measure anywhere, and yet it is one of the most important.
Acoustic rain gauges (ARGs), which detect and measure rainfall rate by listening
for the underwater sound signal generated by rain striking the ocean surface,
can provide these data in oceanic regions. However, there are several features
of the acoustic rainfall measurement that have not been fully explored. These
include the inherent spatial averaging of the rainfall signal with depth of
deployment, the ability to measure drop size distribution in the oceanic
environment, and the high temporal resolution of the measurement. We propose to
examine the inherent spatial averaging associated with ARGs by deploying several
vertically separated ARGs on a mooring placed in deep water (2 km), but within
range of a high-resolution X-band polarimetric (X-POL) coastal weather radar
(less than 40 km). A dense (~20 gauges) rain gauge network will also be
installed within a 40 km range of the radar to provide a comparison
&lt;br/&gt;validation of the radar data. A two-dimensional video disdrometer
will be installed at closer range (~5 km) to be used for polarimetric algorithm
development and evaluation of the X-POL measurements. The X-POL rain estimates
will be used to validate the acoustic measurement of drop size distribution and
the subsequent classification of rainfall type. The spatial distribution of
rainfall over the hydrophones will be used to predict the received acoustic
signal as a function of depth. The proposed field experiment will permit for the
first time a comprehensive investigation of underwater acoustic rainfall
measurements with a high-resolution radar, thus allowing an examination of the
deep-water (open sea and oceans) validation potential of acoustic measurements
for remote sensing (radar and satellite) rainfall estimates. Validation of
oceanic rainfall measurements is an important component of climate research and
the predictability of climate change with its subsequent impact on human
societies. This will be a collaborative effort between 3 universities and the
National Observatory of Athens (Greece), thus building global science and
engineering infrastructure. Human resource development will include student
participation in both field measurements and associated research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;