* 0241484
* Dissertation Research: Javier Lezaun: "Policing Purity: Testing, Traceability and the Governance of Genetically Modified Organisms"
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Trevor Pinch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 01/31/2004
* USD 5,410.00

1 After several years of intense public debate and continuous regulatory
restructuring, a new system for the control of agricultural biotechnology is
currently taking shape in the European Union. Based on the ability to make a
distinction between genetically modified and conventional organisms in food
commodities, this system aims to detect, identify and trace throughout the
production chain all bio-engineered products entering the European market. The
commingling of conventional and genetically modified products, or any situation
in which a single, clear-cut categorization cannot be established, is defined in
practice as a form of pollution, which must be discovered, controlled and
ultimately prevented. It is this policing of purity that this the focus on this
dissertation research grant. The dissertation tracks the controversies
surrounding testing methodologies and the emergence of the principle of
traceability for genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in the EU. Given the
transnational nature of the commodity flows, detection instruments and new
regulatory provisions must operate beyond the strict geographical boundaries of
the European Union. The dissertation explores the development of this new
control system in the context of EU-US relations and compares developments on
both sides of the Atlantic. Support is requested for additional fieldwork in
Europe and the United States to complete the previous research. Intellectually,
the dissertation draws together a number of disciplines and research interests.
By analyzing the role of techno scientific instruments in the stabilization
and/or disruption of transnational marketplaces and regulations, the research
tries to bring Science and Technology Studies into fruitful contact with
Economic Sociology and International Relations. Finally, the dissertation hopes
to make a contribution to the ongoing international policy debate regarding
social control of agricultural biotechnology.

