* 0241350
* Growth and Cycles
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Boyan Jovanovic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 245,652.00

The goal of this project is to develop a model in which there is an incentive to
adopt a new technology because it increases productivity, but the new technology
may require a large adjustment in the level of human capital. The model will be
used to explain volatility of growth, growth-rate disasters, counter cyclical
human capital accumulations and other empirical observations about economic
growth.

Real Business Cycle research is a large and very useful literature on the
relationship between business cycles, economic growth and technology shocks. But
almost all this research assumes that the technology shocks are exogenous and
studies how the economy responds to them. This project develops a model in which
technology is chosen, total factor productivity depends on current technology
and human capital, and human capital can be upgraded at a cost to better match
future technology. In this model technology adoption is risky. The risk is one
of possibly having the wrong skills and therefore of bearing large costs of
retooling and there are additional risks. So choosing a better technology
increases tomorrow's productivity directly, but increases the risk that
resources will have to be spent to upgrade human capital to keep pace. If growth
imposes risks, then it seems like we should observe a positive relation between
the growth rate and its volatility. Yet the data show a negative relation
between the two over time. This project develops a model that explains this, in
that higher volatility leads to a greater mismatch between future technologies
and skills and greater retooling costs. The model can be decentralized and
extended so that it fits the distribution of growth rates of output,
consumption, investment, stock prices, and interest rates observed in post-war
U.S. data and elsewhere. Business cycles are partly an outcome of technology
choices. This project studies how policy implications hinge on external effects
in the use of technology and in the adjustment of human capital.