* 0241668
* A Model for Ocean Vertical Mixing Including Convection
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Vittorio Canuto, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2006
* USD 354,052.00

ABSTRACT

PI/Institution: Canuto / LDEO Proposal No: OCE-0241668

The main goal of this proposal is to build and test a unified, non-local model
to describe non-convective and convective vertical mixing processes in the
ocean. The model is intended for use in coarse resolution ocean models. The
first part of this work has already been carried out (Canuto et al., 2001, 2002,
C1-2). A turbulence model based on the Reynolds Stress Model was constructed
which included the velocity field and two active scalars fields, temperature and
salinity. Correspondingly, the model provided the eddy diffusivities of
momentum, heat and salinity. The model also provided the eddy diffusivities for
a passive scalar. All the diffusivities were expressed analytically in terms of
the large-scale fields calculable form the OGCMs. The model was tested directly
against the data from NATRE (North Atlantic Tracer Release Experiment)
specifically, the heat, salt and concentration diffusivities vs. depth. The data
were reproduced quite satisfactory including the ratio of salt to heat
diffusivity. Recent but yet unpublished data from measurements at Barbados
(reported by R.W. Schmitt of WHOI at the Hawaii Ocean Sciences Meeting, Feb.
2002) of a much larger mixing at Barbados than at NATRE, are also in agreement
with the predictions of the model. When used in a coarse resolution OGCM, the
model reproduced data closer to Levitus data than previous models (e.g., a
better agreement of the T vs.z profile in the Arctic Ocean). The model is
however local and cannot account for key dynamical feature such as the
entrainment process, a precursor of convective overturning or Deep Convection,
DC. The latter process is one of the ocean's major features since it represents
the initial stage of the global-scale ventilation loops of the world ocean and
is also the predominant mechanism involved in the production of NADW (North
Atlantic Deep Water). Many studies in the last ten years have highlighted major
features of DC among which: spatial localization (e.g., plumes-like behavior),
non-locality (a tracer injected in a plume will not get mixed into the ambient
fluid until the plume "creases to entrain"; a property is thus transported
directly from the surface to the bottom, a non-local process); dependence on
rotation. In contrast to this wealth of data, the representation in OGCMs of the
rich phenomenon of DC is still rather rudimentary. The most commonly used is the
Convective Adjustment proposed in 1969. Many shortcomings have, however, been
highlighted by recent studies the most prominent being perhaps the excessive
level of convection that ultimately yields a poor representation of the ice data
(too little ice). A more promising model is based on an oceanic adaptation of a
Plume Model originally devised by G.I. Taylor. The model has produced
considerably more acceptable results. Thus, at present, vertical mixing
processes can only be dealt with by using one model for convective process and
another model for non-convective (diapycnal) mixing. Here, we propose a unified
treatment of both processes. As stated above, the non-convective mixing part has
already been studied and we now plan to extent the previous local model to
become non-local so as to encompass the convective processes. Not only have we
used such a model to study other types of convection but we have recently shown
that the non-local turbulence model reproduces the Plume Model which assumes
that Plumes occupy a small fraction of the convective patch which holds true
only in the initial stages. Our mixing model will be first tested against LES
data and then implemented in HYCOM (an OGCM in isopycnal coordinates). If our
project is successful, not only will the convective and non-convective processes
be part of the same mixing model but we shall avoid the limitation of the Plume
Model just discussed.