* 0241859
* New Developments in Longitudinal and Heterogeneous Data Analysis with Applications to the Social and Behavioral Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Minge Xie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2006
* USD 65,977.00

This research will develop new statistical methodologies and models for the
analysis of categorical response data that occur frequently in the social and
behavioral sciences. The main objective is to address some statistical issues
that are related to the analysis of complex longitudinal and heterogeneous data
when standard models such as the generalized linear models are inadequate. The
research will explore several distinct modeling issues including, among others,
parametric transformations of independent variables (covariates), the
development of growth curve models for large-scale longitudinal social study
data, and adapting heteroscedasticity in generalized linear models with non-
parametrically scaled link functions. New methods and algorithms in estimations
and inferences will be developed, including: 1) developing a general computing
method for estimating transformation and regression parameters in covariate
transformation models; 2) providing a stochastic-approximation-based computing
algorithm for general mixed-effects models; and 3) developing efficient
estimating equations for models with non-parametrically scaled link functions.
The research also will develop large-sample-based supporting theories for the
proposed methodologies. The research topics originally stemmed from some
specific consulting projects in the social and behavioral sciences, but the
methodologies to be developed are very general, with potential applications to
many complex data analysis problems.