* 0241928
* Temporal Evolution of Microstructures on a Nanoscale:   Experiments and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2007
* David Seidman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 12/31/2007
* USD 644,643.00

This grant explores the fundamental problem of the temporal evolution of
decomposing microstructures in multicomponent alloys on a nanoscale, from both
the experimental and simulation points-of-view. A basic understanding of the
decomposition processes, involving nucleation, growth, and coarsening of
precipitates of metastable or equilibrium phase(s) is technologically and
scientifically interesting. A major goal is to analyze nanostructural changes at
the discrete atomic level by a combination of atom-probe (3DAP) microscopy and
simulation techniques: specifically 3DAP microscopy yields the nanostructure in
3D, based on the millions of atoms collected; in concert with kinetic Monte
Carlo (KMC) simulations a nearly complete atomistic picture can be obtained. To
obtain a complete analysis of the evolving nanostructures on all relevant length
scales, transmission electron microscopies are used. The major focus concerns
the effects of the alloying elements Ta, Nb, W, Re or Ru on the evolution of g'
(ordered L12 structure) precipitates in a g?matrix (disordered FCC) in twelve
different model nickel-base superalloys. Ternary, quaternary, quinary and
sexinary alloys are fabricated by adding one or several of these elements to an
81.5 Ni-8.5 Cr-10.0 Al (at.%) base composition. The kinetics of decomposition in
model Ni-Al-Cr base alloys are also studied using KMC simulations, where
diffusion of atoms on a rigid lattice is mediated by a monovacancy mechanism.
KMC simulations allow one to study in direct lattice space the temporal
evolution of a microstructure starting from a random solid solution and then
following the decomposition at a selected aging temperature in real time and
direct space. A subset of the alloys will be subjected to creep testing under
constant compressive or tensile stress in air over the relevant temperature
range (980 to 1150 degrees C) and strain rates (10-8 s-1 to 10-4
s-1).&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The 3DAP microscope is utilized to determine: (1)
temporal evolution of the distribution of all elements with subnanoscale spatial
resolution; (2) partitioning of the alloying elements between the g? and g'
phases; (3) segre-ga-tion at the g?/g' heterophase interfaces; (4) number
density of the g' precipitates as a function of time; (5) super-saturation of
each element as a function of time; (6) mean diameter of g' precipitates as a
function of time. This research program involves undergraduate students through
the REU program along with outreach at Evanston Township High School (ETHS),
which has resulted in the employment of both juniors and seniors at ETHS for
developing and maintaining full-featured data analysis application, ADAM 1.5
(Atom Probe Data Manipulation). An important goal of this research is to provide
an experimental and quantitative verification of the properties and performance
of alloys with fully characterized nanostructures.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;