* 0241949
* Social Identity and Knowledge Transfer
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Aimee Kane, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 201,337.00

Knowledge transfer in organizations has become increasingly important because
firms are more often organized in a distributed fashion to take advantage of
differences in expertise, labor costs, and access to markets that exist around
the world. The increased use of joint ventures and strategic alliances, the
increased frequency of mergers and acquisitions, and the greater prevalence of
the multiunit organizational form also point to the importance of knowledge
transfer. Evidence indicates that organizations that are adept at transferring
knowledge across their units are more productive and more likely to survive than
their counterparts that are less effective at knowledge transfer. The research
examines a critical predictor of knowledge transfer across groups: whether the
groups share a social identity. We hypothesize that sharing a social identity
affects the likelihood of knowledge transfer across groups and their subsequent
performance. Group members who share a social identity generally view their own
group, its members, its products, and its processes more positively than those
of other groups. In a laboratory study, we found that groups that shared a
superordinate social identity with a new member who rotated in from another
group were very likely to adopt innovations proposed by the rotating member when
the innovations improved their performance and to reject innovations when they
did not improve performance. By contrast, groups that did not share a
superordinate social identity with a rotating member were likely to reject the
new member's innovations, even when they would have improved group performance.
The current research replicates and builds on our initial results to gain a
greater understanding of the processes through which and the conditions under
which social identity affects knowledge transfer and performance. The first
study aims to determine the minimal conditions necessary to create the
perception of a shared superordinate social identity among interacting group
members and to affect knowledge transfer. The second and third studies aim to
assess how characteristics of groups and characteristics of the knowledge being
transferred interact with social identity to affect knowledge transfer. This
research has implications for theories of knowledge transfer as well as theories
about shared social identity. Because knowledge transfer can have a significant
impact on group and organizational performance, the research has practical
implications for improving organizational and work group effectiveness.