* 0241466
* Collaborative Research: Coalition Government and Parliamentary Oversight
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Lanny Martin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2004
* USD 36,827.00

This project addresses a central question in the comparative study of democratic
institutions: How do coalition governments, which are composed of multiple
parties with often conflicting ideological goals, manage to make policy?
Surprisingly, relatively few studies have examined this issue in a systematic
cross-national fashion. Instead, most research on multiparty government has
focused on the formation and termination of coalitions, largely neglecting the
policymaking process between these events. In this project, the principal
investigators address this question by examining lawmaking in two European
parliamentary democracies. Specifically, the investigators propose to collect
primary data on the committee and floor stages of the legislative process in
Germany and the Netherlands. The theoretical model in the project focuses on a
central principal-agent problem that coalition cabinets must solve if they are
to govern successfully. Because expertise is needed to plan and implement public
policy, governments in parliamentary democracies must delegate important
policymaking powers to individual ministers who have control over relevant issue
areas. In particular, cabinet ministers enjoy considerable autonomy in drafting
government legislation within their jurisdiction. For coalition governments,
such delegation creates the risk that ministers will use their autonomy to bias
policy in favor of their own parties without adequately taking into account the
interests of their coalition partners. The incentive to do so grows particularly
strong on issues that greatly divide coalition members. The argument proposed
here is that parliamentary oversight provides a key institutional mechanism that
allows coalition parties to deal with this problem. While it is difficult to
police ministers from within the cabinet, coalition members can make use of the
legislative process to scrutinize and amend legislation introduced by hostile
ministers. The researchers contend that this mechanism is particularly important
where the coalition is internally divided. If correct, this argument challenges
the common perception that parliaments in Western Europe are largely irrelevant
institutions. Legislatures may play a crucial role as an intra-coalition
conflict management tool that allows parties with divergent preferences to
govern jointly. &lt;br/&gt;An empirical evaluation of this theory requires
detailed data on the treatment of government bills in the legislative process.
In particular, such an evaluation requires information on the extent to which
coalition parties make use of the legislative process to scrutinize and amend
policy proposals drafted by individual ministers. With support from their home
institutions, the principal investigators have already collected relevant data
on nearly three hundred government bills introduced in the Netherlands and
Germany between 1982 and 1994. The existing dataset provides information on the
ideological stance of coalition parties on the issues addressed by these bills
as well as the length of delay these bills encounter in the legislative process.
A preliminary analysis of the data has yielded results that are consistent with
the theory. The financial support requested in this proposal enables the
principal investigators to expand this dataset substantially and conduct a more
direct test of the theory. The expanded dataset will consist of information on
the exercise of parliamentary oversight as measured by changes made to
government bills by coalition parties during the committee and floor stages of
the legislative process.The proposed project has theoretical and empirical
significance for scholars engaged in comparative legislative research. Most
importantly, the project challenges the common assumption that legislatures in
parliamentary systems are unimportant institutions. By suggesting that
parliaments are significant primarily as mechanisms for managing intra-coalition
conflict, the study encourages renewed theoretical and empirical efforts in
understanding the role of legislatures. In addition, the project makes available
cross-national legislative data consisting of detailed information on government
bills in two major European countries. Currently, no comparable dataset on
government bills and the legislative process is available to the scholarly
community. &lt;br/&gt;