* 0241566
* Cabinet Turnover in Parliamentary Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* John Huber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2006
* USD 149,997.00

This research project examines patterns of turnover among cabinet ministers in
parliamentary democracies. The project develops and tests a theory that explains
how features of the institutional environment and the party system influence
decisions to move individuals in and out of key cabinet posts. In so doing, it
considers the incentives of individuals to accumulate both technocratic
expertise, which is specific to particular portfolios, and political experience,
which is useful in any portfolio. The project builds on the long tradition of
studying government formation and cabinet instability, but it differs in several
respects. First, the research examines turnover in the individuals that control
portfolios rather than the terminal events that end each government. Second, the
theoretical approach brings theories of delegation to bear on understanding how
prime ministers and party leaders use turnover to discover the most talented
individuals, and to put the best people in the most important jobs at a given
moment. The analysis will therefore control for the effect of bargaining
processes among parties with divergent preferences, which have been emphasized
by others, and concentrate on developing and testing arguments about variables
that facilitate or discourage the accumulation of particular types of
experience. This approach directs attention toward explanatory variables that
are absent from studies of cabinet instability, such as institutional
prerogatives of prime ministers, decision-making rules within political parties,
and organizational relationships between ministers and civil servants. Third,
most studies of cabinet governance focus on advanced parliamentary democracies,
whereas this research combines the study of advanced and developing democracies.
Broader impact. The broader impact of the proposed research relate to its
benefits to society, infrastructure improvements in political science, and
unique educational collaborations. The benefits to society concern new insights
into how to design institutional arrangements for effective democratic
governance. Understanding how turnover affects policymaking requires knowledge
of what causes turnover. To this end, the investigators take an explicitly
"institutional" perspective, examining the effects of formal rules within the
political system and within political parties. This makes it possible to explore
how institutional arrangements affect democratic performance, allowing us to
begin building more precise and useful arguments about which tradeoffs will be
associated with the choice of different institutional forms. Developing such
argument is crucial to aid in the creation of stable and successful democracy
around the world. Regarding infrastructure, the project will make publicly
available several data sets that will be useful to scholars who conduct research
on parliamentary democracies. These include data on cabinet composition in 38
countries, as well as data on internal party organization, institutional
arrangements for cabinet decision-making, and civil service organization.
Importantly, these data are from both "advanced" and "developing" countries.
Consequently, the project will make it easier for scholars to transcend the
conventional "advanced" versus "developing" countries dichotomy that often
exists in the scholarly community. Finally, regarding educational collaboration,
the project addresses a disconnect that often exists between social scientific
institutional research of the form described here (i.e., formal models and
empirical tests) and education in policy schools. Students from policy schools
often go on to become involved in shaping institutional reform processes, but
their policy school curriculum typically does not given them a clear framework
for thinking about these choices. In this research project, the PI will work
with Masters students from developing democracies at Columbia's School of
International and Public Affairs to teach them how scholars in the rational
choice tradition study institutional tradeoffs, and how research can be designed
to permit empirical claims about these tradeoffs.

