* 0241935
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The "Give" and "Take" on Restaurant Tipping
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Catherine Eckel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,860.00

Using both laboratory experiments and survey data collected from several
Richmond, Virginia restaurants, this study explores various aspects of
restaurant tipping, along with their implications for both the consumer (the
"give") and the server (the "take"). Several consumer-side issues will be
tackled. For example, what impact does the size of the table have on a
customer's incentive to tip? Standard economic theory predicts an inverse
relationship between tip size and table size, but does this relationship hold
empirically? Also, what impact does the composition of the table have on a
customer's incentive to tip? For example, do women tip more than men? There is a
good deal of research in economics that finds that women are more generous than
men, but does this also hold true in a tipping situation, especially when men
tip in the presence of women? Finally, this study examines the recent (June
2002) Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Fior d'Italia, Inc., which allows
the IRS to estimate a restaurant's tip income based on credit card receipts. On
the server side, this study investigates the effect of tip pooling, a method of
server remuneration in which servers share all of their tips equally among each
other, on server effort. Is service under a standard tipping arrangement,
whereby the server retains, for himself, all of his customers' tips, superior to
service under a tip pooling arrangement? Here, standard economic theory says
that service under a standard tipping arrangement should exceed that under a tip
pooling arrangement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issues that are examined in this
study have several important implications. First, this study should help to
explain why some restaurants add an automatic service charge onto bills at large
tables, while others do not; secondly, it provides insight into why some
restaurants are more likely than others to use tip pooling as their method of
server remuneration. Third, this study will provide evidence of the effect of
the Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Fior d'Italia, Inc., which allows
the IRS to estimate a restaurant's tip income based on credit card receipts. A
statement by the National Restaurant Association said that "Seven out of 10
restaurants are small businesses, many of which operate with slim margins. Quite
frankly, this decision could mean the difference between a restaurant staying in
business or closing its doors." Finally, there is a fairly sizeable literature
in economics on sex differences, which analyzes both whether, and why, men
behave differently than women. This study will add to that literature by
exploring sex differences in tipping behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;