* 0241012
* SGER:  Detection of Optical Absorption from Individual Molecules Using Sagnac Interferometry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Martin Fejer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 02/29/2004
* USD 99,700.00

Professors William E. Moerner and Martin M. Fejer of Stanford University are
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry and Atomic and Molecular
Optics Programs to detect individual molecules using optical absorption and a
Sagnac interferometer. The idea of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research is
to avoid the dependence on fluorescence, which is the basis of most single
molecule spectroscopy at present. Absorption would be a much more global
approach, but is usually not as sensitive due to high background noise. Sagnac
interferometry directly measures the difference in optical phase shift
experienced by beams traveling clockwise versus counterclockwise in a ring. It
is insensitive to excess phase amplitude and phase noise from the probing laser.
Saturation modulation of the molecular absorption with a secondary pulsed laser
will be used to make the molecular absorption time varying. By scanning the
detection volume of the probe laser over the sample, microscopic images of
ultrasmall features can be generated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
potential to impact several fields including trace detection, biophysics,
materials science, quantum information and nanoscience. In biological cells, for
example, it would be possible to perform single molecule spectroscopy without
dye labels, which potentially perturb the system, and without interference from
spurious emitters.&lt;br/&gt;