* 0241652
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Symphyseal Fusion in Ungulates and Anthropoids: A Case of Functional Convergence?
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* William Hylander, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2004
* USD 10,592.00

In the last three decades anthropologists have been among the most active
researchers on the mammalian masticatory apparatus. In addition to numerous
comparative morphological studies, physical anthropologists have contributed
significantly to the growing literature on in vivo masticatory function. As a
result, much of what is known about the mammalian cranial form is based on
primate models. These studies have revealed a number of interesting patterns
regarding the evolution of primate craniofacial form. &lt;br/&gt;In particular,
research suggests that jaw-muscle function has played a significant role in the
evolution of primate masticatory form. During the early development of
anthropoid primates (i.e., monkeys, apes and humans), the mandibular symphysis
(the joint between the two halves of the mandible) fuses or becomes completely
ossified. However, like most mammals, the earliest true primates (called
strepsirrhines or prosimians) retain the primitive condition of a highly mobile,
unfused symphysis. Interestingly, recent work shows that jaw adductor
recruitment patterns during mastication differ between anthropoids and
strepsirrhines with respect to the timing and magnitude of recruitment of
transversely oriented force from the balancing-side (i.e., non-chewing side)
muscles. Of particular interest is the activity of the balancing-side deep
masseter muscle, which has a large transverse component to its force. Compared
to strepsirrhines, in anthropoids this muscle is recruited late relative to the
other jaw adductors and the magnitude of force from this muscle is increased.
This pattern of deep masseter activity causes the two halves of the mandible to
be pulled apart resulting in significant stress and strain in the symphysis.
Thus, there is evidence that jaw muscle firing patterns, symphyseal loading and
the evolution of symphyseal fusion are linked in anthropoids. &lt;br/&gt;The
research on goats, alpacas and horses outlined in this study will contribute to
the growing literature on the mammalian masticatory apparatus from an in vivo
perspective. As little is known about masticatory function in ungulates,
particularly in alpacas and horses, the electromyographic, strain and kinematic
data collected here will expand our understanding of cranial form and function
in two additional mammalian orders. More importantly, as alpacas and horses also
have fused symphyses, this study will shed light on the evolution of symphyseal
fusion in non-primates. To this end, these data will aid in identifying
convergent trends in the evolution of masticatory form in primates and
ungulates. Specifically, this research will clarify whether there are similar
functional constraints on the symphysis in these animals despite differences in
facial morphology. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scientific contributions
outlined above, the broader impacts of this research include the participation
and graduate training of a minority and female Co-PI. As much of the data
collected in this study will be pertinent to future research, funding for this
project will be integral in advancing the scientific career of this Co-
PI.&lt;br/&gt;