* 0241814
* RUI Collaborative Research:  Characterization and Control of Spatio-Temporally Chaotic Pattern Dynamics in Taylor Vortex Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Richard Wiener, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2007
* USD 129,656.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
quantitatively characterize the transition from localized chaos to
spatiotemporal chaos (STC) as a function of system size. This is a novel study
that will lead to a better understanding of how dynamic spatial patterns become
disordered. Experimentally, Taylor vortex flow (TVF), with both long single and
multiple-waist hourglass geometries will be studied. Previous experiments by the
PIs demonstrate that TVF with a short single hourglass geometry exhibits
spatially-localized, low-dimensional chaotic pattern dynamics consisting of
persistent phase slips near the center of the vortex pattern. Lengthening this
system, or introducing multiple hourglass waists, is expected to generate more
complex dynamics that are no longer spatially localized. Numerically, a
spatially-ramped reaction-diffusion model and models of diffusively coupled
nonlinear oscillators will be explored. The reaction-diffusion model is already
known to exhibit localized chaos in a short system and STC in a long system, but
the transition between these states has not been examined yet. Building on their
previous success controlling localized chaotic pattern dynamics, the PIs will
attempt feedback control of STC in the experimental geometries, informed by the
development of control algorithms for the numerical models. The project will
offer highly accessible opportunities for undergraduate students to learn about
chaos, nonlinear dynamics, pattern formation, control theory, and fluid
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is a better understanding and characterization of how
dynamic spatial patterns become disordered, and the development of minimal
interventions sufficient to suppress this disorder. Constantly changing but
recognizable spatial patterns occur throughout natural and human-made systems-
for example, patterns of cloud formation, of electrical conduction in mammalian
hearts, and of light output from high-powered lasers. Dynamic patterns often
display what is referred to as "spatiotemporal chaos" (STC), a combined state of
order and disorder in which the changes in the pattern are unpredictable over
both time and space. How patterns make a transition from localized chaos to STC
as the size of a system is increased is not yet understood. This project will
investigate this transition in a rotating fluid system in which a pattern of
vortices is created and in computer models that simulate analogous dynamic
patterns. The geometry of the fluid system is designed so that there are regions
in which vortices are chaotically created and destroyed. The PIs will also
attempt to control STC (i.e. suppress the disorder) by creating a feedback loop
that makes very small changes to the speed of rotation. The ability to control
STC has important technological and medical implications (e.g. control of
erratic lasers, arrhythmic hearts, and mixing processes in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries). The project will offer highly accessible
opportunities for undergraduate students to learn about chaos, nonlinear
dynamics, pattern formation, control theory, and fluid mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;