* 0241723
* Viruses in marine food webs
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2007
* USD 402,139.00

Viruses are the most abundant biological agents in marine plankton and have a
tremendous potential impact on biological oceanographic processes, including
material &amp; energy flow as well as plankton diversity. New molecular methods
to investigate diversity of host bacteria and viruses permit researchers to
begin unraveling the relationships between virus and host diversity in marine
plankton, and how it may affect overall rate processes. These molecular
techniques include molecular fingerprinting of 16S rRNA and other genes for
bacterial hosts, and pulsed field gel electrophoresis for virus communities.
This project will use such approaches, along with other techniques, to study
natural and experimental marine microbial systems and address basic hypotheses
on the relationships between bacterial and viral communities. Study sites will
include the Wrigley Time Series Site (WTSS) midway between Los Angeles and
Catalina Island, and also richer coastal waters near Los Angeles and Catalina
Island. Part of the project is continuation of an existing monthly time series
at WTSS of virus abundance and virus community composition at 4 depths to 500 m,
to augment other microbiological and oceanographic observations being made at
that location with other financial support. In addition to the general time
series databasing component which continues to provide valuable microbial
community data in its own right, we will use this sampling to test hypotheses
about viral control of specific common groups of marine bacteria, initially
targeting the SAR 11 cluster, cyanobacteria, and marine alpha proteobacteria.
Other focused experiments will also target these groups. SAR 11 and
cyanobacteria are good targets because (a) they are ubiquitous and typically
each makes up 5-30% of the bacteria (b) their members are very closely related
to each other worldwide, yet distant from other known groups (c) an extensive
database of 16S rRNA and 16S-23S intergenic spacer sequences for both groups is
published (and also other genes in cyanobacteria), facilitating investigation of
strain composition at high resolution without the need to culture the organisms
(d) both groups are culturable, with the SAR11 group just recently isolated in
dilution culture, with multiple strains reported. Short-term, more frequent
sampling and experimental mesocosms will be used to examine community and
specific subgroup dynamics on the generation time scale. The project has the
added value of taking advantage of a unique time series of microbial diversity
at an easily accessible marine site, suitable for further analysis such testing
hypotheses relating diversity and stability in marine microbes. Samples (e.g.
preserved virus concentrates, microbial DNA) will also be available for
retrospective analysis. Exploratory investigation of virus diversity and
activity in sediments is also included as a minor component. Broader impacts of
this project include a training and education component with participation of
underrepresented groups, enhancement of the research and education
infrastructure, and planned broad dissemination of the results.