* 0241363
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH. The Role of Meso- and Bathypelagic Prokaryotic Organisms in the Marine Water Column: Insights from Compound-Specific Radiocarbon Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Ann Pearson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2006
* USD 226,212.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0242160&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0241363&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though the meso- and bathypelagic regions
beneath the euphotic zone contain nearly all of the oceans volume, little is
known about the biogeochemical processes that function in this region. For this
reason, a PI from Scripps Institute of Oceanography will collaborate with a PI
from Harvard University to determine which carbon sources fuel prokaryotic
production in the meso- and bathypelagic ocean. Specifically, the PIs wish to
address the following two questions: (1) Is freshly-produced organic matter the
primary dissolved organic carbon (DOC) pool that is accessible to deep ocean
heterotrophic prokaryotes or is "old" DOC also bioavailable?; and (2) Is
chemoautotrophic fixation of inorganic carbon by planktonic archaea an important
component of the deep ocean carbon cycle? To address these questions, the PIs
plan to measure the radiocarbon (14C) concentration of the carbon source pools
and the resulting prolaryotic (bacterial and archaeal) biomass at the surface,
meso (500-600 m) and bathypelagic (&gt;900 m) depths. In addition, fluorescent
in-situ hybridization (FISH) and genetic diversity analysis by denaturing
gradient gel electrophorsis (DGGE) will provide a complementary picture of the
biological community. Lastly, to obtain the large quantities of biomass-derived
carbon needed for this study, the PIs plan to develop an in-situ, battery
powered, submersible pump capable of pumping 20,000L of seawater per deployment
during the first year of the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;