* 0241904
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Litigation and the Electoral Connection-An Analysis of State Attorneys General and Modern Business Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Paul Teske, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,837.00

&lt;br/&gt; Research on policy entrepreneurs has grown into a thriving field,
but its practical applications have been limited. In this Doctoral Dissertation
Research Project the student analyzes a much-overlooked policy maker-the state
attorney general-as an entrepreneur. Because they are motivated by reelection
and the pursuit of higher office, attorneys general are alert to opportunities
to spot market failures, punish businesses and score electoral points with
consumer/voters. The student posits that every state attorney general has the
potential to be an entrepreneur, but various factors either hinder or help them
in realizing this potential. In the first study, the student analyzes the
conditions under which state attorneys general join multi-state consumer
protection lawsuits, arguing that increased activity results in entrepreneurial
behavior. He hypothesizes that a variety of ideological, institutional and
environmental variables facilitate entrepreneurial behavior. Preliminary
findings show &lt;br/&gt;that a liberal electorate and increased legal personnel
within the attorney general office result in attorneys general acting as
entrepreneurs. In the second study, the student aim to upholds the assumptions
of the first study, by showing that attorneys general with strong records of
consumer regulation enforcement are more likely to run for and win governorships
or Senate seats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;