* 0241675
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Aging Conceptualizations and Personal Relationships of Mature Women and Primary Care Physicians
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* James Stansbury, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2005
* USD 8,239.00

0241675 Stansbury / Grant Health care providers often share the widespread view
that sexuality becomes less important as people age, particularly for those who
are no longer married due to divorce, separation or widowhood. Many physicians
appear to be reluctant to discuss these issues with their mid-life and older
patients, which can be problematic not only for patients' health and well-being.
A lack of knowledge can have serious consequences regarding clinical HIV
prevention. Since the transmission trends of those age 50 and over with HIV/AIDS
are beginning to mirror those of younger populations, with increases in
heterosexual transmission as well as increasing percentages of women and
minorities, additional understanding of the risky behavior of mid-life and older
persons is important. This dissertation research, by an anthropology graduate
student studies how physicians and "recently single" (separated, divorced or
widowed) women age 45-70 in a large, conservative Northeast Florida city
conceptualize aging and sexuality. The information will be gathered through in-
depth interviews with 60 women drawn from African American, Latina, and
EuroAmerican populations. The project will use systematic data collection
techniques (called cultural consensus analysis) to assess the cultural models of
the respondents. The project will advance our understanding of how varying
perceptions about patient-doctor communication might differ in such a way as to
inhibit effective interaction. The broader impacts of this project include
aiding the training of a young social scientist, and advancing our understanding
of how "recently single" mature women (including Blacks, Whites and Latinos)
deal with their sexual behavior in a medical context. The new knowledge should
serve to aid in targeting safer-sex messages to hard-to-reach populations. The
knowledge will be useful for public health campaigns, and will provide the basis
for developing physician-training modules to address sexual health and clinical
HIV prevention with mature women. In addition, the project builds on the work of
other medical anthropologists studying health perceptions by combining
qualitative and quantitative methods to explore variations in health beliefs.

