* 0241645
* Collaborative Research: Influences of Cyclonic Eddy Activity on Planktonic Food Web Dynamics and Carbon Export in the Lee of Hawaii
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Claudia Benitez-Nelson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2007
* USD 246,652.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0241645 / OCE-0241897 / OCE-0241121 /
OCE-0241852&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators at
the University of South Carolina, the University of Hawaii, the University of
California - Santa Barbara, and Science and Technology International will
conduct interdisciplinary investigation of the physical, chemical, and
biological characteristics of cold-core cyclonic eddies that form in the lee of
the main Hawaiian Islands. This area serves as a natural laboratory, providing
excellent, if not unique, opportunities for understanding eddy-enhanced
production and carbon export in an accessible subtropical oligotrophic setting.
Three cruises are planned in which eddies will be sampled during three phases:
spin-up (cruise I), maturity (cruise II), and spin-down (cruise III). Satellite
data will be used to direct the timing and sampling locations of the intensive
ship-based observations. Sampling through the eddy is designed to balance
horizontal resolution (i.e., spacing between XBT and CTD stations) with
synopticity. The team will characterize the biomass, size structure and
taxonomic composition of phytoplankton and grazers in the eddy relative to the
ambient oligotrophic waters off Hawaii. This information will be coupled with
estimates of phytoplankton growth and microzooplankton grazing rates and related
to concurrent rate estimates of primary productivity and new/export production
(Th-234 flux estimates, sediment traps, nutrient inventories and stable carbon
isotope mass balance). The trajectory and subsurface temperature structure of
the target eddy will be monitored using satellites (GOES-10, SeaWiFS, MODIS, and
TOPEX/ERS) and drifters, respectively, and the contribution of the local
cyclonic eddy field to carbon export will be estimated. The proposed sampling
strategy will provide a 4-dimensional (x,y,z,t) data set for investigating the
linkages and temporal lags between nutrient inputs, biological responses, and
the downward flux of organic carbon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These biogeochemical
and physical data sets will provide missing links for advancing our
understanding of the nature and importance of eddies in facilitating organic
carbon export, as well as hard data for modelers to test their fundamental
assumptions and formulations. The ultimate goal is to provide in situ estimates
for the upper and lower limits of mesoscale eddy effects on local nutrient and
food web dynamics such that they can be used to test, evaluate and reformulate
the various models being developed to study eddy phenomena and their
biogeochemical consequences on regional and basin scales. Towards that end,
experimental simulations of altimeter-based nitrate flux models will be
performed. This comparison should allow extrapolation of the results from the
lee of the Island of Hawaii to the eddy field in the North Pacific Subtropical
Gyre, using the blended TOPEX/ERS product and calculated nitrate fluxes
calibrated with local in situ data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;