* 0241271
* Conference: Symposium: Contemporary Approaches to Endocrine Signaling, Toronto, Ontario, Canada on January 4-8, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Miles Orchinik, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,160.00



This symposium on contemporary approaches to endocrine signaling is part of the
annual meeting for the Society for Integrative & Comparative Biology (SICB). It
addresses technical innovations that are now being applied to unconventional
model organisms. Participants in this program possess expertise in
neuroendocrinolgy, endocrinology, animal behavior, and developmental biology.
The symposium will engage both senior and junior ranked scientists and students
in discussions of the application of these new techniques that have been derived
from more traditional model organisms, such as laboratory rodents. Introduction
of new people to the society is enhanced by the international nature of this
meeting being held in Toronto, Canada. Travel funds will allow participants to
attend the meeting. The impact of this will extend to numerous fields of study,
as mentioned above. In addition, the meeting will foster scientific education by
training graduate and undergraduate students to participate in comparative
biological research armed with a clear understanding of this sophisticated
technology. A further impact will be made when these discussions are published
in the journals: Integrative & Comparative Biology and General & Comparative
Endocrinology.