* 0241893
* Determinants of Husband-Initiated and Wife-Initiated Divorces
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Marco Haro, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2006
* USD 162,555.00

SES- 0241893 &lt;br/&gt;Paula England &lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to extend our understanding of why
couples divorce or stay together by studying determinants of wives and husbands
initiating divorces. The study is innovation in its approach of classifying
divorces according to whether the wife or husband initiates the divorce. Who
initiated the divorce is defined as the ex-spouse who reports to have wanted the
divorce more. The study analyzes the distinct determinants of women leaving men
and men leaving women. No previous research has distinguished between causes of
husbands leaving wives and wives leaving &lt;br/&gt;husbands. The study uses all
three waves of the National Survey of Families and Households; wave 3 becomes
available in early 2003. The PI draws upon theories of gender and exchange
theory in sociology, and bargaining models in economics. One goal of the study
is to assess whether having better alternatives outside the marriage makes a
partner more likely to initiate divorce, particularly if s/he is unhappy in the
marriage. Having higher earnings (which facilitate support of oneself, one's
children, and possibly a new family) affect alternatives outside the marriage.
Better health (e.g. not having a physical or mental disability) may improve
one's ability to live on one's own and prospects on the marriage market, and
thus make initiation of divorce more likely. The project also assess whether a
partner receiving more benefits from a spouse is less likely to initiate
divorce. These benefits include income from the spouse's earnings, household
work, emotional support, treatment perceived as fair, and the ability to rear
children in an intact family. Gender differences are also assessed, for example,
if there is a double standard of aging, then age will deteriorate women's
outside marriage market alternatives more than men's, and women's inclination to
initiate divorce will decline with age more than men's. The research also
examines whether those with greater commitment to staying in marriage
unconditionally are less likely to initiate divorce. The investigator seeks to
understand why women are reported by both husbands and wives to be the
initiators in a majority of divorces, considering the hypothesis that rigidity
of male gender scripts makes it harder for women than men to convert resources
to bargaining power. Competing-risk event-history models will be used to predict
whether wives or husbands initiate divorce, each relative to the alternative of
the marriage persisting. This research will contribute to the development of
theories of family behavior, as well as to policy discussions of the changing
American family&lt;br/&gt;