* 0241159
* SGER:  Exploratory Studies to Evaluate Potential of Novel Nanoporous Media for Highly Selective Separations of Biomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Neville Pinto, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,394.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: SGER: Exploratory Studies to Evaluate the Potential of Novel
Nanoporous Media for Highly Selective Separations of Biomolecules Proposal
Number: CTS-0241159 Principal Investigator:Neville Pinto Institution: University
of Cincinnati



The potential of MCM mesoporous molecular sieves for the separation of
biomolecules is being investigated. MCM materials are being synthesized
hydrothermally and functionalized through the incorporation of metals. The
structure of the materials is being investigated and optimized through
characterizations using SEM-EDAX, BET surface area, XRD, and Mas-NMR, among
other techniques. Fundamental data on adsorption equilibria and rates of
adsorption are being obtained for these materials using probe biomolecules with
a wide range of molecular weights (~250 to 650,000 Da) and sizes (up to ~ 60
angstrom). A fundamental understanding of the relationships between material
properties, solution conditions, and biomolecule characteristics, and
selectivity, capacity, rates of adsorption and reversibility is being developed.

In terms of the broader impacts, the proposed work represents a new approach to
address the need for highly selective separation media for preparative
bioseparations. The proposed research will provide new data on the adsorptive
interactions of proteins with solid surfaces, and the kinetics of protein
adsorption on MCM materials. Fundamental insights obtained from the data are
expected to contribute to an improved understanding of the adsorption of
proteins. The ability to synthesize adsorbents with a singular pore size and
surface characteristics that are susceptible to a wide range of surface
modifications is likely result in a versatile new class of preparative
adsorbents with selectivities that can be tuned much more closely than is
presently possible. The mentoring of graduate students will be educational
component. The potential for developing molecular sieve membranes with aligned
pores and surface selectivity could lead to a completely new class of membranes
for bioseparations. This project may be useful in both preparative
chromatographic and membrane bioseparations applications.







