* 0241937
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Project 'Particularistic' Liberalism: Industries, Institutions, and Influence in Liberal Market Economies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Peter Lange, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2005
* USD 6,765.00

Globalization's onset inspired predictions about convergence of capitalist
economies to American-style liberalism. Even dissenters agreed on liberalism's
comparative advantages: fewer regulations, less particularistic policy making,
and swift asset redeployment. Ironically, however, this consensus has coincided
with striking departures from laissez-faire in so-called liberal states. Neither
the convergence school nor its critics can explain when and why the liberal
market economies (LMEs) in the UK, the US, and Canada stray from laissez-faire.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project
posits that political institutions explain LMEs departures from liberalism and
differences among the three countries policies. First, party discipline,
combined with ideology, conditions politicians. Incentives to adopt
universalistic policies &lt;br/&gt;versus particularistic policies to benefit
specific sectors. Where party discipline is weak, particularism is greater than
where it is strong. Second, federalism leads to inter-state bids for mobile
industries capable of making credible exit threats. This research project
employs evidence from interviews, quantitative analyses, and case studies, to
investigate links between political institutions and industry policymaking.
National Science Foundation support improves this dissertation by funding
interviews with actors and policymakers in three U.S industries: steel, autos,
and pharmaceuticals. Data will be collected on firm's policy preferences;
lobbying and campaign contributions; and taxation, research and development,
industry location, and industry consolidation policies. This research
contributes to the debate about globalization and domestic policy by
systematically testing the relationship between political institutions and
policy particularism. &lt;br/&gt;