* 0241286
* Collaborative Research: Complex Controls on the Distribution of Lightning Characteristics and Property Damage in an Urbanized Region
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mace Bentley, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 83,590.00

Lightning property damage is often less spectacular and more dispersed in time
than other weather phenomena such as hurricanes or tornadoes. Consequently,
lightning has been under recognized in its potential to generate large economic
losses. Recent studies have found that heat generated from large urban areas may
alter the local distribution of lightning strikes. However, little is known
about the characteristics of this lightning and how surface properties and land-
use trends influence its damage potential. Geographic studies of lightning
property damage conducted to date cast lightning risk as linear and assume only
one causal factor. For example, trends in lightning property damage can be
attributed to background thunderstorm regime, a control imposed by the physical
environment. Other studies emphasize that these loss trends are caused by an
increasing societal sensitivity to thunderstorms. The research in this project
is unique in that the researchers simultaneously consider the physical
environment and the societal template as interacting causal agents. The
investigators will employ multivariate techniques, cartographic visualization,
and remotely-sensed meteorological data in a geographic information systems
framework to extend the knowledge of urban lightning hazards, a relatively
undocumented environmental aspect of urban sprawl. The study region, Atlanta,
Georgia, provides an ideal setting to investigate how these interactions shape
lightning hazards. Recent studies have found that heat from downtown Atlanta can
trigger thunderstorms in outlying counties. The investigators will employ
lightning strike data, insurance claims summaries, and spatial physiographic
data to map lightning characteristics and to test hypotheses about the
underlying controls of associated property damage. The investigators will also
examine how the structure, location, and time of day of these thunderstorms
correspond to lightning production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban weather hazards
have recently been identified by the U.S. Weather Research Program as a
critically important area of research in consideration of the large economic
liabilities embedded within densely-populated regions. By articulating the
subtleties of lightning hazards, the investigators provide detail as to how to
redistribute insurance risks and allocate emergency service resources in
urbanized landscapes. Given predicted increases in lightning frequency under
global warming, a baseline assessment of urban lightning hazards will be a
valuable source of information for future investigations. By articulating the
relationships among urban thunderstorm structure, distribution, and lightning
production, contributions will also be made to the field of urban thunderstorm
climatology. Finally, this investigation will extend the conceptual and
methodological framework through which geographers study the complex interplay
between human and natural systems. &lt;br/&gt;