* 0241740
* In situ Pico-Cyanobacterial Growth Rates in the Sargasso Sea Based on Cell-Specific rRNA Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Brian Binder, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2007
* USD 389,737.00

The picoplanktonic unicellular cyanobacteria Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus
are responsible for a significant fraction of the overall primary production in
the world's oceans. Despite the close phylogenetic and ecological relationship
of these two groups, their respective standing stocks are often inversely
related on geographic, seasonal, and vertical scales. This project will (1)
develop a convenient and robust method for measuring the in situ growth rates of
natural populations of Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, and (2) apply this
method in the field in combination with more tradition growth rate measures in
order to clarify the factors that are responsible for regulating the dynamics of
these populations in the Sargasso Sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
utilize flow cytometrically-determined group-specific ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
content to estimate the in situ growth rates of Prochlorococcus and
Synechococcus populations. Whole-cell hybridizations with fluorescently labeled
16S rRNA-targeted peptide nucleic acid probes will be used to measure cellular
rRNA. Recent research has shown that when normalized to protein or light scatter
(as a proxy for cell biomass), rRNA is a useful index of growth rate in a number
of marine Synechococcus strains in the laboratory. This study intends to expand
this initial work to include a greater diversity of Synechococcus strains as
well as representative Prochlorococcus strains, growing under a range of
environmentally relevant conditions. Once the relationship between cellular rRNA
indexes and growth rate is established in the laboratory, the approach will be
tested in the field by simultaneous application with more traditional (and more
cumbersome) growth rate measurements. By so analyzing the growth rates of
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus under contrasting conditions of biomass
dominance, the relative importance of physiological factors and food web
processes in regulating the observed patterns of distribution will be clarified.
Ultimately, this will lead to a better understanding of the forces that
structure phytoplankton communities in general, and will increase our ability to
predict the effects of environmental changes on these communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance undergraduate education by
serving as a vehicle to provide undergraduate students with the opportunity to
participate in oceanographic research cruises. Interested Marine Sciences majors
(and students in related fields) will enroll in a semester-long seminar course
covering relevant topics in oceanography. Those students who successfully
complete the course will be given the opportunity to participate in a cruise
during the University of Georgia's Maymester, for which they will receive
research credit. This experience would help promising students appreciate the
diverse and rigorous nature of biological oceanography, understand the process
by which environmental scientists frame questions and design studies to answer
them, experience the limitations inherent in carrying out and interpreting such
studies, and learn about biological oceanographic processes in an exciting and
meaningful way. The project will also enhance graduate education by supporting
the operation of a flow cytometer devoted exclusively to the analysis of
ecologically relevant microbes. Graduate students will gain the sort of hands-on
experience with this instrumentation that is unavailable in typical staff-run
flow cytometry facilities. &lt;br/&gt;