* 0241757
* Paleoecology of Belizean Bajos
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Nicholas Dunning, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2006
* USD 25,652.00

Regional landscapes are the product of the long-term dynamics of human-
environment interactions. Geographers have played a critical role in such work
using a combination of historical, archaeological, geoarchaeological, and
physical geographical approaches to help establish the time depth, spatial
extent, and causation of both intentional and unintentional human-induced
environmental change associated with pre-Columbian populations in the New World.
This project will test a model suggesting that large karst depressions known as
bajos in the Maya Lowlands region in and near the Yucatan Peninsula were
transformed by human-activity from perennial wetlands and shallow lakes to
seasonal swamps between 400 B.C. and 250 A.D. This model was developed during
the conduct of fieldwork in northwestern Belize and neighboring portions of
Guatemala. The principal investigator and his colleagues have argued that this
environmental transformation helps answer several questions that have long
puzzled scholars of Maya civilization: Why were many of the earliest Maya cities
built on the margins of bajos? Why were some of these early centers abandoned
between 100 B.C. and 250 A.D.? Why did other centers construct elaborate water
storage systems and survived into the Classic period (250 -900 A.D.)? The
transformation of the bajos represents one of the most significant and long-
lasting human-related environmental changes documented in the Pre-Columbian New
World. This project will use conjunctive method based on paleoecological and
archaeological data to document past human-environment relationships. A
significant limitation of the data collected to date on the anthropogenic
transformation of bajos is the proximity of study sites to ancient urban areas
where human impacts may have been most severe. This project will extend the
sample from northwestern Belize into areas further removed from the region's
major urban centers. If the model of environmental transformation can be shown
to hold in bajos of various sizes and distances from urban settlements, it will
solidify basic understanding of the nature and extent of this environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a much broader spatial
and environmental sample of bajo soils and sediments than currently exists. Any
variability in the nature of environmental change that is detected in these new
samples will be readily correlated with the presence or absence, density, and
distance of archaeological settlement in surrounding areas. A clearer picture
therefore should emerge as to whether the transformation of bajos from perennial
to seasonal wetlands was a ubiquitous phenomenon or a change largely limited to
near-urban locations. If this model of bajo transformation represents conditions
affecting much of the interior portions of the central and southern Maya
Lowlands, it will have important implications for understanding changes that
occurred in Maya civilization towards the end of the Preclassic, including the
abandonment of El Mirador, Nakbe, and nearby large Preclassic urban centers.
This research also has the potential to contribute to the corpus of evidence
dismissing the "leyenda verde" or "pristine myth," the idea that the ecosystems
of the New World were relatively undisturbed by pre-Columbian occupation.
Furthermore, the project will provide field training experience for up to ten
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;