* 0241385
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of Iron-Complexing Ligands on Iron Availability to Phytoplankton in HNLC Waters of the Subarctic Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* William Cochlan, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2007
* USD 239,801.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0241752 OCE-0241385

Scientists from the University of Maine and San Francisco State University
propose to do deck-board incubation experiments in high nutrient, low
chlorophyll (HNLC) waters of the eastern (Ocean Station PAPA) and the western
(Ocean Station KNOT) Subarctic Pacific Ocean to determine how Fe supply affects
phytoplankton species composition. Specifically, this team of scientists plans
to address the following specific objectives: (1) assess how the relative
availability of Fe bound to weaker and stronger classes of ligands differs among
different phytoplankton groups (cyanobacteria, diatoms, dinoflagellates,
prymnesiophytes) and how these differences influence the evolution of the
phytoplankton community after Fe enrichment in HNLC waters; (2) ascertain if new
ligands produced in response to Fe enrichment of HNLC waters behave similarly to
ambient ligands, or if they have significantly different effect on regulating
how an ecosystem evolves over the long term; and (3) determine whether
phytoplankton assemblages in HNLC waters having different proximity or history
of Fe inputs respond differently to the same suite of Fe ligand blends, or
whether conditioning has led to their adaptation of alternate uptake
capabilities. In addition, measurements of growth rates, macronutrient
utilization rates, fluorescence, cell size determinations, Fe use efficiencies,
rates of Fe and carbon uptake and flow cytometry sorting will be done to assess
how specific organisms will respond to Fe supplied in different chemical forms.

