* 0241877
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Rational Expectations, International Trade, and Interstate Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Will Moore, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,504.00

International conflict scholars often focus on the farsighted behavior of states
involved in military conflict. Those analyzing the relationship between
international trade and interstate conflict argue that greater interdependence
among a pair of states increases the costs of military conflict, reducing the
incentive for state leaders. to engage in conflicts with trade partners. But
until recently researchers did not attribute the same level of strategic
sophistication to the economic actors involved. Morrow (1999) suggests a
rational expectations approach to the study of trade and conflict. He argues
that traders are rational actors who develop expectations about interstate
conflict from the political relationships between states. Other scholars find
partial empirical support for this claim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral
Dissertation Research Support project advances the study of trade and conflict
further by incorporating rational expectations of conflict into a gravity model
of bilateral trade flows. The Ph.D. student examines the question of how
conflict influences international trade both directly when violence occurs, and
indirectly through the expectations of conflict that trading firms develop. In
this proposal, bilateral trade levels are the result of market behavior by
firms, but conflict between or within states influences the economic forces that
determine trade. The student uses the gravity equation to explain trade flows
based on purely market forces and argues that conflict affects these market
forces, changing the level of bilateral trade in the process. The idea that
conflict affects trade is then extended by assuming that firms develop rational
expectations about future conflicts. The student argues that expectations of
conflict will also affect the market for traded goods. Moreover, he extends this
argument to suggest that factors associated with recurrent conflict between the
same states will increase expectations of a future conflict. This results in
hypotheses about the effects of rivalry, conflict over territory, and imposed
regime changes on trade between states and the student develops a research
design that tests these hypotheses on post-war bilateral
trade.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This project has more general
implications for those in the economics/security discipline and those in policy-
making circles. A rational expectations approach to the study of trade and
conflict could have significant implications for the liberal-trade brings peace
proposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;