* 0241125
* False-memory rejection: The role of the memorability-based strategy
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Gail Goodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 02/28/2006
* USD 193,638.00

Most studies in the false-memory literature have focused on how people come to
report that a false event occurred. In contrast, this research focuses on how
people decide that an event did not occur. In some forensically relevant
contexts, individuals may be questioned about numerous possible events, some of
which occurred and some of which did not (e.g., in child abuse investigations,
children are typically questioned about all types of abuse even if only one type
is suspected; in adult therapy sessions, adults may be asked about numerous
types of victimization experiences, even if multiple victimization was not
initially mentioned). In such situations, what psychological mechanisms can
potentially protect children and adults from forming false memories? The answer
to this question is crucial from both a theoretical and applied perspective.
From a theoretical perspective, although appreciation of factors promoting
false-memory formation is extremely important for theories of memory, such
theories must also include principles of false-memory rejection. False-memory
rejection may be governed by principles that are functionally distinct from
those affecting false-memory acceptance. Memory theories must thus be able to
explain false-memory rejection. From an applied perspective, understanding
false-memory rejection may be key to improvement of forensic interviews and
reduction of faulty eyewitness memory reports, which can result in serious
miscarriage of justice. Despite the theoretical and applied relevance, little is
known about how individuals perform false-memory rejection. Some of the few
studies conducted in this area indicate that adults use the memorability of an
event strategically to guard against false-memory formation. That is, if an
event is highly memorable, its occurrence should be remembered; failure to
recall the event is therefore taken as evidence that it did not occur. Do
children also use this same memorability-based strategy? Previous research by
the principal investigators identified age differences in this memorability-
based strategy, using a list learning procedure and interviews about false
autobiographical events. Specifically, it was found that young children (5-year-
olds) did not use memorability to make decisions about the nonoccurrence of an
event or did so in a limited fashion (7-year-olds), despite the fact that they
explicitly recognized differences in event memorability. In this research, only
older children (9-year-olds) and adults correctly rejected high-memorability
compared to low-memorability false events. Little is known, however, about the
mechanisms that underlie these developmental differences or about the
forensically relevant variables (i.e., interview instructions) that may
influence use of the memorability-based strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First,
the research explains developmental differences in use of the memorability-based
strategy. Participants will be interviewed about true and false autobiographical
events. For each event, participants are either asked to tell the experimenter
all they can remember about the event or will receive additional information.
Specifically, participants either receive information about the event's
memorability (i.e., the necessary premise for the use of the strategy), or, in
addition, be told that, by considering the event's memorability, they can help
correctly decide whether or not the event happened (i.e., the memorability-based
strategy). The extent to which providing information at retrieval affects
children's rejection of high-memorability false events will shed light on the
factors determining young children's use of the memorability-based strategy.
Second, the proposed research determines whether explicit instructions to use
memorability as a basis for rejecting the occurrence of an event reduce
misinformation effects in comparison with source-monitoring instructions.
Participants experience witness high- and low-memorability events, receive
misleading information about them, and then be questioned about the occurrence
or non-occurrence of the events. At the time of retrieval, participants will be
questioned either without any specific instructions or after receiving
instructions derived from the memorability-based strategy or source-monitoring
principles. Third, the proposed research will examine whether a memorability-
based strategy can be executed in contexts that may challenge individuals.
Reliance on it, namely after individuals are pressured to produce reports of
false events, may create difficulties for individuals.&lt;br/&gt;