* 0241474
* Firms and Product Choice in International Trade
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Andrew Bernard, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 337,329.00

Recent empirical and theoretical work has established the importance of within-
industry firm heterogeneity in international trade. This research has emphasized
productivity differences across firms to explain why exporters are larger more
productive and less likely to fail than non-exporting firms. Although this
emerging literature goes a long way towards integrating the firm into
international trade, it consistently ignores the ability of firms to switch or
upgrade their product lines in response to changes in the competitive
environment. This project has two objectives. The first is to extend the
theoretical literature on firm-driven international trade to allow for
endogenous product selection. The second is to construct two new firm-level
panel datasets to test the importance of product switching in response to
changes in domestic and international competition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
basic model extends the existing framework with heterogeneous firms, imperfect
competition and trade costs to include endogenous product selection by
individual firms. In response to changes in domestic or foreign market
conditions, firms make decisions about whether to continue operations, enter
foreign markets, and which product to produce. The model yields specific
predictions about the path of industry productivity as well as firm exit, entry,
growth and (product) switching up or down. &lt;br/&gt;The empirical work focuses
on extending existing plant-level datasets on US manufacturing firms to
incorporate detailed information on which products are manufactured. First,
(often-overlooked) product-specific measures of plant output are employed from
the existing plant-level dataset in the US Census Bureau's Longitudinal Research
Database (LRD). The use of these data provide a detailed picture of the breadth
of products produced by US manufacturing firms, generating a new set of facts
about how firm product mix varies in response to changes in domestic and foreign
markets. &lt;br/&gt;The second major data component of the project is the
development of a dataset linking US transaction-level trade data to the LRD.
These data are derived from the customs forms filled out by importers and
exporters and include data on all individual trade transactions by US-based
firms from 1992-2001. Construction of this linked dataset allows researchers to
track the destination and unit value of product-level plant exports as well as
the source, value and quantity of imported inputs. &lt;br/&gt;