* 0241102
* Computational and Mathematical Study in Protein Interactions and Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Richard Deonier, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,036,000.00

0241102&lt;br/&gt;Sun&lt;br/&gt;Determining protein interactions and functions
are central in most proteomics projects. This research focuses on the
development of statistical and computational methods for the analysis of protein
interaction data coming from high-throughput proteomic technologies such as
yeast two-hybrid assays and mass spectrometry, and protein function data coming
from databases of large-scale function annotations. The research involves the
study of the following two important problems in biology: (1) identifying
domain-domain interactions and protein-domain interactions from a large number
of protein-protein interactions, and (2) assigning functions to unknown proteins
from the knowledge of the functions of the annotated proteins, gene expression
profiles, gene knockouts, protein sequence similarities, and protein-protein
interactions. These results obtained for yeast proteins can help us predict
interactions and functions of human&lt;br/&gt;proteins. Training postdoctoral
associates and graduate students from mathematics, statistics, computer science
and molecular biology for proteomic research is an important part of the
proposed research. Based on the existing excellent education program in the
field of computational biology and bioinformatics within the Center for
Computational and Experimental Genomics (CCEG) in USC, the principal
investigators plan to train future researchers through rigorous course work,
seminars, discussion groups, and participation in the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, an increasing number of genomes of model
organisms have been sequenced. Using these genomic sequences, researchers have
been able to make tremendous progress in the study of genomes. Beyond these
successes is the far more challenging and rewarding task of understanding
proteomes. In addition to genome sequences, many other databases, such as
protein-protein physical interactions, genetic interactions, protein-DNA
interactions, and gene expressions, have become available. An important problem
is how to combine information from the variety of different databases to
understand the biological processes and biological functions of proteins. The
principal investigators will develop new statistical and computational methods
for estimation and prediction of protein functions and for understanding
important biological problems integrating several relevant large databases. They
will also train graduate students and postdoctoral associates in the field of
computational biology and bioinformatics through their participation in research
activities related to the proposed project. The proposed project will generate a
suite of computer algorithms related to protein-protein interactions and
functional predictions. Both the algorithms and results will be disseminated
through the web. The results from this study will be important for basic
biological studies as well as for disease related studies from identifying
protein functions.&lt;br/&gt;