* 0241061
* The Tides, Internal Waves, Mixing and Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Steven Jayne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2007
* USD 179,137.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Jayne / WHOI Proposal No:
OCE-0241061&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposal is to
work toward understanding the connections between the ocean's tides, the
conversion of the tide's energy into internal waves, the vertical mixing that
results from the breaking internal waves, and the impact of that mixing on
Earth's climate. Evidence linking this chain of processes together has only
recently been found and this topic is rife with important implications for the
ocean's role in climate. Breaking internal waves are the main cause of turbulent
mixing in the ocean. Recent studies have implicated the internal tides as a
major source of mechanical energy for mixing, with up to 1 terawatt of tidal
power being dissipated in the interior of the deep ocean, away from the
continental shelves of the major land masses. This power is extracted from the
ocean's tides through generation of internal waves in the ocean's interior in
regions of rough seafloor topography. The mixing supported by the dissipating
internal wave energy influences the thermohaline structure of the deep ocean and
provides buoyancy forcing for driving circulation in the abyss. However, none of
the state-of-the-art ocean general circulation models take into account this
tidally driven enhanced vertical mixing, and this lack of correct physics begs
the question of how reliable these models are at predicting the present ocean
circulation. These models are also an important part of climate models, and
their ability to predict future climate change is brought into serious question.
This highlights the need for improved parameterizations of mixing in ocean
general circulation models used to study the Earth's climate. The intellectual
merit of this proposal is addressing some of the outstanding questions
concerning the parameterization of the dynamics of enhanced tidal dissipation
and mixing over rough topography and its relation to Earth's climate. Further it
seeks to understand the physical linkages between the cycles in tidal forcing
and changes in the earth's climate. The broader impact of this work will be the
societal benefit of improved climate forecasts through more realistic climate
models (in particular the Community Climate System Model) which lead to more
accurate forecasts of naturally-occurring and anthropogenically-forced changes
in earth's climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;