* 0241889
* Rethinking Technology, Nature and Society:  A Research and Training Program
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* John Brown, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 282,819.00

This proposal represents a request to fund for a three-year program of research
and graduate study to rethink the relationships between nature, technology and
society. This will be accomplished by integrating the history of technology and
environmental history. Over the past three decades, these two specialties have
developed its own journals, professional societies, and graduate programs.
Despite this independent evolution, scholars from both fields have come to focus
on the central question of how humans have employed technology to shape the
natural world. Historians of technology have effectively probed the inner
workings of technology, but have not completely conceptualized what they mean by
nature. Similarly, environmental historians have analyzed how humans
conceptualize the natural world, but they tend to treat technology as a black
box. Borrowing from Leo Marx's famous metaphor, this program draws on both
fields to deepen our analysis of the machine and the garden (Marx 1964). The
pursuit of this analysis will be through graduate seminars, a postdoctoral
teaching fellowship, and a monthly workshop series. To ensure an
interdisciplinary approach, the program draws on faculty from the Division of
Technology, Culture, and Communication, the History Department, and other
academic units. The postdoc and two graduate students participating in this
project will pursue coursework in technological and environmental history within
the framework of the American History PhD program. To attract outstanding
graduate students, three-year funding packages will be offered. To recruit
students from under-represented groups, the Committee works with UVA 's Emerging
Scholars Program, which provides minority students with guidance and support for
graduate study. After three years, students will take comprehensive exams in the
field of History of Science, Technology and Environment. It is only by
rethinking the relationships between nature, technology, and society that
scholars will able to understand fully both the triumphs of technology and the
environmental perils that confront contemporary citizens. Interactions between
technology and the environment also raise ethical concerns, such as equitable
access to the benefits of innovation and exposure to its risks. The proposal
emphasizes that t is through history that frameworks will be found to help
citizens to address the challenges confronting humanity in this new century.
This project will stimulate new thinking in the history of technology and
environmental history by exploring their intersection. By training students in
both disciplines, this program will enable them to build on the analytical
strengths of both fields.