* 0241400
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Citizenship and Social Influence: A Comparative Study of the Public Sphere in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Jennifer Widner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2004
* USD 14,475.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project is a comparative study of
the public sphere in West and North Africa and of the contextual forces shaping
the public and political domains. In particular, the research investigates
tensions between the overlapping spheres of state and religious authority, and
what &lt;br/&gt;this means for democratic politics and reform. To these ends,
the project asks how individuals in Senegal and Morocco form political attitudes
toward the state and how individuals conceptualize their own roles as citizens
of a national state. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Analysis is undertaken to take
account of the processes of political communication during which individuals
come to understand their relationship with the state. The research tests
hypotheses regarding the effects of social influence herein defined as
contextual influences &lt;br/&gt;such as religion and the neighborhood on
political actions, attitudes and identities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research investigates contextual effects in non-Western settings and looks at
local social interactions in two predominately Muslim countries with histories
of French colonial occupation. The selection of cases allows for cross-cultural
and cross-regional comparisons and embeds variations in political systems,
racial and ethnic differences, and Islamic religious practices. Senegal provides
a case in which, though democratic, power was transferred to the opposition
through electoral means for the first time in 2000. Though democratic reforms
have &lt;br/&gt;been implemented in Morocco's constitutional monarchy, no
transition has yet taken place. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Insights from the
research in Senegal and Morocco will enhance understanding of citizenship and
political attitude formation in developing and democratizing countries more
generally, and specifically in those with Muslim majorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;