* 0241665
* Military Strategy and Civilian Suffering in Wartime: Understanding the Consequences of War for Non-Combatants in the 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Paul Huth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

The causes of interstate and civil war have been a topic of central concern to
social scientists. In addition, there is a growing body of systematic research
on the outcomes of war for the opposing armed forces of each side. A significant
gap in basic research on war, however, is the relative lack of rigorous
theoretical and empirical analysis that seeks to account for systematic
differences in civilian loss of life and suffering in wartime across both time
and space. &lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses this critical shortcoming
in scholarly research with a study of the consequences of armed conflict for
non-combatant populations in 219 wars from 1900-2000. In this project a rational
choice theoretical model is developed to address the central question: When and
why would opposing armed forces in wartime, as a matter of military strategy,
adopt policies that target civilians with the result that large numbers of non-
combatant populations are directly killed, or are forced to endure conditions
that threaten large losses of life? Specifically, hypotheses are developed to
explain when opposing armed forces engage in: a) direct military attacks on
civilians, b) coercive displacement of civilians from their homes resulting in
large-scale refugee flows or internally displaced populations, and c) deliberate
policies of destroying agricultural production systems and denying access to
adequate food supplies resulting in conditions that threaten famine and
starvation. The hypotheses are empirically tested with statistical models on the
population of 219 wars (interstate, civil, and de-colonization conflicts) in the
20th century. Comparative case analyses are utilized to illustrate and evaluate
the causal inferences drawn from the statistical findings. The published results
of the project will produce important contributions to the scholarly literature
of political scientists on a neglected aspect in study of war. In particular,
the project &lt;br/&gt;can broaden existing research to include a systematic
analysis of when and why wars can produce devastating consequences for non-
combatant populations. While existing research does not provide compelling
answers to this question, this project's findings should advance scientific
knowledge on this topic. &lt;br/&gt;This project can produce broader
contributions beyond advances in the research of political scientists on war.
First, new data sets on civilian loss of life and suffering in 219 wars are
created. These newly created data sets will be made publicly available and
should be of value to social scientists studying a cluster of related issues,
such as the laws of war, outside intervention in wars, and changes in wartime
military strategies. Second, the results of this project should contribute to
scholarship in the field of Public Health. Researchers in this field are
increasingly concerned with understanding the public health consequences of
armed conflict. As a result, the data sets created and the findings of this
project should be of interest to Public Health analysts who seek to better
understand how political and military decisions increase the vulnerability of
civilian populations to risk factors associated with disease and death. Third,
the &lt;br/&gt;results of this project should be useful to policy makers in
states, international institutions, and non-governmental organizations that seek
to prevent and respond to humanitarian crises in wartime. For example, by better
understanding when civilian populations are at greater risk, policy makers can
try to devise policies that will deter combatants from targeting civilians with
coercive military force. &lt;br/&gt;