* 0241319
* Metallacarboranes of Main Group, Transition, and Lanthanide Elements: Syntheses, Structures and Reactivities
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Narayan Hosmane, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 03/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division supports Dr. Narayan S. Hosmane, Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry Northern Illinois University, for research into the synthesis,
structure, and reactivity of metallacarboranes of main-group, transition, and
lanthanide elements. The project has three main thrusts. The first is the
development of a convenient, safe synthesis of natural and 10B-enriched
C2B4-carboranes from readily prepared and/or available borane reagents, such as
the Na(B3H8). The objective is a preparative route that does not require a
vacuum line, thus enabling laboratories not experienced in the manipulation of
boranes and carboranes to utilize these compounds. Secondly, a variety of ionic
and neutral metallacarboranes, containing metals spanning groups 2-14, will be
prepared using active-metal mediated reductive cage-opening reactions, with
concomitant metalation of the opened carborane face. The specific purpose is to
obtain a range of compounds- from water-soluble metallacarborane salts to
lipophilic neutral metallacarboranes-of both the constrained geometry half- and
full-sandwich organometallic species. Finally, cationic electrophilic
metallacarboranes will be prepared with C2B4- and C2B9- or C2B10- carboranes
both coordinating to the metal and serving as weakly coordinating anions. These
will be studied as catalysts for olefin polymerization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to produce a number of new
and novel compounds containing cages of carbon and/or boron combined a wide
range of metals. While cage compounds containing carbon and boron have been
known for some time, they require very sophisticated techniques in order to
prepare them conveniently and safely. Thus, the first part this project will be
the design new preparative procedures that will allow these species to be
synthesized in typical laboratories. The next section will develop routes to a
variety of boron-carbon cage molecules that are stable under normal
environmental conditions. The highly water- and fat-soluble species might be
useful in applications such as Boron Neutron Capture Therapy and in homogeneous
catalysis. The students involved in this project, both graduates and
undergraduates, will learn a breadth of synthetic skills. Additionally, they
will be involved with a number of collaborators at several national
laboratories, other universities and research institutions, and at BP/Amoco.
Thus they will take part in a true interdisciplinary research project at the
interface of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;