* 0241824
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization and Representation in Developed Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,09/30/2003
* John Freeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 09/30/2003
* USD 9,300.00

Does economic globalization affect political representation in the world's
established democracies? If so, how? Despite a growing literature on the effect
of global markets on domestic politics, scholars have ignored the fundamental
question of representation. The study of representation remains the province of
a largely separate literature on the political behavior of masses and elites.
And though economic performance figures prominently in these
works,&lt;br/&gt;scholars do not explore how the external economy affects the
extent to which contemporary political systems live up to the democratic ideals
of representation, accountability, and responsiveness. The proposed research
will take up this task. Under globalization national governments become more
dependent on the external environment, leaving policymakers with less control
over the health of the economy. The electorate in turn becomes less inclined to
evaluate elite performance in terms of economic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study argues that these developments carry two
related consequences for representation. First, increased
openness&lt;br/&gt;reduces the likelihood that voters hold their governments
accountable for past performance. Second, openness reduces elite incentives to
respond to mass preferences over economic policy. In short, by upsetting links
between domestic actors and policy outcomes, globalization alters the mechanisms
of representative democracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
make a contribution to the globalization literature both substantively and
methodologically. Substantively, the study parts from past work on performance
and policy outcomes to argue that a complete understanding of the impact of
globalization requires a consideration of citizen preferences and elite
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologically, the study will test the
argument in four stages. First, dynamic analyses of government popularity will
be performed to assess whether increasing openness affects the clarity with
which citizens evaluate elite performance. Second, multilevel analyses will be
conducted to investigate if this relationship is conditional on national
political context or on voters' characteristics. Next, comparative case studies
of politician strategy will be done to examine the extent to which policy
choices in a partially globalized world are driven by the demands
of&lt;br/&gt;domestic politics. Finally, measures of elite and mass positions
over policy responses to globalization will be combined to assess their
congruence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has several potential
impacts. First, it proposes one of the first comprehensive accounts of how
economic openness affects representation among the developed democracies.
Second, by doing so the research may call into question conventional assumptions
over the bases of mass and elite preferences. And third, the research will
reveal the extent to which national political institutions particularly
elections themselves can continue to serve as instruments of democracy in an
increasingly interdependent world.&lt;br/&gt;