* 0241591
* Collaborative Research: States, Rates and the Fates of Federations: Provincial Politics and Fiscal Policy Around the World
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Erik Wibbels, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2004
* USD 70,000.00

This investigation supports the completion of a large data set that makes it
possible to conduct comparative analysis of provincial-level fiscal performance
in federations around the world. In recent years, central governments in
federations have devolved profound functional responsibilities to provincial
governments. Concurrently, there has been renewed interest in federalism as a
tool to solve issues of regional governance in settings as diverse as the
European Union and South Africa. At the same time, a number of researchers of
Russia, Brazil, and Argentina have noted a common pathology whereby federations
generate incentives for provincial politicians to over-fish the common pool of
revenue, overspend in the expectation of national bailouts, and expend resources
on the sustenance of political machines. As a result, the comparative
investigation of federalism has become a booming research program at the
intersection of political science, economics, and policy studies as researchers
attempt to answer questions about the driving forces behind government fiscal
decisions and more broadly, the nature of accountability in multi-tiered systems
of government.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Current research on comparative
federalism provides three justifications for the proposed research. First, while
some researchers have begun to investigate the institutions that underpin
divergent economic outcomes across federations, they have treated federations en
toto. There is little recognition that provinces within federations vary
dramatically in their incentives and behavior. Second, because of this
shortcoming the field has little ground on which to generalize about the
conditions under which provincial governments are able to serve a positive
mediating role between an increasingly global economy and local citizens, as
asserted by many proponents of federalism. Third, the vast majority of research
on provincial fiscal policy focuses on the U.S. states, which are quite
anomalous and provide a limited foundation for broader theorizing on provincial
fiscal performance. Even where researchers have begun to address inter-
provincial variations in fiscal policy elsewhere, none of this research has been
explicitly comparative. Method: In developing a comparative model of provincial
fiscal behavior the researchers begin with four hypotheses culled from their own
work and other recent theoretical and empirical literature: (1) Provinces more
dependent on fiscal transfers from the central government are more likely to run
larger deficits. (2) Under some conditions shared partisanship across levels of
government generates incentives for budgetary restraint on the part of
provincial governments. (3) Provincial institutions that increase the number of
checks and balances on fiscal decision-makers foster overspending. (4) Provinces
that lack competitive provincial party systems are more likely to run larger
deficits. The investigators test whether these hypotheses are contingent on a
variety of other characteristics of each country's fiscal and political system.
This collaborative research project requires the collection of comparable
political, fiscal, macroeconomic, and demographic data on each provincial
government in 18 federal systems from 1978 through the late 1990s. To date with
support from their respective universities, the researchers have collected much
of the relevant data for Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, India,
Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Switzerland, the United States, and Venezuela. The
investigators seek support to complete the collection, coding, and organization
of the remaining data, including the addition of Austria, Belgium, Malaysia,
Russia, South Africa, and Spain. &lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The investigators will
prepare a series of articles based on each of the research hypotheses above,
eventually culminating in a book manuscript written for non-specialists. The
research has very important policy implications. Redesigning the basic structure
of fiscal federalism to improve fiscal discipline is at the top of the reform
agenda in many federations.especially those that have suffered severe
macroeconomic consequences of dysfunctional federalism. Moreover, the data set
will be made available on the internet to other researchers, and has the
potential to become an often-used data resources in comparative politics and
economics. Examples of future uses include studies of political accountability
in multi-tiered system, trends in inter-regional inequality, redistribution, and
risk-sharing. &lt;br/&gt;