* 0241654
* The Oleander Project:  Sustained Observation of Ocean Currents and Transports in the Gulf Stream and Adjacent Waters from New York to Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* H. Thomas Rossby, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,370,776.00

0241654 Rossby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten years ago a program was initiated to
directly measure upper-ocean currents from the U.S. continental shelf to Bermuda
from a container vessel, the CMV Oleander, with special focus on long-term
variations in the strength of the Gulf Stream. The high horizontal resolution
repeat sampling of the Gulf Stream and adjacent gyres, made possible by the
weekly shipping to Bermuda, has led to estimates of upper-ocean transports and
their variability with an absolute accuracy previously unachievable. While any
single estimate of upper-ocean transport will have an inherent uncertainty in
the 15-20% range, repeat sampling can reduce this to just a few percent at most.
For the 1993-2001 Oleander observing period, the largest observed inter-annual
variations in Gulf Stream transport had a magnitude of +/-8%, peak-to-peak, when
estimated annually. Since these variations appear to occur on time scales
characteristic of the North Atlantic Oscillation, it is not yet clear whether
these are typical, small, or large numbers. Nor can one at present distinguish
between different hypotheses regarding forcing mechanisms. This project will
continue the Oleander sampling program for another five years. Proposed
enhancements include the installation of a new state-of-the art acoustic Doppler
current profiler and optical compass. These will improve consistent sampling of
the velocity field to significantly greater depths. EXpendable BathyThermograph
(XBT) casts along the Oleander track will continue to be taken monthly by the
National Marine Fisheries Service. Scientific objectives include the
investigation of linkages between four oceanographic regimes (outer continental
shelf, Slope Sea, Gulf Stream, and Sargasso Sea) and their connections to large-
scale forcing fields. In particular, observations obtained to date suggest a
stronger thermohaline role to the variability of the Northwest Atlantic than
perhaps previously recognized. These are complex issues and the Oleander data
set will be far more effective when used in conjunction with other studies and
modeling efforts. To facilitate such synergies, the Oleander's data will be
acquired each time she enters port, and the processed data posted in near real-
time on a web-based server. With a growing focus on real-time ocean forecasting,
these observations and related products can play an increasingly useful role in
forecast validation and model improvements. Other research activities can avail
themselves of these data, and may find it advantageous to design field programs
around this data availability. It is also proposed to prepare observations for
use by a wider public, particularly the sailing community. The Graduate School
of Oceanography at the University of Rhode Island has an active web-based
program for the K-12 community and collaborations in this area will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;