* 0242339
* Alpine Glaciation and Mass-Movement Relief Production in the Western Himalaya
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* John Shroder, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 05/31/2007
* USD 300,989.00

Climatic forces, tectonic activity, and surface processes are all known to
interact with each other as factors that influence the transformation of
topographic relief in high mountain regions, but considerable uncertainty
remains regarding the complex dynamics through which such interactions occur.
Considerable need exists for both field-based geomorphological work and for
numerical simulations that account for the dominant controls on relief
production. This research project will implement a 3-D dynamic landscape-
evolution model to facilitate investigation of scale-dependent surface
processes, erosion rates, and relief production. The research objective is to
evaluate the polygenetic influence of alpine glaciation and mass-movements on
relief production at K2 in the high mountains of the Karakoram Himalaya.
Specific objectives include dating of high-level, rock-cut glacial terraces to
reconstruct a chronology of glaciation; terrain analysis and geomorphological
mapping of moraines, mass-movement deposits, and fluvial deposits; glaciological
characterization of the Baltoro Glacier; paleoclimate simulation studies; and
numerical landscape simulation studies. The investigators will pursue this
project through detailed fieldwork, advanced remote sensing, terrain analysis,
and numerical modeling of the internal and external factors that govern relief
production.

The project should contribute to scholarly understanding about deep glacial
erosion, pervasive mass movement, monsoonal glacier augmentation, polygenetic
relief production, and integrated scale-dependent landscape evolution modeling
to understand the first-order geodynamics of relief production in the Karakoram.
The results to provide new insights into commonly perceived notions about the
role of surface processes on relief production and the debate on whether
tectonics has driven long-term climate change or vice versa. In terms of broader
impacts, the project results should yield new analytical methods for using
satellite imagery and digital elevation models in the assessment of mountain
geomorphology over intractable topography, development of a landscape simulation
model for research and education, and elucidation of landscape hazard potential.
The study of alpine glaciation and mass movement in the Karakoram Himalaya also
should provide new capabilities to a wide variety of disciplines for assessing
and mapping mountain environments using spatial data.