* 0242443
* CAREER:  Biomimetic Interfaces for Implantable BioMEMS
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Tejal Desai, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 136,008.00

9983840&lt;br/&gt;Desai&lt;br/&gt;A great deal of consideration has been given
in recent years to the biological uses of micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS). However, such devices are not yet found in many clinical settings due to
the lack of appropriate interfacing between these devices and the biological
world. The capability of surfaces to interact intelligently with their
environment is essential for any diagnostic or therapeutic device to be placed
in contact with biologic cells and tissues. The overall thrust of this research,
therefore, is to develop, characterize, and integrate functional biomolecular
surfaces with implantable MEMS, in a manner that is both reproducible and fully
integrated with existing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strategy will be
explored based on the covalently coupling of small bioactive peptides to
microdevices. Such peptides will be incorporated onto silicon substrates to
modulate the interfacial response, while at the same time ensuring compatibility
with microfabrication and micromachining processing. A central goal will be able
to create stable multifunctional surfaces by attaching peptide/cell recognition
sequences or multifunctional biopolymers to surfaces in order to modulate
cellular response at various locations. By integrating surface modification with
MEMS processing, we can create device surfaces that interact appropriately with
multiple populations of cells and the surrounding tissue. Besides identifying
principles for engineering surfaces that are biofunctional, this research will
foster advances in developing therapeutic bioMEMS, lab on a chip platforms, and
drug delivery systems that can more effectively interface with the biological
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed educational plan aims to enhance the
educational experience of students at both undergraduate and graduate levels. In
addition to substantial curriculum development for a new focus area in
bioengineering called Interfacial Tissue Engineering, there will be new
initiatives in industrial and educational outreach. Specifically, an industrial
advisory committee will be formed to help foster industrially relevant
bioengineering activities and opportunities for students including internship
and cooperative research experiences in the Chicago area. The PI will promote
greater interest in bioengineering by increasing student and teacher exposure at
the high school level. Working with the Chicago Public School System,
bioengineering career/educational materials will be developed, including an
informational website. We hope to use these tools to attract students not
traditionally represented in bioengineering and raise awareness in the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;