* 0242284
* Exploring Flow Structures in a 2D Fluid
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Xiao-Lun Wu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/29/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The project deals with fluid turbulence, a significant, long-standing problem
that remains largely unsolved. A major difficulty is the presence of a large
number of degrees of freedom that are strongly interacting in a fluid. The
proposed research attempts to simplify the problem by studying turbulence in a
two-dimensional geometry in which motion of each fluid element can be followed
over a long period of time using a fast video imaging system. Two-dimensional
fluid motion is realized in a freely suspended thin liquid film, a few microns
thick, and driven by an electromagnetic field. The research will focus on
interaction and stability of hydrodynamic coherent structures, such as vortices
and saddle points in the flow. It is believed that these coherent structures are
responsible for energy and angular momentum transfer in turbulence. The
experimental results will be compared with statistical models that make
quantitative predictions about distributions of vortices and saddles in two-
dimensional turbulence. With a better understanding of how two-dimensional
turbulence behaves, the research can shed new light on more difficult problems
of three-dimensional turbulence, which is relevant not only to physics but also
to engineering and meteorology. The research will involve both graduate and
undergraduate students in a dynamic environment where research and education go
hand in hand. The students participating in this research use state-of-the-art
equipment to study a fundamental physical system that is fascinating and
relevant, preparing them for future challenges, and for the academic, industry,
and government workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid turbulence is a complex
phenomenon, affecting all sections of science and engineering. The complexity of
the phenomenon is best reflected in our limited ability to predict wealth
patterns, despite dramatic improvements in the computational power in recent
years. This work is aimed at understanding turbulence in a two-dimensional
space, where the complexity is significantly reduced but yet still retains the
most important ingredients of three-dimensional turbulence, i.e., strong
interaction and non-determinism. To achieve two-dimensional flow, a thin freely
suspended liquid film, about a few microns in thickness, is used and is driven
by an electromagnetic field. Using a state-of-the-art video imaging system, the
evolution of turbulence in the film will be followed for each fluid element for
an extended period of time. The focus of the research is to understand how
hydrodynamic vortices interact with each other and how stable they are under
different flow conditions. The newly gained insight would help us to understand
more difficult three-dimensional turbulent phenomenon. A flowing liquid film is
not only valuable for scientific research; it is also a wonderful laboratory for
teaching physics at all levels. Students, graduates and undergraduates who
participate in this work, will receive rigorous training in fundamental science
(physics), modern imaging processing techniques, and computer programming. This
makes them well rounded for a future career in academe, industry or
government.&lt;br/&gt;