* 0242946
* Novel Electronic Phases in Two Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* James Eisenstein, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2006
* USD 429,375.00

This individual investigator award will support experimental condensed matter
physics research aimed at the study of the numerous strongly correlated phases
that are exhibited by two-dimensional electron systems in semiconductor
heterostructures. This field of science has shown remarkable vitality in recent
years, with a number of very striking discoveries. For example, a system formed
of two parallel two-dimensional electron gases can condense into an exotic
superfluid state if the two layers are close enough together. This "excitonic
Bose condensate" will be a focus of the project. An important question to be
answered is whether this semiconductor system can exhibit the Josephson effect
familiar from superconductivity. A second dramatic example of the unusual
properties of low dimensional semiconductor systems is the recent discovery of
ferromagnetism in certain manganese-doped compounds. Experiments designed to
elucidate the basic physical properties of Mn-doped II-VI semiconductor (e.g.
ZnCdSe) quantum wells will be undertaken. In particular, the spin polarization
of such systems will be studied using a novel quantum tunneling technique. This
research will contribute greatly to the education of graduate and undergraduate
students and a postdoctoral associate. They will learn skills that prepare them
for academic, industrial, or government research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award will support a
project at the frontier of basic research on advanced semiconductor materials.
The aim of this research is to improve the understanding of how large
collections of electrons behave. The topics of greatest interest are those in
which such collective behavior cannot be directly inferred from the detailed
understanding of the properties of individual electrons that now exists. The
phenomenon of superconductivity in certain materials is perhaps the best-known
example of such an "emergent" phenomenon, but there are many others. The work
supported here will concentrate on examples of emergent phenomena in so-called
"two-dimensional" electron systems in semiconductors. A particularly interesting
example, in which two parallel layers of electrons interact to form a remarkable
new collective phase of matter, will be a main focus of this project. In
addition, the properties of magnetic semiconductors will form another focus.
There is intense interest in such materials stemming from a vision of an
advanced new technology called spintronics. Much of the research will be
executed by graduate and undergraduate students and a postgraduate associate.
Thus this project has a strong educational component and will prepare these
young scientists for sophisticated jobs within the Nation's technological
base.&lt;br/&gt;