* 0242450
* US-Cameroon Cooperative Research:  Pade Approximants and the Physics of Waves
* O/D,OISE
* 09/02/2002,11/30/2005
* Prabasaj Paul, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2005
* USD 27,000.00

0218015 Paul

This award supports a two-year collaborative research project between Professor
Prabasaj Paul, with the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Colgate
University, and Professor Daniel Nkemzi, with the Department of Physics at the
University of Buea, in Cameroon. They will investigate the application of Pade
approximants to the problems of scattering of electromagnetic waves, and of
photonic materials with maximal bandgaps.

The problem of electromagnetic wave scattering from rough surfaces is important
to many branches of physics and mathematics. Using some powerful mathematical
techniques, the multipoint Pade approximants, the two researchers will
investigate the scattering of waves off uneven surfaces with very large
roughness parameters, as well as the transmission of light through regions with
a spatially varying refractive index. The Pade approximants of the scattering
matrix will preserve two important properties, reciprocity and unitarity. The
investigators expect their model to yield better results than existing
mathematical models that are based on a classical perturbation series. The study
combines Professor Paul's expertise in condensed matter and quantum physics with
Professor Nkemzi's knowledge of applied mathematics, principally in wave
propagation.

The results are expected to add new knowledge about wave scattering from rough
surfaces, and will have application to many areas of mathematics and physics.