* 0242472
* An autonomous bottom-transecting instrument for making long time-series measurements of phytopigment fluorescence and acoustically detectable sediment structure to abyssal depths
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 10/31/2006
* USD 1,061,360.00

The PI proposes to develop an autonomous bottom-transecting instrument, ROVER II
capable of making long time-series estimates of fresh phytodetritus arriving on
the sea floor. In addition, this instrument will concurrently monitor the
structural features of the sediment that influence spatial and temporal
heterogeneity in sediment community activity, ultimately affecting the signal to
noise ratio and resolution of measurements on biogeochemical processes in the
sediments. ROVER II will be capable of conducting non-invasive time-series
measurements of phytopigment fluorescence as an indicator of fresh phytodetritus
on the sediment surface, while imaging the same sediments acoustically to
provide 3-dimensional profiles of structural features (e.g. burrows and
animals). Sediment community metabolism measurements (e.g. sediment community
oxygen consumption) coupled with 2-dimensional oxygen imaging studies, will be
conducted on the same sediments along transects including up to 50 sites without
docking, recharging, and data download. The critical questions that will be
addressed with this instrument will help answer significant questions regarding
pelagic-benthic coupling in the context of biogeochemical cycling. These
questions include: 1) what is the quality and quantity of phytodetritus reaching
the sea floor, 2) how important is irrigation (nondiffusive transport) in
measuring mineralization in sediments and 3) what responses are elicited in the
sediment community by the arrival of fresh detritus on the sea floor?