* 0242042
*  'Our' Science, 'Their' Science-Conflicting Agendas and Disputed Theories Concerning Amazonia
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Myanna Lahsen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Fixed Amount Award
* Priscilla Regan
* 03/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

This project involves ethnographic study of the Large-Scale Biosphere Atmosphere
(LBA) project, a US, EU, and Brazil funded international science initiative
focused on the sustainability of Amazonia and its role in regulating the global
environment. The research examines how science and politics shape each other in
international affairs involving the global environment. The project attends to
the interpretation, mobilization and contestation of science as it is produced
and discussed within the LBA. Competing interpretations advanced by US, EU and
Brazilian LBA scientists are examined, with special attention to Brazilian
scientists and to uses and impacts of the various interpretations for Brazil at
the levels of national and international politics. The study explores
suggestions that the forestry-related positions that national governments take
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) map onto
differences in hypotheses generation. The views of US and EU LBA scientists
about the role of the Amazon in the global carbon cycle are studied for their
correlations with national governments' positions. To the extent that similar
cohesion at the national level is lacking among Brazilian scientists, this fact
will be identified and analyzed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
involves full-time fieldwork in Brazil. The investigator will use a variety of
methods to study LBA leaders and participants, as well as relevant science
administrators and policy makers and environmental NGO representatives in
Brazil. These include semi-structured interviews; a survey derived from
interview data and from other surveys of environmental values in the US, EU, and
Brazil; participant-observation; social network and media analyses; and archival
research. The International Division of the National Science Foundation is also
contributing to the support of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will improve understanding of the interplay of science, culture, power and
politics in international affairs and of the fragmented nature of "epistemic
communities" as social units variously bound and unbound by national,
transnational and geopolitical frames of meaning. Ethnographic tracking of the
links between macro and micro processes will contribute to efforts in many
disciplines to identify these interactions and explore their relevance for
environmental governance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will promote
discussion between the social and natural sciences in the multidisciplinary
field of global change research. Study products will include publications;
conference and seminar presentations; informal exchanges with global change
scientists and policy analysts; and collaborations with social scientists in
Brazil and the US. Products from this study will also be made accessible through
websites at Harvard University and the University of Colorado designed to
disseminate global change science research and policy studies
(www.sustainabilityscience.org and http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu). The study
has important pedagogical dimensions involving students and curriculum
development in both the US and Brazil. Longer-term outcomes include hoped-for
contribution to the formation of more robust institutions to address global
environmental issues and understanding of the limits of universalism and
objectivity in science. Results can serve to reduce (1) political use of these
concepts to advance what are in fact more locally-framed concerns and interests
and (2) suspicions and controversies about scientific objectivity and value
neutrality among actors whose perspectives and experiences lead them to
doubt.&lt;br/&gt;