* 0242155
* Establishing a Multi-Century, Annual-Resolution Climate Record from the Northeastern Caribbean
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2006
* USD 153,072.00

At middle and high latitudes, dendrochronology has provided some of the most
valuable annual-resolution climate records available, most of which
significantly extend our knowledge of climate back into time well before periods
with instrumental records. In contrast, few dendroclimatological records from
low latitudes exist, because tropical trees rarely produce reliable annual rings
that allow dendrochronological research. This research project builds on the
finding that Pinus occidentalis Swartz, the native pine of the Caribbean island
of Hispaniola, produces excellent rings that are moisture-sensitive. This
species provides a valuable proxy precipitation record, but only when it grows
at the very highest-elevation and moisture-stressed sites within its range, near
3,000 meters in elevation, in stabilized blockfields, and on cliffs. The
investigators have collected wood samples (cores and a few sections of living
trees, plus sections of dead trees and remnant wood) from 120 specimens. Initial
work on small subsets shows promising potential. This award supports analyses of
these samples through surface preparation, computer-measurement of rings under
magnification, and statistical analysis of the chronologies including comparison
with modern climate data. Fire scars are abundant in the stands sampled, and the
species' fire response will be analyzed to assess the potential of the species
to yield sub-seasonal fire history information for these Caribbean highlands.
Rare pieces of subfossil remnant wood are found in fire-protected bare-rock
spots within the stands, and the investigators will try to determine the age
distributions of floating chronologies from such specimens using radiocarbon
dating in order to estimate the ultimate potential record length from these and
similar sites. Finally, the award will help fund ongoing efforts to improve
public-outreach activities at the University of Tennessee's Laboratory of Tree-
Ring Science. These efforts include helping school children and others discover
the excitement of tree-ring research.

The importance of this project stems from the fact that Pinus occidentalis grows
at tropical latitudes, a region that has not witnessed the development of tree-
ring-based climate records as have more temperate locales. In geographic terms,
the nearest published dendroclimatological record is 1,700 kilometers to the
northwest in an extra-tropical location. As awareness of the importance to human
society of climate and climate change increases, the scientific impetus to
improve understanding of tropical climate dynamics continues to grow. This
project will provide the first terrestrial proxy record of precipitation from a
tropical region that is closely connected in climatic terms to the North
American mainland. It also will enhance educational efforts to inform students
and the public about the processes and outcomes of tree-ring research.