* 0242980
* Collaborative Research:  An Observational, Modeling, and Climatological Study of Sierra Rotors
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 172,188.00

This research is focused on a study of mountain-wave induced rotors in the lee
of the Sierra Nevada. Rotors are intense low-level horizontal vortices that form
along an axis parallel to and downstream of a mountain crest. While they are
known to be very hazardous to aviation, there have been few quantitative
observational and theoretical studies of this phenomenon. As a result,
understanding of rotor structure and rotor dynamics is relatively incomplete,
and the ability to forecast rotors shows little skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will be conducted using observations and numerical simulations. The
observations will be collected in and upstream of the Owens Valley, which lies
directly to the east of the southern Sierra Nevada. The eastern slopes of the
southern Sierra Nevada are the tallest, steepest quasi-linear topographic
barrier in the contiguous United States. The westerly winds that blow across the
Sierra Nevada frequently generate large-amplitude mountain waves and strong
rotors over the Owens Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major objectives of this
project are to: (1) establish quantitative characteristics of the rotor behavior
including the location and the frequency distribution of the rotor-inducing
mountain-wave events, and (2) evaluate the extent to which current operational
mesoscale models can reliably forecast the occurrence of rotors. The first major
objective will be accomplished with a small field experiment involving the
installation of an array of automatic weather stations and wind profilers in the
Owens Valley and radiosonde launches to sample the upstream flow. The numerical
modeling effort in support of the second objective is designed to determine
whether deficiencies in the model forecasts (as revealed by comparison with the
observational data) are due to an inadequate representation of the large-scale
flow striking the mountains or to difficulties in the detailed computation of
the mountain waves and rotors themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project will serve as a basis or improving the forecasting capability of
numerical models applied to steep topography. One consequence of such
improvement would be to provide better forecasts of severe aviation hazards in
mountainous terrain.