* 0242964
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Development of Catalytic Asymmetric Azomethine Ylide Cycloaddition Reactions
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Philip Garner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 39,480.00

0242964 &lt;br/&gt;Garner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a cooperative research project between Dr. Philip Garner, Department of
Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), Cleveland, Ohio, and Dr.
Ozdemir Dogan, Department of Chemistry, Middle East Technical University (METU),
Ankara, Turkey. The objective of this joint project is to develop an effective
catalytic asymmetric reaction for the synthesis of pure pyrrolidines. The
development of means of preparation of substituted pyrrolidines in high purity
would be a major achievement, as the pyrrolidine substructures are found in many
bioactive natural products and synthetic drug structures. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Part of the catalyst development work will be conducted in the
U.S. by Hasan Koyuncu, who is a Turkish graduate student in the Dogan group. He
will spend three months each year in the Garner laboratory, and his work will be
part of his Ph.D. thesis with Professor Garner acting as Mr. Koyuncu's co-
advisor. This experience abroad will contribute to his professional development.
The visits by Dogan and Garner to each other's laboratories will be used for
group discussions relating to the project, and for departmental seminars. These
activities will foster the growing research interactions between METU and CWRU.
The project is funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;