* 0242630
* Design and Synthesis of Porous Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Omar Yaghi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

The aim of this project is to develop strategies for the design and synthesis of
metal-organic materials from molecular building blocks. Specifically, metal-
carboxylate clusters will be assembled by organic links into porous scaffolds or
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). These MOFs have been shown to have remarkable
porosities that can reach up to five times those observed in the most porous
zeolites. The generality of this approach will be tested and developed for a
large number clusters and organic links of varying lengths and functionalities
in order to prepare MOFs in which it is possible to change their metrics and
chemical functionalities without changing their underlying topology (or backbone
structure) still maintaining periodicity of the framework. This project provides
unparalleled opportunities for students and postdoctoral fellows to learn
chemical and physical techniques associated with both solution and solid-state
chemistries, areas traditionally practiced separately. On the intellectual
level, students experience the necessary synergy that must exist between design
and discovery using diverse intellectual tools ranging from mathematics and the
enumeration of networks to synthesis, characterization and study of the
inclusion chemistry of the materials
prepared.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Crystalline porous materials have a tremendous
impact on the global economy, as they are useful in petroleum cracking,
catalysis, separation and ion exchange processes. Indeed porous materials
represent a (roughly) US$350 billion segment of the global economy. This project
is aimed at studying the design and synthesis of new kind of porous materials in
which the inorganic and organic components can be varied at will to perform
highly specific function. For example, materials capable of storing hydrogen and
natural gas at ambient conditions for use in mobile electronics and automobile
fueling will be pursued. These applications will bring more environmentally
benign fuels into mainstream use. Already, this group is establishing
cooperation with industry to design hydrogen storage cartridges that employ
metal-organic frameworks for use in mobile phones and laptop computers. The
chemical approach that will be developed under this project has a number of
implications for the education of students and young scientists. For example,
researchers are now participating in a program that encourages thinking and
working across several disciplines, and from materials synthesis and
characterization through the development of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;