* 0242455
* Foraging, Food Sharing, and Family Formation among the Hadza
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Frank Marlowe, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2006
* USD 386,459.00

0242455&lt;br/&gt; Marlowe&lt;br/&gt;The tiny number of hunting and gathering
societies left in the world will soon disappear and with them our chance to
study behavior associated with the hunting and gathering niche. This
longitudinal study examines foraging and food sharing, and their impact on the
formation of the nuclear family among one of these societies, the Hadza of
Tanzania. The Hadza have no formal marriage ceremony but form long-term pair
bonds and are serially monogamous. Like many foragers in warm climates women
bring in more food calories than men, and the food men bring in is acquired much
less regularly and is more widely shared outside the household. This forces us
to question the long-held view that a man's provisioning is what promotes pair
bonds. About 160 Hadza in four nomadic camps of roughly 40 people each will be
observed over the course of three years by a human behavioral ecologist, along
with graduate anthropology students from Harvard and the University of Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania. The researchers will collect data on the foraging activities
and food acquired by all people, how much of which foods they eat while
foraging, how much they take back to camp, and how much is shared with others
within and outside the household in order to evaluate what role male
provisioning may play in maintaining pair bonds. A previous study found no
effect of father absence on child mortality among the Hadza. However, a cross-
cultural analysis of foraging societies showed that men's contribution to the
diet mainly affects women's fertility rather than offspring survivorship.
Previous data reveal that Hadza men bring in more food when their wives are
nursing and this study will investigate the effects men's provisioning has on
mortality, time to weaning, time to next child, and overall fertility
rates.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research include a better understanding
of what explains the universality of pair bonds among humans. Examination of the
causes and consequences of divorce will shed light on the importance of families
and emotional attachment. The nutritional analysis of Hadza foods, the energetic
analysis of their acquisition, and the economic analysis of their pattern of
sharing will further our knowledge of human health under naturalistic
conditions. By supporting students in extended field settings, the project
combines education and research.&lt;br/&gt;