* 0242949
* Disordered Systems, Supersymmetry, and Quantum Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Nicholas Read, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2008
* USD 285,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education on low-temperature
quantum phenomena in condensed matter systems. Areas of focus include the
quantum Hall regime of an electron gas, and the more recently developed area of
bosonic atoms in traps (not solely Bose condensates), which at high rotation
rates are expected to exhibit behavior analogous to the quantum Hall effect. The
goal is to understand the ground and excited states, and the properties of the
elementary excitations. Another major focus is on disordered systems, in the
quantum Hall effect and elsewhere. Here the primary emphasis is on
noninteracting fermions in two dimensions, where the phase transitions are
ultimately expected to be tractable. This will be addressed by analytical means,
using and extending techniques in conformal field theory. New techniques and
methods will be introduced whenever this can lead to an advance in physical
understanding. While the work will concentrate on deepening the understanding of
fundamental properties, connection to experiments will be made wherever
possible. Concurrently, the PI is teaching Intensive Introductory Physics to
well-prepared incoming undergraduates, which provides opportunities to introduce
them to current topics, and writing a book on the Quantum Hall Effect, to
further disseminate results of the research. This award also supports graduate
student training in condensed matter theory.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on low-temperature quantum phenomena
in condensed matter systems. Areas of focus include the quantum Hall regime of
an electron gas practically realized by a two-dimensional electron gas trapped
in a semiconductor structure and in a high magnetic field, and the more recently
developed area of (bosonic) atoms in atom traps, which at high rotation rates
are expected to exhibit behavior analogous to the quantum Hall effect. The goal
is to understand the quantum mechanical states of these systems. Another major
focus is on the effect of disorder on quantum Hall effect systems and elsewhere.
This will be addressed by analytical means, using and extending advanced quantum
mechanical techniques. New techniques and methods will be developed whenever
this can lead to an advance in physical understanding. While the work will
concentrate on deepening the theoretical understanding of fundamental
properties, connection to experiments will be made wherever possible.
Concurrently, the PI is teaching Intensive Introductory Physics to well-prepared
incoming undergraduates, which provides opportunities to introduce them to
current topics, and writing a book on the Quantum Hall Effect, to further
disseminate results of the research. This award also supports graduate student
training in condensed matter theory.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;