* 0242328
* Regulatory Protein-DNA Interactions in vivo Analyzed by Ultrafast Photochemical Crosslinking
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2010
* Eric Alani, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2010
* USD 3,154,800.00

Watt W. Webb, School of Applied and Engineering Physics, John T. Lis, Department
of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Tadhg P. Begley, Department of Chemistry and
Chemical Biology, Bik-Kwoon Tye, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Eric E. Alani, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, and Alexander L.
Gaeta, School of Applied and Engineering Physics, all of Cornell University are
funded with an award from the Collaborative Research in Chemistry Program with
funds provided by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of Physics, the
Division of Molecular, Cellular Biology and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. This multifaceted team will employ ultrafast UV laser crosslinking
to lock proteins to their nucleic acid targets instantaneously and covalently
during functional activation as it occurs during the cell cycle. These molecular
complexes are then resolved by state-of-the-art analytical protein and nucleic
acid biochemistry and structural analysis to identify crosslinked amino acids
and their nucleotide binding-sites. These researchers will investigate the
network of complex DNA-protein interactions regulating gene transcription,
replication, and repair using new technologies that allow high temporal and
spatial resolution biochemical analysis of elusive DNA-protein interactions in
living cells. The ultimate goal of this research is to develop the methods to
perform functional genomic experiments on living cells of prokaryotic and
eukaryotic systems to establish genome-wide maps of DNA-bound proteins, thus
following global gene regulation control through a cell's growth cycle and
providing efficient tools for deciphering the complexity of gene regulator
networks.

In this research, a collaborative approach will be employed to target both the
photochemistry and the functional genomics of DNA-binding-proteins. Scientific
ideas will be integrated across three disciplines - biology, chemistry, and
physics - uniting molecular biologists investigating DNA-protein interactions;
chemists studying the photochemistry of DNA; physicists applying ultrashort
laser pulse optics; and biophysicists providing the interface for the
interdisciplinary research. Students will receive training at all levels from
high school to postdoctoral.