* 0242034
* Collaborative Research: Towards Quantifying Elemental Fluxes and Fluid Origins from Margins Using Novel Submarine Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Kevin Brown, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2008
* USD 279,295.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0242034 / OCE-0242089 /
OCE-0242091&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team of
researchers from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of Hawaii,
and the University of Alaska at Fairbanks will develop and test new submarine
technology to both measure in-situ the scale of the elemental (including
volatile) flux from submarine margin environments as well as to capture a
temporal record of the fluids for associated isotopic analyses. The isotopic
studies will include the stable isotope systematics of carbon-bearing species
(CH4 and CO2) and the light noble gases (He, Ne, Ar). By developing sampling and
deployment strategies for two complementary instruments -the Mass SURFER which
measures concentrations in-situ together with the CA meter which records fluid
flux rates and preserves samples for later analyses - the team will make new
estimates of the rate of loss to the ocean and atmosphere for a number of
elements via this important, but hitherto largely neglected, pathway. A major
focus of this study will be development of and inter-comparison between the two
instrument packages. For the most part, this development will occur in the
laboratory and at a number of well-characterized fluids in the Monterey Bay
region. The unique analytical capability of these technologies holds great
potential for future studies in margin and other submarine
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to development work along the
Pacific coast of the United States, the chief scientific focus area will be the
Costa Rica margin, an area identified by the MARGINS community as one of two
designated study areas particularly amenable to a multi-disciplinary approach.
The research team plans to investigate the forearc region between the Nicoya and
Osa peninsulas where subducting seamounts have disrupted the forearc and allowed
seepage of fluids along normal faults. The key questions that will be addressed
with this study are the nature and sources of these leaking fluids and whether
that there are temporal variations in both flow rate and/or chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longer-term objectives of the project are to quantify
the rate of elemental loss to the ocean and atmosphere via this active fore-arc
margin and to determine if seepage variability and earthquakes are linked. The
investigators believe that this the study will afford a unique opportunity to
understand the factors controlling the release and movement of carbon associated
with the subduction process and to place quantitative constraints on the flux of
volatiles from this vital yet poorly studied segment of the terrestrial carbon
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;