* 0242145
* Workshop: The Construction of Social Reality: The Case of Land
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Isaac Ehrlich, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2005
* USD 25,546.00

It is a challenge to define the ontology of social and institutional reality
within a framework which does justice to the surrounding physical environment of
society and its institutions. This award will support a workshop on land,
property and social ontology that will advance our knowledge and understanding
of social processes and their outcomes. It is rooted in the idea that the
transformation of land into property is a fundamental social process that has
been hitherto neglected in the sciences of society, and that land and land
ownership play a vital role in the establishment of capitalism and in economic
development, especially in less-developed countries. The workshop will bring
philosopher John Searle and economist Hernando De Soto together with a
multidisciplinary group of leading experts on the topic, to discuss current
developments in our understanding of social institutions and economic
development in the particular context of land. Searle and De Soto have both
recently authored books that have had broad impact within and outside of
academia. Searle's The Construction of Social Reality has advanced a new way of
understanding human society and its institutions, while de Soto's The Mystery of
Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else has
caused a small revolution in thinking about land, capital, and development.
Searle is an internationally prominent philosopher whose works have had
considerable impact also in disciplines such as linguistics, computer science,
and the social sciences. De Soto is President of the Institute for Liberty and
Democracy based in Lima. He works as a consultant to governments throughout
Latin America and (currently) in the Middle East. While Searle and de Soto are
personally acquainted, and while de Soto's Mystery of Capital was itself in part
influenced by Searle's ideas on social ontology, the two have never appeared
together in public. The present workshop will bring these two highly creative
individuals together in such a way as to provide an open forum for examining the
implications of their views for our understanding of economic development and of
the ways in which different social institutions may hinder or facilitate such
development. Additional experts have been invited to contribute their views on
these questions and to develop contributions to the new social ontology which,
through the work of Searle and de Soto, is currently in process of being
established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide valuable
perspectives on the role of land information systems in the establishment of
working market institutions and in the nurturing of economic and legal rights in
less developed countries. Explicit formal accounts of the ontology of a domain
are a critical foundation for adequate tools for information management systems,
and this meeting will contribute to the development of such an ontology for the
domain of land, the cadaster, and property law in general. The workshop also
will contribute to the development of an ontology of other aspects of social
reality at geographic scales. An edited book consisting of papers prepared for
and presented at the meeting will promote the broader impact of the project.
Early career scholars from several disciplines will benefit directly from their
participation. On the last day, there will be sessions to identify priorities
for future research on the topic. Lastly, the project will make efforts to
promote the practical application of the results in Latin America and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;