* 0242833
* CAREER: Evolutionary Research and Education at CSU
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Stephen Voss, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 382,259.00

0093251&lt;br/&gt;Voss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last decade, concepts and
techniques from various biological disciplines have yielded new tools for
studying patterns and processes of evolution. Accordingly, it is becoming
increasingly important to pursue evolutionary questions that draw upon
interdisciplinary concepts and research skills. In this Career Development Plan,
evolutionary research, education, and service objectives are proposed to
introduce undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty at Colorado State
University (CSU) to the emerging, interdisciplinary nature of evolutionary
biology. The overall goal of the research component is to integrate genetic and
genomic approaches into an existing evolutionary research program that focuses
on salamander biology. The specific objectives are to construct the first
comparative genome map of any amphibian and pursue quantitative trait locus
(QTL) mapping of ecologically, evolutionarily, and developmentally important
traits. A comparative gene map will allow identification of homologous
chromosomal segments between salamanders and other vertebrates, thereby
providing the first amphibian perspective to vertebrate genome evolution. This
objective will be accomplished by determining the genome location of
approximately 600 protein coding loci using existing material from an
interspecific mapping cross (Ambystoma mexicanum x A. mexicanum/A. tigrinum
tigrinum). The second research objective will be accomplished by performing
comparative QTL analyses of two unique urodele traits: metamorphic failure
(paedomorphosis) and limb regeneration. Background data are presented to show
the feasibility and significance of the research objectives. The specific
objectives of the education component are to: (1) Coordinate the development of
a new, required course for undergraduate Biology majors at CSU: "BZ220:
Introduction to Evolution", (2) Further develop a course for upper division
undergraduates and graduate students entitled "BZ478: Molecular and
Developmental Evolution.", (3) Establish a recurrent graduate seminar that
focuses on evolutionary biology, and (4) Provide research opportunities for
undergraduates through the REU program. Finally, the specific objective of the
Service component will be to serve as a meeting organizer of the annual meeting
of The Society for the Study of Evolution, which will be hosted by CSU in 2004.
Taken together, accomplishment of these research, service, and education
objectives will further strengthen the program in Evolutionary Biology at CSU.
&lt;br/&gt;