* 0242290
* Integrated Analyses of the Arctic Freshwater Cycle and its Influence on Global Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Marika Holland, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 09/30/2006
* USD 163,086.00

The primary goal of this proposed study is to explore the progressive
integration of the impacts and processes of the arctic freshwater cycle on the
local, pan-Arctic and global scales. This study will focus on analyses of the
physical processes, as represented by global scale models, in the arctic water
cycle. This will involve the study of processes that modify arctic freshwater
budgets in the terrestrial, atmospheric and oceanic environments, the
integration of these processes to produce the exchange of freshwater between the
Arctic and North Atlantic, and ultimately the influence of these processes on
the thermohaline circulation (THC) and global climate. The following research
questions provide a framework for investigations: (1) How will changes in land
cover, the amount and seasonality of precipitation and temperature influence
river discharge to the Arctic Ocean? (2) How will changes in the summer Arctic
frontal zone influence the location and intensity of storm tracks and, as a
consequence, the mean sea level circulation over the central Arctic Ocean? (3)
How do changes in river runoff, precipitation, temperature and the atmospheric
circulation influence the Arctic-North Atlantic oceanic and sea ice freshwater
exchange, and how do these quantities impact the global thermohaline
circulation? What are the directions and magnitudes of feedbacks associated with
these processes? Alterations in the freshwater input to, and the atmospheric
circulation over, the Arctic Ocean influence the sea ice and ocean transports,
water mass structure, the oceanic heat flux to the sea ice, and the ice mass
budgets. Such interactions are likely to be important in forcing changes in
freshwater exports from the Arctic and, consequently in North Atlantic deep
water formation. These changes have the potential to impact global climate
through the THC, which in turn can produce or damp further changes in the Arctic
system. Science education has always been a principal goal of NSF. As an
integral part of our study, we propose to develop a seminar course within the
University of Colorado Department of Geography. The course will focus on Arctic
climate processes and their role in the global system, drawing strongly from the
integrated analyses studies proposed here, along with material developed under
prior NSF/ARCSS studies. M. Serreze will teach the course in collaboration with
the other investigators on this project and a graduate student.