* 0242537
* Line Shape for Water Vapor and Other Atmospheric Asymmetric Rotor Molecules
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Robert Gamache, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* John Eugene Mak
* 06/30/2008
* USD 231,309.00

This project involves developing a theoretical framework for calculating
spectroscopic parameters (pressure-broadened half-widths and pressure-induced
line shifts) for trace gases in the terrestrial atmosphere. Accurate half-widths
are needed for interpreting remote sensing data and in line- by-line models used
to calculate radiative forcing from greenhouse gases. The inclusion of the line
shift in profile retrievals also reduces errors in these retrievals. Data for
thousands of ro-vibrational transitions are needed. A theoretical model is
needed that is computationally efficient and capable of determining the desired
parameters accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex Robert-Bonamy (CRB)
formalism is the basis of the theoretical approach. The calculations use
realistic molecular dynamics, all relevant terms in the interaction potential,
and no cutoff procedure. The effects of explicit velocity averaging on the half-
width and line shift will be studied. The intermolecular potential and the
dependence of the half-width and line shift on the parameters describing this
potential will be investigated. The potentials will be optimized by nonlinear
least-squares fits to experimental and theoretical data. Initial calculations
will be done for species for which there are experimental measurements of both
parameters for several vibrational bands to compare with, such as water and
ozone perturbed by molecular nitrogen and oxygen. The theory will also be
extended to consider self-broadening and shifting of these species and other
developments of the wavefunctions. The vibrational state, rotational state, and
temperature dependence of these collision-induced parameters will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will improve our confidence in
spectroscopic remote sensing results and allow a better determination of the
radiative forcing of greenhouse gases. Research experiences for undergraduate
students will be provided. This award is supported jointly by the Atmospheric
Chemistry Program (Division of Atmospheric Sciences/Directorate of Geosciences)
and Experimental Physical Chemistry Program (Division of Chemistry/Directorate
of Mathematical and Physical Sciences).