* 0242991
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Experimental and Computational Investigation of Wall-Pressure Fluctuation in Shear Layers with Strong and Weak Feedback Effects
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Ahmed Naguib, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 28,778.00

0242991&lt;br/&gt;Naguib&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
joint research project between Dr. Ahmed Naguib, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Michigan State University (MSU), East Lansing, and Dr. Zakaria
Ghoneim and Dr. Mostafa Abdelkhalek, Department of Mechanical Power Engineering,
Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to conduct collaborative research
on computational investigation coordinated with experimental work funded by NSF
award CTS 011690. The investigation will focus on understanding the space-time
character of the wall-pressure field and its generating flow sources on two
different but related flow problems. The first of these is associated with the
incompressible flow over a two-dimensional cavity. This flow has been computed
recently by the Ain Shams University collaborators using Random Vortex
Methods&lt;br/&gt;(RVM). The experimental investigation is aimed at verifying
the existing computation of the cavity flow. The RVM code will be adapted to
compute the flow field and associated wall pressure for the (second case) flow
over an axi-symmetric backward-facing step. These computations will be
coordinated with the experimental work conducted under the existing award. It is
expected that the space-time databases to be compiled here could be used to
investigate a host of other flow issues. Examples include the development of
wall-pressure-based low-order models for active flow control, and testing of
turbulence models for non-equilibrium flows. The resulting data sets will be
published and made accessible to interested parties in the wider community of
fluid dynamics researchers through web and conference-based
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project will enhance the
existing NSF grant by the generation of time-resolved, spatial flow and wall-
pressure information from the computations at conditions similar to those of the
experiment. The proposed work is mutually beneficial as MSU gains the depth of
adding a computational component to an experimental research project and Ain
Shams University gains capability to conduct an experimental investigation
complementing ongoing computational work. The project will support the travel of
a masters degree student from Ain Shams University to MSU for three months to
work under the supervision of the PI on constructing a cavity-flow setup and
microphone-array sensor module. This hardware will later be used to conduct
measurements in a wind tunnel facility at Ain Shams University under the
supervision of Dr. Ghoneim and in coordination with the PI. This project is
jointly funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;