* 0242148
* Conference:   Number Theory and Combinatorics in Physics; March 21-23, 2003; Gainesville, FL
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Khandker Muttalib, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 02/29/2004
* USD 15,000.00

The investigators together with the University of Florida are hosting a
Conference, ``Number Theory and Combinatorics in Physics.'' The main topics of
the conference are q-hypergeometric functions, Rogers-Ramanujan identities,
exactly integrable models and quantum field theory; alternating sign matrices
and determinants; quantum computing; and the Riemann zeta-function, random
matrices and quantum correlators. Each of these topics has been enriched by
interactions between mathematics and physics. For example, deeper understanding
of the alternating sign matrix conjecture of combinatorics was recently found
when it was connected with the XXZ spin 1/2 model (on an odd number of sites)
from statistical mechanics. In another recent example, Di Francesco and
collaborators were able to exactly compute meander configuration exponents using
methods of conformal field theory. The main goal of the conference is to bring
mathematicians and physicists together to discuss and learn recent developments
in these current topics. This interaction should help foster new developments in
both mathematics and physics. There are eleven plenary speakers: George E.
Andrews, Robert Calderbank, Philippe Di Francesco, Daniel Gottesman, Michio
Jimbo, Barry McCoy, Tetsuji Miwa, James Propp, Michael Rubinstein, Xavier G.
Viennot, and F.Y. Wu. There are thirteen 20 minute speakers. A number of
graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s are participating.

Number Theory is concerned with properties of integers and is one of the oldest
branches of mathematics. In the last 20 years Number Theory has had important
applications to cryptography. The security of some modern cryptographic methods
depends on the complexity of factoring integers. In 1994, Peter Shor showed
theoretically how this complexity could be drastically reduced using a quantum
computer. A quantum computer is based on the principles of quantum mechanics and
is at present only a theoretical device. The concept of a quantum computer was
first introduced by the Nobel prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman in his
famous course on computation given at Caltech, 1983-1986. It is believed that in
the next 20 years the new generation of computers will be quantum computers.
This will necessitate synthesis of mathematics, quantum field theory and
technology. This conference, Number Theory and Combinatorics in Physics, hosted
at the University of Florida, is a forum where progress on such a synthesis can
be made.