* 0242492
* Workshop: Assembling the Tree of Life - the European Dimension ( in Paris, France in Setember 18-21 2002)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Ward Wheeler, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Lipscomb
* 08/31/2003
* USD 24,379.00

Dr. Ward Wheeler of the American Museum of Natural History has received a grant
to conduct a workshop on coordinating US and European efforts to reconstruct the
phylogenetic history of life on earth. One of the most profound ideas to emerge
from modern science is the realization that all of life, from the smallest
microorganism to the largest vertebrate, is connected through genetic
relatedness in a vast evolutionary tree. This tree of life provides the
framework for much of our modern understanding of biology because it shows the
diversity of life as well as the historical basis for similarity and differences
among organisms. Organizing biological knowledge according to phylogenetic
relationships and their parallel classificatory hierarchies has become
increasingly important for both science and society. These taxonomic groupings,
for example, underlie all comparative biology and are increasingly used to
organize biological and biomedical databases. Phylogenetic hypotheses of
organisms, or of their genes or gene products, are being used to search for and
identify new emerging diseases, trace the historical pathways of infections
among individuals or to understand their geographic spread, search for
potentially new pharmaceuticals, identify invasive pests of crops and other
agricultural lands such as forests and develop control programs, and solve
numerous other questions in applied biology. It is recognized that
reconstructing the tree of life must be a large, international venture and that
ultimate success will depend on scientific expertise and resources, collections
and funding from many nations. Therefore, we must begin the process of
coordinating our efforts and internationalizing the tree of life and other
systematic biology activities. This workshop will bring together approximately
20 leading European systematic biologists, representatives of European funding
agencies, and representatives of NASA, USDA and Smithsonian Institution and NSF
observers. The workshop will: (1) familiarize European researchers and funding
officials with progress to date and plans for the US Assembling the Tree of Life
effort; (2) update European researchers on US plans for invigorating revisionary
systematics; (3) develop a vision for the challenge of an international Tree of
Life effort; (4) discuss what is needed in terms of scientific expertise and
infrastructure and in terms of international organization; and (5) produce a
report that summarizes the discussions and that makes as many recommendations
toward international cooperation as possible.