* 0242194
* Social and Psychological Mechanisms of the Relation between Age and Openness to Attitude change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Penny Visser, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/2009
* USD 411,925.00

Conventional wisdom holds that as people age, they become more rigid in their
views and less open to change. A great deal of initial research seemed to
confirm this notion. But more recent research has demonstrated that the relation
between age and openness to change is actually curvilinear: susceptibility to
attitude change is high during young adulthood, drops sharply through the middle
adult years, but rises again starting at about age 65. Drawing on literatures in
psychology, sociology, and political science, the current research seeks to
understand why age is related to susceptibility to attitude change by
identifying some of the mechanisms of this relation. This research will explore
a novel set of hypotheses about the determinants of attitude change
susceptibility more generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the current
research will explore five potential mechanisms by which aging may lead to
fluctuation in openness to attitude change. First, it will examine the impact of
social network structure and composition on people's openness to change. Second,
it will examine the impact of multiple role transitions on openness to change.
Third, it will explore the implications of cognitive functioning for attitude
change processes. Fourth, it will examine the notion that self-efficacy
regarding resistance to attitude change may vary with age and may regulate
susceptibility to change. Finally, this research will explore age-related
changes the social goals that people pursue in the persuasion context and will
trace the implications of these goals for persuasion processes. A panel survey
of a large, representative sample of adults will measure participants' attitudes
toward a broad array of objects, expose some of those attitudes to persuasive
challenges, and gauge attitude change. Measures of the five factors will permit
tests of whether each regulates openness to attitude change and whether one or
more contribute to the relation between age and openness to
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring the mechanisms responsible for the
relation between age and openness to attitude change, this research promises to
shed new light on age-related changes in thinking, evaluating, and action,
thereby enriching our understanding of the social psychology of aging. This is
especially important given that the American population is aging rapidly, and
the oldest Americans are composing an increasingly large portion of the nation.
A better understanding of the psychology of aging will aid social planners and
support agencies in helping the elderly meet the challenges of adaptation and
effective survival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;