* 0242228
* Wakes and Scale Interactions in Stratified Flows Past Topography
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Craig Epifanio, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 307,287.00

Until recently, theoretical studies of stratified flow past topography have
largely focused on understanding topographic circulations at one particular
scale of motion in isolation from all other scales. Large-scale effects have
thus been studied independently of smaller-scale phenomena, while intermediate-
scale effects and scale interactions have in large part remained neglected.
Recent numerical modeling studies and observational programs increasingly
suggest that this traditional separation between large and small scales in
topographic flows is no longer adequate. The research aims to start bridging
this gap in scales by considering interactions between scales in two simplified,
but representative contexts: i) orographic wake formation and the interaction of
wakes with larger scales; and ii) the nonlinear generation of gravity waves in
quasi-balanced topographic flows at small Rossby number
(Ro).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Orographic wake formation has long been known to have
important consequences for local and regional-scale circulations in mountainous
regions. Recent work suggests that orographic wakes may also have an important
upscale effect by enhancing synoptic-scale cyclogenesis in the lee of
topography. The Principal Investigator will study aspects of orographic wakes
spanning the full range of scales important to wake formation and dynamics -from
the small-scale processes that generate wakes to the influence of wakes on
larger-scale flows. The key questions to be addressed include: What are the
dynamical and physical processes that produce orographic wakes? b) How are the
formation and subsequent dynamics of wakes modified by background rotation in
intermediate-Ro flow? c) What effects do orographic wakes have on cyclone growth
in developing baroclinic wave? The Principal Investigator will approach these
issues using idealized numerical simulations combined with sophisticated
diagnostic tools designed to address the dynamics of both vorticity and
potential vorticity (PV) in stratified flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
generation of mesoscale gravity waves in small-Ro flows is topic of considerable
interest in the general dynamic meteorology community. Flow past a ridge at
small Ro provides an intriguing context in which to examine such phenomena due
to the inherent simplicity of the quasi-balanced topographic flow that produces
the mesoscale waves. The Principal Investigator will study wave generation in
small-Ro topographic flows using newly developed semi-analytic framework that
allows fully finite-amplitude two-dimensional solutions for flows over broad
ridges. An attempt will then be made to extend these results to three dimensions
using weakly nonlinear analysis combined with idealized numerical simulations.
It is hoped that this analysis of wave generation in the topographic case will
provide insights into the mechanisms of wave generation in other small-Ro, non-
topographic flows as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the work on
orographic wakes should provide insights into multiscale effects and scale
interactions in stratified flow past topography. The consideration of such
multiscale phenomena is important to further understanding of orographic effects
on both weather and climate. The study of wave generation at small Ro is
expected to provide insights applicable to wave generation in more general
small-Ro flows as well. As such waves have significant impact on weather and
clear-air turbulence, better understanding of their generation mechanisms could
have important implications for forecasting.