* 0242571
* Policy Representation in the American States II
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Gerald Wright, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2006
* USD 275,000.00

This renewal project continues work on developing new data and a new approach to
the study of representation. It uses the legislatures of the states and the US
Congress as 101 representative systems through which we can study the linkages
between constituency, party and roll call voting. This comparative perspective
provides substantial advantages over previous work by taking the research
designs beyond the limitations of a case study of a single institution and by
providing enough variation in institutional rules and procedures, electoral
settings and constituency preferences to achieve deeper understanding of the
factors that enhance or retard governmental responsiveness to citizen
preferences. The greatest obstacle to this approach in the past has been a
simple lack of data. Roll call records are used to gauge legislators' policy
positions within the legislatures, but, except for the U.S. Congress, these are
not compiled in any easily available format for scientific analyses. This
project has addressed that shortcoming with the development of a methodology of
computer-assisted extraction of roll call data from the variety of sources and
formats in which this information is found in the states. This approach to data
generation is dramatically more efficient and less error-prone than traditional
methods of hand coding and manual data entry. The methodology has been well-
developed during the initial grant period and virtually a full set of roll calls
and matching presidential vote totals for legislative districts have been
compiled for the 1999-2000 sessions. Initial analyses point to the central
importance of parties in the electorate and in the legislatures for policy
representation and electoral accountability, and the researchers have found that
parties take on a variety of roles, both in elections and in the legislatures.
&lt;br/&gt;This project continues that work on four fronts. First, analysis of
the completed data sets permits verification and expansion on the initial
findings concerning the role of party and constituency in legislators' roll call
voting. Second, the approximately fifty thousand roll call votes that have been
compiled are coded to facilitate analyses by policy area or types of bills.
Third, information on legislative electoral returns and the socio-political
backgrounds of legislators is added to the data collection to increase
substantially the analytic leverage of the roll call and constituency
information. Fourth, a longitudinal component to the data collection is
undertaken to permit analyses of change and stability in representation and
legislative policy making. One aspect of this is the replication of the
1999-2000 data compilation with a full post-reapportionment roll call record of
the 101 legislative chambers. This adds significantly to the investigators'
ability to establish the temporal stability of legislative coalitions and the
ideological positioning of legislators over time as well as to assess
institutional changes like redistricting and term limits. The second aspect of
this is the collection of the full time series of roll calls for the
approximately half of the legislative chambers for which roll calls are web-
accessible. This is possible by building on the expertise developed in the
initial grant period, so that for a relatively modest investment, the project
will produce for the research community a quantum increase in the data resources
for comparative study of legislative policy making in the U.S. Besides greatly
expanding the data resources for research on representation and policy making in
the American legislatures, the project contributes to our understanding of how
political contexts, institutional configurations and diversity influence the
effectiveness of elections and political parties as mechanisms of citizen
control of government. &lt;br/&gt;