* 0242647
* An Immuno-Mimetic Sensor-Actuator using Novel Polymeric Vesicles as Artificial Lymphocytes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Maria Santore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2005
* USD 292,633.00

An Immuno-Mimetic Sensor-Actuator using Novel Polymeric Vesicles as Artificial
Lymphocytes

In this program the principal investigator will develop a breakthrough sensor-
actuator, mimicking the immune system to identify, amplify signal from, and
respond to low levels of multiple target compounds in a wet environment. This
compact (and potentially chip-based), smart system will continuously monitor a
test space and provide independent real time chemical feedback to multiple
stimuli. Microelectronics could be integrated into this stand-alone device for
added functions. The proposed technology exploits novel polymeric vesicles that
will act as artificial lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. The polymeric
vesicles are a new invention, made of tough membranes that will encapsulate
amplification or response molecules. Different surface receptors on different
vesicles will code for target compounds that, when present in the testing
environment, will activate particular vesicles. The test solution flows through
an amplification cascade (a rough mimic of bone marrow) to replicate only the
activated vesicles. Replicated vesicles (a crude mimic of plasma cells) will
return to the test space to release response compounds such as drugs or
inhibitors to counteract the target compound(s) detected. The replicator cascade
is like a photomultiplier tube (PMT), with amplification occurring on each of
several stages. The proposed device is, however, more advanced because, of the
many target compounds cataloged, only those in the test space will be amplified.
In the device, specific adhesive interactions facilitate separation of activated
vesicles from those not yet activated. While the latter are recycled, activated
vesicles are lyzed to release each test compound (or analog thereof), at a
concentration higher than that at the stage inlet. This solution passes to the
next stage where the process repeats, giving a powerlaw dependence of
amplification on the stage number. This program will conduct the science and
device development necessary to form the basis of a single stage that later
could be combined with others to produce the cascade. At the stage level, the
goal is to maximize amplification, maintaining selectivity for activated
vesicles (not triggering the non-activated ones.) To accomplish this, the
scientific investigation will address how adhesive interactions between
receptors on vesicle and separator surfaces could be tuned through receptor
placement and macroscopic parameters. Fundamental adhesive behavior will be
assessed using micropipette aspiration methods (paralleling studies of cell
adhesion) and compared with adhesive performance in device prototypes. Results
will be interpreted using formalisms established for cell adhesion, appropriate
for specific adhesive groups on a membrane capsule in a flowing solution. The
specialized vesicles and their replication cascade form a sensor-actuator system
whose end applications bridge a number of industries, from biomedical uses to
chemical process control and environmental monitoring (closed bodies of water)
and response. The proposed scientific investigation targets designs that meet
the constraints for a robust technology that will be implantable or submersible.
The scientific team bridges academic disciplines and specialty areas to combine
expertise in polymer interfaces, biomimetics, adhesion, and MEMS. Graduate and
undergraduate students from different engineering and scientific backgrounds
will benefit from this synergistic approach to research, which preserves
fundamental rigor and emphasizes engineering creativity.