* 0242227
* RUI-Antiaromaticity of Indenylidene Dications and the Aromaticity/Antiaromaticity Continuum
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Nancy Mills, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2007
* USD 253,000.00

The concepts of aromaticity and antiaromaticity play central roles in organic
chemistry. Although somewhat elusive concepts, a combination of experimental and
calculational tools may be used to assess aromacity and antiaromaticity through
analysis of magnetic, structural, and energetic criteria. Indenylidene dications
allow the assessment of magnetic properties through the paratropicity of protons
on both the five- and six-membered rings, allowing evaluation of the
antiaromaticity suggested by the nucleus independent chemical shift values.
Because the cyclopentadienyl ring of the indenylidene cation can respond to
increased antiaromaticity through deformation, structural properties can be
assessed. Energetic properties can be assessed by electrochemical oxidation and
comparison of redox potentials with those of non-antiaromatic model systems. By
playing the various criteria against each other in aromatic and antiaromatic
systems, the criteria that most effectively define aromatic/antiaromatic systems
will be exposed.

Ever since the initial realization that benzene and related "aromatic"
hydrocarbons display unusually high stability, the factors responsible for this
stability have been of great interest. "Aromaticity" and its counterpoint,
antiaromaticity, in which compounds display lower than anticipated stability,
play central roles in defining organic chemical structure and reactivity. With
the support of a Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) grant from the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Nancy S. Mills, of the
Department of Chemistry at Trinity University, is exploring new molecular
systems expected to display antiaromaticity. Through the rational design and
synthesis of appropriate organic molecules and analysis of their magnetic,
structural, and energetic properties, Professor Mills is defining the criteria
that most effectively define aromaticity and antiaromaticity. A large number of
undergraduate research assistants will participate in these studies, providing
them with valuable research experience and education in a variety of
experimental, instrumental, and theoretical techniques.