* 0242033
* The Organizational, Professional and Legal Challenges of  New Information Technologies in Healthcare
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Mark Suchman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/2008
* USD 325,922.00

SES-0242033&lt;br/&gt;Mark Suchman&lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin-
Madison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a study of the organizational, professional
and legal factors that shape the adoption of clinical information technologies
in American hospitals. Innovations such as electronic medical record-keeping and
computerized physician order-entry promise to improve the accuracy, efficiency
and rigor of clinical medical practice. At the same time, however, they also
threaten to introduce new forms of coercion, surveillance and inequality into
the healthcare sector. Employing theories from organizational sociology, the
sociology of the professions, the sociology of technology and the sociology of
law, this research examines the role of "social governance mechanisms" -- laws,
rules and norms -- in determining when and how these new technologies are
embraced or rejected. The project comprises two empirical components: (1) a
broad-based quantitative survey of clinical information technology use and
governance at 320 hospitals across 16 states, and (2) an intensive qualitative
field observation of the technology implementation and legal-compliance process
at a large teaching and research hospital in the Upper Midwest. The quantitative
survey traces the macro-structure of technology governance nationwide, as the
diverse sample of hospitals confronts new Federal regulations on electronic data
interchange and patient privacy. Simultaneously, the qualitative fieldwork
traces the micro-structure of technology governance in a single site, as the
focal hospital brings its operations into compliance with the same regulatory
initiative. By examining technology implementation in an environment of
substantial legal activity, the research promises new insights into how social
governance mechanisms channel and constrain innovation and organizational
change. In addition, the research promises new insights into how various
governance mechanisms interact with one another, as organizational cultures,
professional ethics and legal strictures overlap to determine the fate of
technology projects both within particular organizations and throughout the
healthcare sector as a whole. This investigation will make fundamental
contributions to social scientific knowledge about innovation and diffusion,
technology governance (particularly standard-setting, trust and accountability),
and organizational responses to law. The results should also assist policymakers
in constructing appropriate governance mechanisms to realize the immense
potential of clinical information technology whileavoiding the equally immense
pitfalls.&lt;br/&gt;