* 0242666
* Classroom BirdWatch Development
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Richard Bonney, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* David A. Hanych
* 05/31/2007
* USD 765,620.00

This proposal will develop a middle-school curriculum designed to facilitate
inquiry projects in biology, ecology, animal behavior and natural history.
"Classroom Birdwatch" will be developed by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology
(CLO) and the Lawrence Hall of Science. The curriculum will guide students as
they collect data about local birds, submit the data to CLO, use the project
database to answer questions about birds and conduct original bird research
projects. Usable in all schoolyards, "Classroom Birdwatch" will cover biological
topics including flight, migration, nesting behavior, and habitat utilization,
and will incorporate math and statistics through data analysis, geography
through online mapping, and technology through online data submission and
retrieval. Twenty-five explorations that investigate bird biology and behavior,
explore the process of scientific investigation, and help students conduct
research will be developed. Students can submit their findings to a student
journal produced by CLO, "Classroom Birdscope," and will have continued access
to CLO scientists, who will answer questions about birds and guide participants
through the scientific process. Materials will include a student handbook,
teacher's guide, reference guide, and a web site incorporating software for data
submission, retrieval and analysis. Assessments include tools for evaluating
students' current and ongoing understanding of science content and inquiry
process skills.