* 0242619
* Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Structural Transformations in Metal and Ceramic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Armen Khachaturyan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 508,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on the
3-dimensional evolution of strain-generating complex structures formed in
diffusional and diffusionless transformations as well as of the evolution of
defects, e.g. dislocations and cracks, formed in plastic deformation and
fracture. In spite of an apparent diversity of these problems, there is a
profound commonality among them: they present different aspects of the problem
of self-organization of a multi-mode complex system with a long-range strain-
induced anisotropic interaction. The Phase Field Microelasticity model developed
by the PI together with 3-dimensional computer simulations will be used to
investigate complex microstructures to elucidate the mechanisms controlling
their evolution in technologically important systems. The relative role played
by thermodynamics, crystallographic symmetry, microelasticity, and kinetics in
microstructure evolution will be investigated to provide insight into mechanisms
of thermal stability of microstructure, to predict the morphology and evolution
rate, and to help establish the optimal processing parameters to yield
microstructures that provide the best mechanical properties. Three groups of
problems of scientific and engineering interest for advanced materials will be
addressed. The first group, related to mechanisms controlling coherent
decomposition in cubic systems with several structural variants of ordered
intermetallics, includes investigating the formation of coherent two-phase
microstructures with a very complex morphology (e.g., the chessboard
microstructure in Co-Pt and other alloys) via precipitation of multi-variant
ordered intermetallics from a transient congruently ordered phase, and
investigating the formation of a multi-phase coherent microstructure involving
more than two phases. The second group of problems involves the response of the
martensite to applied stress in crystallographically and elastically
inhomogeneous systems. This group includes the study of martensitic
transformations involving dislocation plasticity. Stress-accommodating
dislocations drastically affect the morphology of martensitic crystals; they are
responsible for irreversible plastic deformation, which are detrimental to the
Shape Memory Effect. The study of stress-induced martensitic transformation
generated by advancing cracks in transforming inclusions is also included in
this group. Of particular interest is the heterogeneous nucleation of the
martensite followed by the rearrangement of its domains in the crack tip zones
as well as the effect of this rearrangement on the development of the crack
system. The corresponding stress-strain curve will be simulated. The third group
of problems involves coherent diffusional and martensitic phase transformations
near free surfaces. The study of these phenomena becomes possible because of the
availability of a new theoretical approach developed with NSF support. Effective
software that will enable realistic simulations of multiple processes
simultaneously occurring in complex materials systems will be developed. The
code will be distributed to researchers in the field. The galleries of virtual
experiments, simulation animations and movies will be collected for public
education in materials science and engineering. This activity will also enable
more students to participate in advanced interdisciplinary research. There are
additional broader impacts in the education of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on the evolution of strain-generating
complex structures formed in diffusional and diffusionless transformations as
well as of the evolution of defects, e.g. dislocations and cracks, formed in
plastic deformation and fracture. The Phase Field Microelasticity model
developed by the PI together with 3-dimensional computer simulations will be
used to investigate complex microstructures to elucidate the mechanisms
controlling their evolution in technologically important systems. Microstructure
plays an important role in determining mechanical properties of materials and in
materials processing. Research focuses on three problem areas: The first is
related to mechanisms controlling coherent decomposition in cubic systems with
several structural variants of ordered intermetallics; The second is related to
the response of martensite to applied stress in crystallographically and
elastically inhomogeneous systems; The third involves coherent diffusional and
martensitic phase transformations near free surfaces. Effective software that
will enable realistic simulations of multiple processes simultaneously occurring
in complex materials systems will be developed. The code will be distributed to
researchers in the field. The galleries of virtual experiments, simulation
animations and movies will be collected for public education in materials
science and engineering. This activity will also enable more students to
participate in advanced interdisciplinary research. There are additional broader
impacts in the education of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;