* 0242207
* 2003 Gordon Research Conference on Polymers (East):  Advanced Polymeric Materials;  South Hadley, MA;  June 15-20, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2003
* USD 3,000.00

The potential role of well-defined polymeric materials in a range or advanced
technologies is becoming increasing apparent. From microelectronics, sensors,
drug delivery systems, catalysts, agents for chemical warfare detection and
destruction, smart surfaces, to biodegradable tissue replacements, polymeric
materials are the critical component or enabling technology for the successful
implementation of these applications. This conference will focus upon recent
developments in the design and applications. This conference will focus upon
recent developments in the design and synthesis of polymeric materials,
biodegradability, supramolecular chemistry and polymer physics. Such an exchange
of knowledge in these critical areas by world experts will provide a springboard
for future developments as well as encouraging young scientists to join this
growing field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To encourage younger scientists to
contribute to this blossoming field and its future directions specials emphasis
will also be placed on their involvement. We are requesting funds to supplement
the travel costs for 10 postdoctoral fellows / students at $300 per person to
attend the 2003 Gordon Research Conference (Polymers East) to be held at Mount
Holyoke College, June 15-20, 2003. This amounts to a total request for $3000.00
in financial support.&lt;br/&gt;