* 0242109
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Nonlinear Energy Exchange Between High-Frequency and Low-Frequency Modes in Composite Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Ali Nayfeh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2008
* USD 35,400.00

0242109 &lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research project between Professor Ali Nayfeh, Department
of Engineering Sciences and Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University (Virginia Tech), Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Khaled Asfar,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Jordan University of Science and
Technology, Irbid, Jordan. They plan to conduct experimental and theoretical
investigations to study the mechanism for the transfer of energy for high-
frequency to low-frequency modes in composite structures. The mechanism
responsible for this energy transfer is unique as it is neither an
autoparametric resonance, nor an external combination resonance, nor a
parametric combination resonance. Composite structures to be investigated are
mainly beams and plates with various boundary conditions. Analytical and
experimental work that was done at Virginia Tech revealed such energy exchange
in multi-degree-of-freedom systems due to combination and internal resonances
and interaction between widely-spaced modes. Such energy exchange may alter the
behavior of the system leading to undesirable consequences. Effects of various
composite material parameters on the energy exchange will be studied in order to
improve the design process of such materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The
project involves analytical and experimental approaches, and combines the
complementary expertise of the US and Jordanian scientists. Dr. Nayfeh has
contributed significantly to the understanding of various energy transfer
mechanisms. The application to composite structures is of particular interest.
The project would enhance the international exchange of ideas and expertise in
the general field of nonlinear vibrations, and would strengthen the ties between
the PI's research group at VPI and the Jordan University of Science and
Technology. The research will add the study of composite materials to a large
volume of research that has been performed in the last three decades on
nonlinear modal coupling in mechanical structures of homogeneous materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;