* 0242798
* CAREER: Switching and Logic in Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Joao Hespanha, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2007
* USD 371,599.00

0093762 Hespanha

In this proposal we delineate a five year-research and education plan in the
area of Automatic Control. The overall objective of this plan is to build the
foundation for a career devoted to scientific research and its integration in
the educational program at the University of Southern California. Our research
and education efforts will be focused in the area of hybrid control systems,
i.e., systems that combine continuous dynamics with discrete logic. We are
particularly interested in supervisory control algorithms that utilize discrete
logic for the purpose of online learning and adaptation. The use of logic in
this context was proposed in the control literature more than fifteen years ago.
Most of the early work was of a theoretical nature, motivated by the desire to
construct universal controllers capable of stabilizing very large classes of
systems. The universality of these controllers was achieved at the expense of
very poor performance and the resulting algorithms could not be used in most
practical applications. Since then a great deal of progress has been made in
this area and now supervisory control is actually proposed as a technique to
attain very high performance and robustness to sudden changes in the process or
the control objectives. The scientific goal of our research is to develop a
framework to expedite the analysis and design of learning algorithms that
utilize switching and logic. Towards this end we will isolate the fundamental
issues that arise in the design of supervisory control algorithms and explore
them in a systematic fashion. We show in this proposal that although many of the
algorithms proposed in the literature originate from fundamentally different
approaches, they share key structures and exhibit several common properties. A
common framework will provide a better understanding of their key features and
limitations. We isolate here two specific topics that we judge crucial for the
wide establishment of supervisory control: 1. Extend the domain of application
of these algorithms to the control of complex nonlinear systems. In particular,
when only output-feedback is available and/or when there is significant
measurement noise and unmodeled dynamics. 2. Develop theoretical tools to
optimize the performance of these systems. Here, performance should be
understood both in a transient and in an asymptotic sense.