* 0242909
* Cohomology of Groups and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* David Benson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 105,000.00

Professor Benson's proposed research concerns the representation theory and
cohomology of groups, and interactions with commutative algebra and algebraic
topology. The proposal comes in several parts. The theme of the first part is
the application of methods of commutative algebra to the cohomology of groups.
This work centers on several conjectures. The first conjecture says that for a
finite group, the Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity of the cohomology ring of a
finite group is always zero. This remarkable conjecture should be a
manifestation of a duality discovered by Benson and Carlson about fifteen years
ago. This conjecture is expected to generalize to compact Lie groups, where the
regularity is taken as minus the dimension of the group as a manifold; and to
virtual duality groups, where the regularity is the virtual cohomogical
dimension. Another conjecture says that the depth of the cohomology ring of a
finite group should equal the minimal dimension of an associated prime. The
second part of the proposed research is closely connected with this, and
concerns a conjecture relating two different constructions of infinite
dimensional modules for a finite group. The conjecture can be viewed as a sort
of Grothendieck duality for the stable module category. A recent collaboration
of Benson and Greenlees has come up with a way to translate this problem into
the language of algebraic topology, using recent machinery of Dwyer, Greenlees
and Iyengar. It looks as though they should be able to solve the problem there,
although there are formidable technical difficulties involved. The third part of
the project involves generalizing the concept of the nucleus of the principal
block of a finite group to nonprincipal blocks. Benson has proposed a
definition, but the statement that it works analogously to the way the principal
block works is still a conjecture. The fourth and final part of the proposal is
a joint project with Kathryn Lesh to try to understand the cohomology of the
symmetric groups at odd primes. This involves rehashing the work of Ben Mann
(which by no means gives a complete treatment), and relating it to the structure
of the Dyer-Lashof algebra from algebraic
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory is the study of how to
represent abstract groups as groups of matrices. Group cohomology theory
provides a description of how matrix representations can fit together to form
larger representations. A great deal of information about how groups can act on
manifolds and on more general topological spaces can be gleaned from the
representation theory and cohomology of the group. These ideas are central to
most of pure mathematics and mathematical physics. Professor Benson's research
centers around group cohomology and representation theory, and its interactions
with commutative algebra and algebraic topology. These subjects provide fruitful
interactions for other areas within pure mathematics. The main areas of
application are algebraic topology, group actions, and algebraic number theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;