* 0242293
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Computer Science for Students at Undergraduate Institutions
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* David Berque, DePauw University
* Continuing grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 249,882.00

Institution: DePauw University Proposal Number: EIA - 0242293 PI: David A.
Berque Title: REU Site - Research Experiences in Computer Science for Students
at Undergraduate Institutions

The project directly impacts twenty-four students (eight during each of three
summers) by giving them first-hand experience with several of the most rewarding
activities that characterize graduate study and research careers. These
activities include: conducting research as part of a team, disseminating
results, and participating in a community of scholars. Students have access to
DePauw University's computing facilities, including a pen-based computing
collaboratory that facilitates the study of multiple machine interfaces. This
Collaboratory was recently enhanced with a NSF MRI grant and houses a 72"
diagonal touch-sensitive electronic whiteboard, four 61" diagonal touch-
sensitive plasma displays, and twenty Pentium student stations that use pen-
based video tablets as their primary input device. The grant is also funding a
display server, six handheld Windows-CE computers, and a database server for
experimentation with wireless database access. The program is geared toward
students enrolled at undergraduate institutions who have had little exposure to
graduate departments.

The research projects are drawn from a number of fields of Computer Science
including Text Summarization, Wireless Database Access, Multiple Machine
Interfaces, Programming Language Pedagogy, and Assistive Technology.