* 0242197
* Amelogenin Protein Evolution and Functional Heterochrony
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Thomas Diekwisch, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 05/31/2007
* USD 343,824.00

This research is concerned with the evolution of tooth enamel and enamel
proteins. Amelogenin is the major protein of tooth enamel and directly affects
the growth and habit of enamel hydroxyapatite mineral crystals. However
amelogenin also occurs in organisms such as sea urchins that have teeth but lack
enamel and toads which lack teeth. One principal in evolutionary biology is that
relatively small genetic alterations can have profound affects on morphogenesis
and development. This project will test whether the evolution of the amelogenin
gene is the causal agent for the evolution of tooth enamel. This project focuses
on the functional significance of the amelogenin C-domain. The C-domain is part
of the central hydrophobic amelogenin core rich in proline and glutamine tandem
repeats that change significantly in size, structure, and composition among
organisms as diverse as sea urchins, sharks, fish, lizards, frogs, and mice. As
tooth enamel has evolved, enamel crystals have proceeded from short randomly
oriented patterns to long and parallel prisms. In order to gain an understanding
how specific structural domains of the amelogenin molecule might affect
alterations in enamel biomineralization during vertebrate evolution, the fate
and function of the amelogenin molecule in vertebrate lineages will be studied.
The hypothesis to be tested is whether the evolution of enamel crystals from
short and randomly oriented patterns to long and parallel-oriented prisms is
directly linked to the evolution of increasingly sophisticated amelogenin
C-domains facilitating the organization of complex supra-molecular amelogenin
subunit-compartments. Aims are 1) to correlate enamel/enameloid crystal
dimensions to amelogenin temporo-spatial localization and protein domain
configuration, 2) to trace the evolution of amelogenins from pro-amelogenin to
teleo-amelogenin in vertebrate lineages in the context of amelogenin protein
function, 3) to compare the effects of pro-amelogenin with the effects of teleo-
amelogenin on enamel matrix conformation and crystal growth and
habit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will shed new light on mechanisms
involved in vertebrate enamel formation and will generate further understanding
of the evolution of complex structural genes as well as mechanisms of
biomineralization. Insight into biomineralization processes has potential
applications in nanotechnology particularly with regard to the fabrication,
assembly, and design of new materials .&lt;br/&gt;