* 0242507
* US-South Africa Cooperative Research:  Characteristic Evolution of Black Hole-Star Binary Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Luis Lehner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Patterson
* 01/31/2009
* USD 26,823.00

INT-0242507&lt;br/&gt;Lehner&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Luis Lehner (LSU), and
Professor Nigel T. Bishop (University of South Africa). The investigators will
collaborate on research for the simulation of binary systems containing: [a]
black hole and a star and [b] a supermassive black hole and a star . The USA
side will contribute with its expertise on the needed simulations and
computational facilities while the South African side its expertise on algebraic
manipulation. Additionally, both sides have vast knowledge on the formalism and
numerical techniques that will be employed in the project. The goal will be to
predict the expected gravitational wave emission produced by these systems.
&lt;br/&gt;These two target systems are prime candidates to produce radiation,
of gravitational origin, which highly sensitive detectors could measure (earth-
based detectors in system [a], while spaced-based detectors for [b]). The
prediction of the expected gravitational waves will be important for their
detection and crucial for deciphering the information carried by them.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the activities of this project will give new research
opportunities to young researchers in both countries (and in particular to two
junior investigators in South Africa at historically disadvantaged
institutions). The project will introduce a new generation of scientists to
multidisciplinary and collaborative research and enhance the participation of
the South African partners in leading edge research in gravitational wave
physics. &lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering and by the Stellar Astronomy and Astrophysics Program,
Division of Astronomical Sciences, Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;