* 0242994
* Citizen Learning, Deliberation, and Reasoning in Internet-Mediated Technology Policy Forums
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Carolyn Miller, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 05/31/2005
* USD 325,068.00

Public participation in technology policy decision-making is both controversial
and desirable. It is controversial because of questions about the capabilities
of citizens to understand and evaluate these complex issues; it is desirable
because democratic participation is a measure of civic engagement and may
improve decisions and their outcomes. Identification and development of more
effective modes of citizen participation will play an important part in enabling
citizens to participate effectively.

This project has several goals: 1) to develop improved vehicles for effective
public involvement in technology policy, 2) to create basic knowledge of how
citizens' trust in regulators, scientists, and corporations; self-efficacy; and
learning are affected by participation in these processes, and 3) to inform
development of effective internet-mediated models for national technology policy
participation. The research team, composed of faculty in rhetoric of science,
group decision-making, and political science, will conduct two mixed-mode and
six internet-mediated consensus conferences, based on the Danish model. These
conferences will involve 120 citizens; each panel of 15 citizens will be
representative of the local population and will deliberate to reach consensus
recommendations on a prominent technology issue. The research includes testing
an innovative measure of democratic deliberation developed by one of the team.
The project will also test political science theory, by investigating
relationships between gender, ethnicity, lower socio-economic status and
increases in efficacy and trust in regulators, as outcomes of modes of
participation.

The project has national-level impact, broadens participation of
underrepresented groups, and develops new participation approaches using
information technology. The project will also involve undergraduates and
graduate students in research; results will be distributed broadly, including
publicizing the results and citizen recommendations to policy makers and the
media.