* 0242938
* US-India Workshop:  Recent Advances in Organometallic Catalysis and Olefin Polymerization, Pondicherry, India, December 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Edward Coughlin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/29/2004
* USD 29,000.00

0242938&lt;br/&gt;Coughlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel
support for a delegation of ten US scientists to participate in the US-India
Workshop: Recent Advances in Organometallic Catalysis and Olefin Polymerization,
Pondicherry, India, December 2003. Professors Edward B. Coughlin, University of
Massachusetts, and G. Sundararajan, Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai are
the organizers of the workshop in a discipline that has come to hold a special
position in research and development by virtue of the applications in organic
and polymer syntheses. India has many active researchers in the field, but the
multi-disciplinary aspects of organometallic chemistry have not been evaluated.
The workshop will unite academicians and industrial scientists in the field of
organometallic catalysis and olefin polymerization, and will identify specific
research areas for future collaboration such as the synthesis of organometallic
catalysts, single-site catalysts in the olefin polymerization reactions, and
applications in the field of catalytic organic synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organometallic chemistry is a thrust area identified by
the Government of India Department of Science and Technology (DST). While in
India the number of chemists involved in this research area is growing, only a
handful of groups are involved in research on olefin polymerization using
single-site catalysts. The fruits of this research are not yet realized by
Indian industry. This workshop will bring to focus the requirement for active
research in this area. The proceedings will be brought out in CD format and then
published as a special issue to commemorate the workshop. The DST jointly
supports this activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
travel funds for ten American participants at the US-India Workshop: Recent
Advances in Organometallic Catalysis and Olefin Polymerization, to be held in
Pondicherry, India on December 2003. Professors E. Bryan Coughlin, University of
Massachusetts Amherst and G. Sundararajan, Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras are the organizers of the workshop on this important topic in the area of
catalysis chemistry and polymer synthesis. The US delegates are a high-powered
team recognized for research related interactions between academia and industry
and they will ensure the success of the workshop. The Indian participants
represent a broad range of interests from academia, industry, and government.
The composition of US and Indian scientists at this workshop is likely to
initiate new collaborative activities. The US PI is a very promising young
investigator with significant industrial experience and commendable outreach
activities; the US delegation includes younger scientists and representatives of
underrepresented groups. This workshop will be supported by the Government of
India's Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST). &lt;br/&gt;