* 0242817
* Evolving University-Industry Relationships from the Perspective of the Firm
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Janet Bercovitz, Duke University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2006
* USD 75,001.00

While universities have long served as a source of scientific and technical
knowledge for industry, there has been a significant rise in both the level and
the formalization of knowledge transfer activities at the university-industry
interface. For the most part, however, recent research explores university-
industry interactions from the perspective of the university. Few studies
examine the firm's perspective. As a result, understanding of the motivations of
firms in technology-transfer and the ways in which industry-university
interaction fits into the larger U.S. system of innovation is limited. This
study seeks to address this gap. Leveraging organizational theory and contract
theory, hypotheses are developed to explore: How the firm's internal R&amp;D
organization and innovation strategy affect its propensity to interact with
universities; how the firm's internal R&amp;D organization and innovation
strategy affect the mode of university-industry interactions selected. (Does the
firm pursue limited transactions or long-term relationships?); and how the
firm's internal R&amp;D organization and innovation strategy affect expectations
for, and satisfaction with, the university interactions. To conduct this study,
data will be collected through a survey of the large R&amp;D performers, both
public and private, in the U.S. economy. Empirical testing of hypotheses will
contribute an understanding of how university interaction fits within the firm's
R&amp;D strategy and examine the effect of firm strategy and organizational
structure on the types of technology-transfer mechanisms employed by the firm
and the ultimate relationship the firm maintains with the university. Besides
contributing to the existing knowledge base, the study will provide useful
comparative information for industry R&amp;D managers. One or two PhD students
will also be involved in this research, and outcomes will contribute to classes
in entrepreneurship, strategy, and science policy.&lt;br/&gt;