* 0242906
* Homology of Linear Groups with Applications to Algebraic K-theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Kevin Knudson, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2004
* USD 19,138.00

Knudson studies the homology of linear groups over various rings of interest in
algebraic K-theory. In this project he focuses attention on the low-dimensional
homology groups of the general linear group over the coordinate ring of an
elliptic curve over a number field with the goal of proving that the second
K-group of such a curve has finite rank. This extends Knudson's previous work on
the homology of rank one groups over such rings. In addition, a new homology
theory based on algebraic cycles in the product of a scheme with the simplicial
classifying scheme of an algebraic group is constructed and its properties
investigated. The hope is that this construction will lead to a proof of the
Friedlander-Milnor conjecture concerning the homology of algebraic groups made
discrete. Also, the investigator's previous work on the structure of special
linear groups over integral Laurent polynomial rings is used in the study of the
Burau representation of the braid groups. This representation is known to be
faithful for three strings and unfaithful for five or more strings; the
remaining case of four strings is singled out for study in this project.
Finally, Knudson studies the completion of a discrete group relative to a
Zariski dense representation in a reductive group over a field of positive
characteristic. This generalizes the classical unipotent completion of a group
and extends to positive characteristic R. Hain's work in characteristic
zero.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scheme is a geometric object constructed from
solution sets of polynomial equations. Algebraic K-theory associates to a scheme
a sequence of groups which encode information about the scheme. One aspect of
this project is the study of the K-groups of an elliptic curve. Such curves have
remarkably rich structure and appear in various branches of mathematics such as
algebraic geometry and coding theory. A seemingly unrelated part of this project
concerns the so-called Burau representation of the braid groups which is
intimately connected with knot theory. These diverse topics are unified by
studying the structure of groups of matrices with entries in various rings (the
coordinate ring of the elliptic curve in the first case and the ring of integral
Laurent polynomials in the second). The hope is to solve several outstanding
conjectures about these objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;