* 0242211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing the Neanderthal Replacement Model from an Ecological Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Robert Whallon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,990.00

Under the direction of Robert Whallon, Eugene Morin will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. He will continue to analyze faunal material from Saint-
Cesaire and Quincay, two sites located in southwestern France documenting the
Middle to Upper Paleolithic transition (roughly between 40,000 and 32,000 BP),
an episode corresponding, according to many, to the replacement of Neanderthals
by modern humans. Numerous changes, biological as well as cultural, occurred
during this short time period. In its cultural dimension, most notable are the
emergence of art and bone technology, an increase of stylistic patterning, and
the diversification and standardization of stone tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a set of material predictions based largely on
fauna, the research examines and tests the presumed replacement of Neanderthals
in Western Europe. Given the low productivity of the environment in southwestern
France during this time period, the incursion of early modern humans into an
area already occupied by Neanderthals would have increased the local population
far beyond the carrying capacity of the environment and led to overpopulation.
Based on this argument, it is suggested that the Neanderthals redefined their
ecological niche in order to avoid direct competition with modern humans. This
would be reflected, in a predictable manner, in archaeological faunal
assemblages. Two types of comparisons are carried out to test this hypothesis.
First, we should observe a decline, as a result of the modern human incursion,
of high caloric return species (e.g. large herbivores) in late Neanderthal
assemblages as well as more efficient utilization of carcasses and, possibly an
increase in scavenging. In sum, compared to early modern human faunal
assemblages, late Neanderthal assemblages should be characterized by significant
subsistence stress. Saint-Cesaire and Quincay are ideal sites to conduct a
detailed study of Neanderthal and modern human adaptation since the latter have
been carefully excavated and because animal bone is well
preserved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to a better
understanding of human origins, especially in regard of the interaction between
the social, demographic, and economic aspects involved in the migration of a
population. At the general level, this project will deepen the anthropological
study of hunter-gatherers and add to our body of knowledge on speciation
processes in human evolution. In trying to strictly test a hypothesis derived
from the replacement model, this kind of study has great potential to contribute
in resolving the debates on the nature of the Middle/Upper Paleolithic
transition since its assumptions and bridging arguments are clearly exposed and
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will also contribute significantly to
training a very promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;