* 0242246
* Dimensionality and Weak-links Effects at the Superfluid Transition of 4He
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Francis Gasparini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 09/30/2006
* USD 356,752.00

This low-temperature physics research project will investigate the superfluid
transition of confined 4He as a paradigm of critical behavior. The work is
intended to test theories of finite-size scaling at a second order phase
transition. Here, the thermodynamic behavior should be scaled by the correlation
length of the unconfined system. Excepting helium, there are very few
experimental studies of this problem. Scaling has come into question from
earlier experiments with helium confined in a planar geometry. It has been
observed that on the superfluid side the expected scaling fails. This is also
supported by theoretical calculations of the superfluid fraction. Other
theoretical models also point out possible lack of scaling. The role of the
lower dimension is also important and will be pursued. Films, representing
2-dimensional crossover, might behave quite differently from confinements where
additional dimensions are made small. This research, because of the universal
character of second order transitions, may have implications for critical
behavior of other systems near a second order phase transition. The technique
used in defining the confinement involves silicon lithography, and direct wafer
bonding to achieve unprecedented uniformity in confinement at the nanometer
level over cm2 areas. This is coupled with experimental techniques that allow
study of very small samples with high accuracy. Both graduate and
undergraduates, are involved in this work, and receive training in an unusually
broad range of fabrication and experimental methods. This prepares them for
careers in industry, academia, or government.

This low-temperature physics project involves studies of the behavior of a
confined fluid near a phase transition. Usually materials do not change their
properties with size because the largest relevant length scale is of the order
of the interatomic spacing. However, near a phase transition an additional
length scale emerges, the correlation length, which can grow as function of
temperature to become quite large. In this case, samples which have dimensions
comparable to the correlation length behave quite differently. This study
focuses on liquid helium at its superfluid transition as a paradigm of what is
expected to be a general behavior of many other systems. This is important in
the current pursuit of nanotechnology, especially for magnetic systems.
Substantial technological development is needed to do this work. A process has
been developed which involves lithography of silicon wafers, and direct wafer
bonding to construct exceptionally uniform chambers in which the liquid is
confined. Techniques have also been developed for measuring very small samples.
The present research focuses on the role of dimensionality. The program will
investigate the effects of making 1, 2, or all 3 dimensions small. Students
working in this area, both graduate and undergraduates are trained in cryogenic
techniques, silicon lithography, wafer bonding, and high-resolution, precision
measurements using computer controls. This prepares them for careers in academe,
industry, and government or for additional study for advanced degrees.