* 0242701
* Molecular Logic:  Bringing the Power of Molecular Models to High School Biology
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Boris Berenfeld, Concord Consortium
* Continuing grant
* Michael Haney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,416,623.00

The Molecular Logic project is designed to improve the ability of all students
to understand fundamental biological phenomena in terms of the interactions of
atoms and molecules. The project does this by enhancing biology courses with
guided explorations of powerful atomic and molecular computational models. These
models are embedded in eight modules that are linked both to standards and to
typical textbooks, and they are easily implemented in diverse educational
settings.

The models are designed to cover basic science concepts using an approach that
is accurate, grade-appropriate, and accessible to students with different
learning styles. Exploration of the models requires problem solving and fosters
critical thinking. Collaboration around model-based challenges is used to
strengthen student communication skills. The associated materials provide
connections to technology, engineering, social questions and scientists.

Computational models are central to the project. The models are also available
at no cost online as hybrid materials that include text and additional
computational resources. Student assessment is embedded. Teacher professional
development and ongoing support are provided online. An advisory board of
scientists, teachers and researchers helps oversee and guide the project.