* 0242187
* An Inexpensive Vertically Profiling Float for Seasonal-High-Resolution Measurements in P-BECS
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Robert Pinkel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2008
* USD 631,201.00

P.I. Pinkel, Robert (SIO) Proposal #: 0242187&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: An Inexpensive Vertically Profiling Float for Seasonal-High-Resolution
Measurements in P-BECS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; The PI
proposes to develop an inexpensive vertically profiling float that draws its
energy from the ocean surface wavefield. This system has been named the
"Wirewalker" and it is a generalized platform capable of supporting a variety of
self-contained instruments. The motion of the waves drives the positively
buoyant profiler downward. It then free floats upward, decoupled from the
surface motion field. The design focuses on mechanical simplicity and low cost.
In moderate sea states, a prototype Wirewalker has completed profiles to depths
of 60 m every 15 min. Test deployments have shown that profiles from the surface
to 50-100 m can be obtained rapidly enough that diel and higher-frequency
variability can be resolved. Both free-drifting and tethered applications are
possible. During testing a record with greater than 6000 profiles was obtained
over a three-week period with the profiler tethered at the end of the Scripps
Pier.&lt;br/&gt; The work proposed here will help refine and extend the
Wirewalker design to produce a profiler that could be used by the broader
oceanographic community. In particular, a general purpose profiling platform
capable of handling any internally recording instrument of modest weight (&lt;20
kg) will be constructed. The PI states that the commercial price for such a
device would likely be less than $1000. In addition, a CTD-optical profiler with
GPS navigation and remote data telemetry will be developed. This telemetry would
enable real-time data collection and expendable deployments. In addition, the PI
proposed to purchase a commercially available point velocity sensor for use on
the profiler. This will enable initial experience with the problem of measuring
near-surface velocity to be gained. &lt;br/&gt; The PI proposes that the initial
science application for the Wirewalker is in P-BECS, where there is a documented
need to establish the long-term averages of rapidly fluctuating lateral and
vertical fluxes. A specific target is the lateral heat flux associated with the
afternoon heating of low latitude surface waters and its subsequent advection by
the wind. It is envisioned that the Wirewalkers will be deployed individually or
in small arrays to address specific science issues. If successful, the
Wirewalker system could significantly extend the depth-time resolution of
monitoring arrays and could also increase the duration and spatial coverage of
process experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;