* 0242030
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Approaches For Testing Axioms of Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* George Karabatsos, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2006
* USD 197,065.00

Many models of measurement and decision-making can be characterized in terms of
axioms. While it is of primary importance to test whether data are in accord to
such axioms, there is a challenging incompatibility between empirical data and
the nature of the axioms. On the one hand, empirical data generally contain
random error, which is attributable to a number of sources, such as the inherent
unreliability of human (or animal) behavior, sampling error, and imprecision of
the observations themselves. On the other hand, the axioms do not account for
random error, because of their deterministic, qualitative form. This research
project aims to solve this incompatibility by developing procedures of axiom
testing that are based on contemporary Bayesian methods of model estimation,
model fit evaluation, and model selection. Through five inter-related research
objectives, this project will investigate the Bayes inference framework by
applying it to test axioms on real data, and by comparing the performance of
different types of model selection methods and prior distributions. The goal is
to determine the best Bayesian inference methods for testing axioms of
measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For researchers in many branches of the social
sciences, including test theory and decision theory, the fruits of this work
should provide usable and powerful statistical tools for testing the key
assumptions that underlies contemporary models of measurement and decision-
making. The use of these statistical tools should lead to a better understanding
of these models, and possibly indicate productive extensions of them.