* 0242683
* Molecular analyses of the Peabody Basketmaker collection and their implications for Anasazi origins
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Joan Coltrain, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 118,869.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Joan Brenner Coltrain and Shawn
Carlyle will analyze the bone chemistry of a human burial collection from the
American Southwest. The burials under study make up the "Basketmaker Collection"
and are housed at the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard.
Basketmaker people are thought to represent the earliest farmers in the Four
Corners region, predating the Anasazi, lived in pit houses rather than adobe
structures and used basketry rather than pottery. The Peabody Basketmaker
collection was assembled early in the twentieth century and is not as well
documented as later collections recovered using systematic excavation and
recording methods. Firmly establishing the timeframe in which they lived, their
reliance on maize as a dietary staple and their genetic ancestry will add
measurably to our understanding of this important period in Southwest
prehistory. We will use three techniques in this study. The first is radiocarbon
dating. This is accomplished by isolating and purifying a protein called
collagen from a small piece of bone. Collagen makes up the supporting framework
of bone and is comprised of amino acids that contain carbon. A small fraction of
this carbon is the radioactive isotope of carbon, 14C, allowing us to obtain a
radiocarbon date from bone collagen. The second technique is a two-part analysis
of Basketmaker diets. The first is based on two stable isotopes of carbon found
in bone collagen, 13C and 12C. The ratio of 13C to 12C covaries with the amount
of maize in the diet of sampled individuals and will be measured on the same
isolated and purified proteins that are used in radiocarbon dating. The second
assay will measure the ratio of two stable isotopes of nitrogen in bone
collagen, 15N and 14N, to estimate how much animal protein our study population
consumed. It is very possible that as Basketmaker people became more sedentary
and began to rely more heavily on maize, they consumed less animal protein,
perhaps as a consequence of reduced animal prey densities. Finally, we will
extract mitochondrial DNA from small pieces of bone to determine the genetic
relationship between Basketmaker people and the Mimbres who lived to the south,
the Fremont who lived to the north, the Anasazi who followed the Basketmaker in
time and modern American Indian groups. This will be accomplished by identifying
specific maternal lineages evident in the mitochondrial genome and by sequencing
DNA in specific regions of that genome. The data from these procedures will
improve our understanding of who the Basketmaker people were, when they arrived
in the Four Corners region and how reliant they were on maize agriculture over
time. In addition and of equal importance, these data will allow the Peabody
Museum to comply with federal legislation (NAGPRA) that requires them, and all
American institutions curating Native American remains, to return or repatriate
these remains to descendent tribal groups if requested. Currently, several
tribes have requested the Basketmaker collection. To equitably repatriate this
collection is contingent upon the genetic relationships and temporal framework
under study.