* 0242575
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Child Health and the Proximal Ecology of Stress: Scheduling American Family Life
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Carol Worthman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,000.00

"Stress" and its role in adaptation and health are central to understanding
human variation within biological anthropology. We have good measures of the
effects of stress on the body, and good ecological models of general sources of
social stress. Nonetheless, greater attention is needed to the social and
cognitive mechanisms by which one translates into the other. The work of
behavioral ecologists, while largely focused on ultimately evolutionary causes
and adaptive trade-offs, nonetheless suggests that we might approach this
through a focus on the deployment of two types of "resources" expended in any
behavior: time and energy. Further, amongst developmentalists who focus upon
ecologic stress in children, there is a tradition of comparing environmental
"microniches" that set up different developmental ecologies and their
corresponding outcomes. Combining these scientific traditions, this study uses a
natural experimental model to consider how ecologic social stress translates
into child health. &lt;br/&gt; Research suggests that the American "time bind"
is experienced as a major stressor, and this may be related to changing work and
living arrangements. This study will examine in detail the actual usage of time
within metropolitan Atlanta families and families' perception of their use of
time. These data are combined with hormonal markers of stress and arousal, and
records of functional child health outcomes, including physical, psychological,
social, and educational outcomes. The links between these outcomes and various
characteristics of the daily schedules of families are considered, including
tension, density, and fragility. This will extend our understanding of the day-
to-day workings of "stress" by detailing specific biocultural pathways
connecting social ecology to physiology and child health.&lt;br/&gt; The
research will have a number of broader impacts. First, it will assist in the
training of a graduate student in the field of biological/physical anthropology.
Second, the information gathered helps us to better understand the relationship
between "psychosocial stress" and the challenge of maintaining an acceptable
"work/life balance." The maintenance of "work/life balance" has been of
tremendous recent interest inside and outside the scientific community,
including in business, where this is crucial to maintaining a well-functioning
and thus productive work force. Finally, it will help us better understand the
notion of "stress" itself, which has wide-ranging implications, since "stress"
has been linked to personal health and well-being, and more indirectly to such
social phenomena as school shootings, divorce, and child abuse, but often
without sufficient understanding of how stress operates in people's daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;