* 0242157
* Nearshore Benthic-Pelagic Coupling:  Coral Growth Responses to Internal Tidal Forcing on Florida Keys Coral Reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* James Leichter, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 147,947.00

Internal bores generated by internal tides and breaking internal waves represent
an important source of physical variability and cross-shelf transport in a range
of near-shore marine environments, including the slopes of coral reefs in the
Florida Keys, USA. The arrival of internal bores is marked by rapid fluctuations
in near-bottom water temperature and density coupled to the onset of strong
upslope flows. Cool subsurface water is forced onshore at semi-diurnal
frequencies throughout the summer months, and the penetration of cool water and
the high frequency physical variability associated with this pulsing mechanism
decreases with distance up reef slopes. The arrival of subsurface waters on reef
slopes is associated with increases in concentrations of dissolved nutrients,
phytoplankton and zooplankton. Internal tidal forcing represents a suite of
physical mechanisms that can potentially connect near-shore benthic communities
to water and materials associated with offshore thermocline and associated
subsurface chlorophyll maximum layers. The impact of internal tidal forcing is
widespread throughout reefs in the Florida Keys, and new observations show that
very large internal bores can be detected near the bottom at 50 m depth at least
1.5 km seaward of the Keys reef tract. The timing of these large internal bores
appears to correspond to upward deviations of offshore isotherms indicative of
subsurface intrusions of cool water onto the shelf seaward of the reef tract.
This upwelling of isotherms may be caused by offshore meanders of the Florida
Current, suggesting a direct link between regional oceanographic variability and
high frequency cross-shelf transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
an investigation of the effects of internal tidal forcing on growth rates of
suspension-feeding corals, as well as an examination of the roles of
oceanographic variability in modulating internal tidal forcing along the Florida
Keys reef tract. Two reef sites have been identified where natural topographic
features produce adjacent reef slope microhabitats with equivalent depth
gradients and similar overlying ambient water masses but with very different
levels of exposure to internal tidal forcing. At these paired sites,
manipulative coral growth rate experiments and analysis of skeletal banding
patterns in native coral colonies will be combined with high frequency near-
bottom physical sampling, measurement of fluxes of dissolved nutrients, and
characterization of zooplankton availability. Results from experimental work
will be considered within a context of broad-scale biological patterns, and
regional-scale observations of high frequency oceanographic processes that can
modulate internal tidal forcing. Understanding the biological and ecological
importance of internal tidal forcing is limited, in part, by a lack of
experimental studies and long-term, broad-scale observations. In addition to
influencing thermal and nutrient dynamics, cross shelf transport associated with
internal tidal bores may represent a dynamic conduit for delivery of larval
invertebrates and fish to coral reefs. Such mechanisms of benthic-pelagic
coupling have far-reaching potential consequences for biological processes on
coral reefs and for connectivity among meta-populations distributed alongshore.
Internal tidal forcing can directly influence small scale, high frequency
physical variability within reefs, and may be modulated by regional scale
oceanographic processes of water column stratification and alongshore currents.
These forcing mechanisms, thus, may function to link small-scale, benthic
biological processes to regional-scale oceanographic variability. This project
should expand understanding both of coral responses to internal tidal forcing
and of the importance of alongshore variability in internal tidal forcing for
benthic marine communities.&lt;br/&gt;