* 0242840
* Vulnerability Analysis and Threat Assessment/Avoidance
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Bharat Bhargava, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 05/31/2009
* USD 217,472.00

Existing vulnerabilities are a serious threat to computer systems and
organizations. Research in security is needed to identify vulnerabilities in
systems, evaluate the threat, and devise mechanisms that avoid them. Formalizing
vulnerability, building quantitative models of threat, and experimental studies
are needed to discover and evaluate solutions for dealing with threats to life
and economy. This will result in algorithms, observations based on experiments,
and infrastructure that can deal with expected and unexpected attacks in an
adaptable and graceful manner. It will lead towards guidelines for building
secure systems and databases. The research will build upon results in failure
identification, fault-tolerance and reliability/safety. Vulnerabilities will be
reduced by keeping an attacker uncertain and unaware about the latest version of
databases/software and routing information that are in operation. This research
will contribute to fundamental principles and policies for providing homeland
security in information systems and applications in nuclear waste shipping,
e-commerce, and disaster management. A better understanding of vulnerabilities
in a variety of institutions such as schools, government agencies, air space and
airports, and industrial plants will be explored. We will contribute to the
outreach program of CERIAS security center at Purdue through preparation of
education material and organizing workshops.