* 0242772
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Wave Propagation in Multi-Layered Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Ian Hall, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2007
* USD 22,200.00

0242772&lt;br/&gt;Hall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a joint research project between Dr. Ian Hall, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr. Mustafa
Guden, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology,
Izmir, Turkey. They plan to study the propagation of elastic, plastic and shock
waves through combinations of solids (engineering, structural or geological
materials) through a program consisting of modeling and experiments. The goal is
to develop computational tools to facilitate the design of material systems in
which the passage of waves can be manipulated to achieve a variety of desired
effects. The particular application behind this research concerns wave
propagation in materials consisting of ceramic tiles attached to thick-section
polymer composites, such as may be used in armors. It has been observed that
even when subjected to an initially compressive wave, to which its resistance is
good, the ceramic soon experiences a tensile reflected wave to which its
resistance is very poor and rapid failure occurs. Interposing a third material,
with different properties, between the two principal constituents has been shown
to affect the behavior beneficially. The systematic study of the extent to which
the behavior may potentially be affected by deliberately choosing the materials'
relative dimensions, impedances and other properties is a focus of this research
activity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award is for a US scientist to
collaborate with a Turkish scientist in a research project in an important
scientific area. The collaboration will take the form of six-month reciprocal
visits by the U.S. principal investigator and his Turkish collaborator. The
collaboration will include joint advisement of graduate students, and reciprocal
visits by U.S. and Turkish graduate students. This project is jointly funded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Civil
and Mechanical Systems.&lt;br/&gt;