* 0242000
* Growth, Capital Shares, and A New Production Function
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Charles Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2007
* USD 233,373.00

ABSTRACT PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0242000 INSTITUTION: University of California at
Berkeley NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jones, Charles I
PROPOSAL TITLE: Growth, Capital Shares, and A New Production Function Four
stylized facts, taken together, constitute a puzzle in modem growth theory: (1)
some countries can grow at a relatively stable average rate for a long time, (2)
contrary to conventional wisdom, factor payments as a share of GDP are not
constant over time in most countries and typically exhibit large trends for
several decades, (3) estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor are often less than unity, (4) the price of capital equipment relative
to that of consumption is falling, suggesting that some technical change is
embodied in equipment capital, a phenomenon often called investment-specific
technical change. For a neoclassical growth model to exhibit a steady state,
either technical change must be entirely labor augmenting in the long run, or
the production function must be Cobb-Douglas. To get steady growth in the
presence investment-specific technical change, the production function should be
Cobb-Douglas; however, this is inconsistent with Facts 2 and 3.

This research consists of three projects that document and resolve this puzzle.
The first project will create a new dataset on factor payments to capital and
labor for a large number of countries, both at the aggregate and industry
levels, over as long a time as possible. This is important because Fact 2 runs
counter to the conventional wisdom: it is commonly accepted that capital shares
are relatively constant over time. The second project proposes a new production
function that is consistent with all four stylized facts. Factor shares and
estimates of the elasticity of substitution are driven by short-run properties
of the production function. However, requirements for steady-state growth
involve the shape of the long-run production function. The production function
proposed here exploits this difference. The short-run elasticity of substitution
responsible for factor pricing is less than one. In the long run, additional
substitution possibilities arise and production occurs with a Cobb-Douglas
structure.

The third project explores the microfoundations for this new production
function. A production technique, with a low elasticity of substitution, may be
appropriate for a given input mix. To produce with a very different input mix, a
new production technique may be required. The shape of a given technique governs
the short-run elasticity of substition, while the long- run elasticity of
substitution is determined by the distribution of newly discovered techniques. A
necessary condition for steady growth is that new techniques are distributed
according to a Pareto distribution. This same distributional assumption
generates a long-run production function that takes the Cobb-Douglas form. This
research will resolve some of pressing puzzles in growth theories that seem to
be inconsistent with the observed facts.

