* 0242076
* Rational Calculation and Trust: A Comparative Institutional Analysis of Emerging Credit Card Markets in Socialist and Post-Socialist and Developing Societies
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Akos Rona-tas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2007
* USD 185,000.00

This project examines the role of rational calculation and trust in lending in
emerging credit card markets in socialist and post-socialist countries. The
fundamental goal of the project is to investigate the institutional conditions
underlying rational calculation, the ways that trust may be substituted for
rational calculation as well as the consequences of using one or the other. The
researchers will compare how banks issue credit cards in seven socialist and
post-socialist economies; these countries represent three transition paths from
a command economy and, thus, three different contexts that banks must negotiate.
The first group (the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland) has, by and large,
successfully completed both a political and an economic transformation; the
second group (Bulgaria and Russia) are considered so far to have failed to
consolidate a well-functioning set of institutions; and the third group (China
and Vietnam) has opted for an economic transformation while keeping political
institutions stable. Data that will be gathered from interviews with credit card
applicants and users and banking and government officials as well as from
documents describing banking and credit card practices, decision making,
industry organization and practices, and the practice of credit lending and
usage.