* 0242022
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Major Power States and Limited War
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Scott Gartner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2005
* USD 7,819.00

Why do major power states frequently fail to achieve even limited objectives
when they use military force against vastly weaker targets? Recent research
suggests that war outcomes are largely a function of strategic selection (war
initiation), military-industrial capabilities, combat effectiveness, and
strategy choice. But this model cannot explain why a major power would ever lose
an armed conflict with a weak target. As the initiators of military
interventions, major powers have the advantage of selecting their target.
Additionally, in post-WWII major power military interventions, the major powers
invariably possess vastly superior military-industrial capabilities, higher
quality troops, better leadership, and, unlike their targets, the ability to
successfully execute even the most difficult and complicated military strategies
(e.g. maneuver or combined arms strategies). Yet, frequently, the intervening
major power is not able to achieve its war aims, or, if it does secure its
objectives, success is temporary and the state is not able to maintain the
objective (Arreguin-Toft 2001; Blechman and Kaplan 1978).

The student argues that the existence of political constraints on the ability of
major power states to pursue their objectives to the full extent of their
capabilities is a primary, but often neglected, or poorly operationalized,
factor that can account for the discrepancy between outcomes predicted based on
capabilities and observed outcomes in asymmetric conflicts. In particular,
certain domestic political characteristics of the intervening state, attributes
of the conflict, and characteristics of the international strategic context in
which an intervention takes place can create constraints on the ability of major
power leaders to use force effectively. Under some circumstances, domestic
political and international strategic constraints become the primary
determinants of violent conflict outcomes. This is particularly problematic for
major power states that use force against minor power or non-state targets
because, for the major power state, these interventions are initiated for
limited aims, in the absence of a credible claim to self-defense, and in a
context of numerous competing international concerns and commitments.

Standard models of war outcomes are built on the implicit assumption that both
sides bring the full force of their capabilities to bear in a conflict. The
primary predictors in such models are variables that capture potential power
rather actual (situation specific) power. As a result, they are less able to
explain conflict outcomes the more limited the conflict is for one side.

This study develops a model of military intervention outcomes that accounts for
the fact that leaders must make operational decisions about foreign conflict
prosecution within the confines of competing domestic political and geostrategic
concerns.

To test the hypotheses derived from this model, this project develops an
original dataset of all major power military interventions since the Second
World War and conducts aggregate analyses employing event history statistical
techniques including competing-risks hazard analysis, an estimation procedure
appropriate for questions pertaining to the impact of explanatory factors on
both the outcome and duration of events.

This study's focus on the dynamics of major power military intervention is
particularly relevant in the current international climate, in which a major
power war is much less likely than a series of violent contests between major
power states and inrogueli states or non-state actors. Better theory and
empirical evidence on the factors that affect the ability of states to achieve
their political objectives through the use of force may at times allow decision-
makers to design more effective military interventions. At other times, however,
it may caution them against the use of force altogether.

The results of this project will address: 1) the influence of political
constraints on the propensity of major power leaders to maintain, escalate, or
withdraw from military operations abroad, 2) the affect of domestic political
and geostrategic factors on intervention outcomes and duration, and 3) the
conditions under which domestic political and geostrategic constraints have a
significant effect on the conduct of foreign military operations. In addition to
its theoretical and empirical contributions, this project will result in a
detailed and comprehensive dataset of post-WWII major power military operations,
which will be made widely available to the social scientific community.