* 0242465
* Collaborative Research:  Discharge Variability of Ross Ice Streams Over the Last Millenium, Deduced by Numerical Simulation of Flow Features in the Ross Ice Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Mark Fahnestock, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 02/29/2004
* USD 63,360.00

This award supports the investigation of the dishcarge variability of Ross Ice
Streams over the last millenium, using a combination of numerical simulation and
satellite remote sensing of flow features on the Ross Ice Shelf. The proposed
collaborative research will use the Ross Ice Shelf record of flow variability to
deduce variations in ice stream discharge over the last 1000 years. Changes in
ice stream discharge disrupt flow of the ice shelf, in both profound and subtle
ways, distorting flow features and changing creavasse patterns. The result is an
integrated record of many changes over the lifetime of the ice within the shelf.
Interpretations of flow-trace and crevasse geometry already made by Fahnestock
and others will be used as a template for the design of numerical modeling
experiments. The primary objectives are to verify the imagery-derived history
and to quantify the volume flux implied by that history. The proposed research
will improve existing concepts of ice stream discharge variability and will
produce new data sets, both of which will be of use to the Antarctic glaciology
community. Landsat-7 imagery will be used to measure velocity in areas of
particular interest where existing data are inadequate. MODIS data, which has
better radiometric and spatial resolution will be used to improve feature
mapping on the ice shelf in sensitive areas.