* 0242023
* Summer Institute in Economic Geography
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Kristopher Olds, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Snce the 1970s, economic geography has witnessed theoretical orthodoxies and
methodological conventions persistently exposed to searching critique and
reevaluation. While this restlessness has contributed to the dynamism of the
field, it has presented particular challenges for young researchers who have had
to chart courses through a shifting terrain of theoretical, methodological, and
substantive concerns without succumbing to faddishness. Furthermore,
codification of methodological practice in economic geography generally has
lagged that found in other disciplines and subfields. The need for enhanced
research training in economic geography has been highlighted at a number of
recent meetings. In response to these issues, economic geographers in the U.S.
and other nations have developed plans to conduct a series of summer institutes
in economic geography, with an inaugural meeting to be held in Madison,
Wisconsin, in July 2003. The summer institute will provide an opportunity for
participants to investigate theoretical and methodological issues in economic
geography as the field is broadly defined as well as to explore a range of
associated professional development matters. Open to doctoral students,
postdoctoral researchers, and recently appointed faculty from the United States
and overseas, the summer institute will comprise an intensive, week-long
residential program of activities designed to provide participants with an in-
depth understanding of the innovative developments and continuing challenges in
this field. NSF support will provide assistance to facilitate participation of
at least 37 participants. Support for the summer institute also is being
provided by the Worldwide Universities Network and from the Economic Geography
and Antipode journals. In addition to new insights provided directly to
participants through their participation, the institute organizers will
establish a website to facilitate dissemination of papers and supporting
documentation as well as details of forthcoming meetings. A number of the
presentations made at this year's summer institute (as well as at a planned
second institute in 2004 in the United Kingdom) are expected to be included in a
planned edited volume tentatively titled "Politics and Practice in Economic
Geography."

The summer institute in economic geography is expected to establish a basis for
future collaborative ventures involving young researchers. It should also
advance thinking about fundamental approaches and frameworks for conducting
research in this important field.