* 0242697
* Development of Infrared Spectroscope for Microfabricated Proteome Chips
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Shyamsunder Erramilli, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 597,684.00

This award supports development of an infrared spectroscope capable of observing
the intrinsic molecular vibrations of protein complexes with the potential for
both high sensitivity and high throughput. The instrument will use evanescent
waves, obtained by use of a tunable laser operating in the mid-infrared, to
examine proteins positioned on a microfabricated array of silicon cantilevers.
Each cantilever has a solid immersion lens (SIL) on one side, and a site for
protein deposition on the other. The deposition site will typically consist of a
chemically-bound, known peptide plus one or more proteins bound only through an
interaction with the peptide. The array will be positioned on the stage of a
microscope. Use of infrared allows detection in the amide I band, where the
peptide bond has a sufficiently large cross section to obviate the need for
labeling of the protein. The project is an interdisciplinary collaboration
between scientists and engineers at Boston University, Stanford University and
the University of California at Berkeley. The instrument is expected to have
applications in both basic and applied research, including studies aimed at
improved understanding of the relationship between protein structure and
function, and rapid screening of protein mixtures. The broader impacts of the
project will involve the training of graduate students and periodic
presentations to area high school students as part of an ongoing outreach
program aimed at dissemination of scientific and technological understanding.
These presentations occur during the school year and the summer as well. In
addition, another ongoing effort at involving minority undergraduate women
majoring in science and medical science will benefit.