* 0242543
* Modeling Biomolecular Transport Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Timothy Elston, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2004
* USD 45,952.00

Elston&lt;br/&gt;0075821&lt;br/&gt; The broad goal of this project is to gain a
mechanistic&lt;br/&gt;understanding of energy transduction in biomolecular
transport&lt;br/&gt;processes. The project focuses on three specific systems:
the&lt;br/&gt;bacterial flagellar motor, the motor protein dynein, and
protein&lt;br/&gt;translocation systems found in membranes of the
endoplasmic&lt;br/&gt;reticulum and mitochondria. While the biology involved in
these&lt;br/&gt;systems is very different, the same mathematical techniques
are&lt;br/&gt;applicable for analyzing theoretical models of all three.
To&lt;br/&gt;model these systems requires the use of Langevin or
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;differential equations. The randomness in these equations
comes&lt;br/&gt;from two sources, thermal diffusion and chemical
kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;Thermal fluctuations are characterized by the
diffusion&lt;br/&gt;coefficient, which can be measured experimentally, and many
of&lt;br/&gt;the important reaction rates are known from biochemical
studies.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to molecular collisions, electrostatic
interactions&lt;br/&gt;are the other dominant forces involved in these
transport&lt;br/&gt;systems. If available, structural data are used to determine
the&lt;br/&gt;relevant electrostatic potentials. Once model equations for
the&lt;br/&gt;systems have been developed, numerical and analytical
techniques&lt;br/&gt;are used to compare their behavior with experimental data.
The&lt;br/&gt;final phase of the analysis is to use the mathematical models
to&lt;br/&gt;produce experimentally testable predictions.&lt;br/&gt; Biological
molecular motors are nanometer-sized engines that&lt;br/&gt;use chemical energy
to generate force. A well known molecular&lt;br/&gt;motor is myosin, which is
the protein responsible for muscle&lt;br/&gt;contraction. Other examples include
the flagellar motor, which is&lt;br/&gt;used by bacteria for swimming, and
dynein, which produces the&lt;br/&gt;force necessary for cilia motion. The broad
goal of this project&lt;br/&gt;is to gain a mechanistic understanding of force
generation in&lt;br/&gt;both these systems. Current experimental techniques are
allowing&lt;br/&gt;biophysicists to study molecular motors at the single
molecule&lt;br/&gt;level, thereby allowing the mechanical properties of
motor&lt;br/&gt;proteins to be measured. These new physical data in
conjunction&lt;br/&gt;with structural data provide the impetus for renewed
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;investigations into molecular motor function. An important
reason&lt;br/&gt;for performing a mathematical analysis of force generation
is&lt;br/&gt;that it allows a quantitative comparison between
experimental&lt;br/&gt;data and model behavior to be made. The results of such
a&lt;br/&gt;comparison not only are important for model validation, but
also&lt;br/&gt;can be used to uncover errors in the assumptions underlying
the&lt;br/&gt;model. However, the significance of mathematical modeling
goes&lt;br/&gt;beyond model validation and lies in its predictive power. Once
a&lt;br/&gt;theoretical model has been developed that is consistent
with&lt;br/&gt;current experimental data, it is straightforward to extend
the&lt;br/&gt;analysis to include situations that have not yet
been&lt;br/&gt;investigated in the laboratory. If model predictions are
borne&lt;br/&gt;out by experiment, further confidence in the reality of the
model&lt;br/&gt;is gained. For the systems under consideration in this
project,&lt;br/&gt;this means a mechanistic understanding of force generation
has&lt;br/&gt;been achieved. From a technological standpoint, the results
of&lt;br/&gt;these investigations should be relevant for designing
and&lt;br/&gt;fabricating manmade nanomachines.&lt;br/&gt;