* 0242524
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: A Computational Study of Bubble and Drop Dynamics in Inelastic and Viscoelastic Non-Newtonian Fluid Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Mark Sussman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 04/30/2007
* USD 46,274.00

0242524&lt;br/&gt;Sussman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
international collaborative research project between Professor Mark Sussman at
Florida State University and Professor Mitsuhiro Ohta of the Muroran Institute
of Technology in Hokkaido, Japan. They will undertake a computational study of
bubble and drop dynamics in inelastic and viscoelastic non-Newtonian fluid
systems. The researchers propose to extend numerical methods for complex moving
boundary problems in Newtonian multi-phase flow to non-Newtonian multi-phase
flows, implement the methods in software, and conduct computational simulations
of the flows in the light of relevant experiments. These problems are important
in industry. For example, modeling the break-up of fluids in microscale jetting
devices (e.g. ink-jet devices), modeling coalescence of bubbles and drops in
extraction processes, and modeling extrusion processes. Numerical validation
studies and comparison with experiments will be used to test the validity of
non-Newtonian constitutive relations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project brings
together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
research capabilities. The U.S. researchers provide expertise in numerical
analyses and the Japanese researchers provide expertise in the experimental
areas. The full scale, three dimensional, direct numerical simulations of
jetting and extrusion processes will have direct applicability in the design of
ink-jet printers and fiber spinning apparatus and provide valuable insight into
the flow instability and interfacial morphology of the non-Newtonian fluids. The
project advances international human resources through the participation of a
number of graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. Results of the research will be disseminated at
scientific meetings and in scientific journals on scientific computing, non-
Newtonian fluid mechanics and chemical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;