* 0242159
* The Study of Intermediate Energy Photonuclear Physics with Polarized Beams and Targets
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* C. Steven Whisnant, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2007
* USD 198,000.00

This award will support continued study of the properties of the nucleon through
the production of mesons and nucleon resonances.&lt;br/&gt;The dominant
component of this program isthe use of polarization observables in photonuclear
reactions. &lt;br/&gt;The experimental program is located at the Laser Electron
Gamma Source (LEGS) at&lt;br/&gt;the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at
Brookhaven National&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory (BNL). Combining our novel polarized HD
target, SPHICE, and the&lt;br/&gt;large acceptance SASY detector with the high
quality polarized photon beam&lt;br/&gt;at LEGS, the initial experimental
program concentrates on sum-rule&lt;br/&gt;measurements of the spin-dependent
Compton amplitude for the nucleon to&lt;br/&gt;provide a direct determination of
the forward spin-polarizability and&lt;br/&gt;Gerasimov Drell-Hearn sum rule
integrals for the proton and the first such&lt;br/&gt;measurement for the
neutron. We will simultaneously measure the double&lt;br/&gt;polarization
observables for pion photoproduction from the proton and&lt;br/&gt;neutron. The
combination of SPHICE and SASY at LEGS makes measurement of a&lt;br/&gt;complete
set of observables possible, permitting the first model
independent&lt;br/&gt;multipole analysis. High quality double polarization data
on the&lt;br/&gt;photodisintegration of deuterium will also be obtained greatly
expanding our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of this fundamental reaction.&lt;br/&gt;
The JMU group is responsible for producing the high purity HD
gas&lt;br/&gt;required for the production of the polarized targets used for
these&lt;br/&gt;experiments, the operation and mapping of the the
superconducting magnet to&lt;br/&gt;be installed as part of the SASY upgrade,
and will participate in the&lt;br/&gt;collection and analysis of the data. Five
undergraduate students will&lt;br/&gt;participate in this project each year and
gain experience in both on-campus&lt;br/&gt;and off-campus
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;