* 0242402
* Theory and Application of Computation in Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Jonathan Machta, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

The broad theme of this award is to understand complex systems in statistical
physics using a combination of computational and theoretical tools. The research
has three related components: the random field Ising model; the development of
new algorithms; and, the analysis of physical systems from the standpoint of
computational complexity.

Informed by new hypotheses and recent results, the phase transition of the
random field Ising model will be studied using a replica exchange, i.e.,
parallel tempering, algorithm, a push-relabel algorithm, to find ground states,
and real-space renormalization group techniques. The objective is to understand
the nature of phase transition and particularly the singularities in the
specific heat. Phase transitions in long-ranged correlated pore spaces, e.g.,
aerogels, will be considered. This work will potentially answer some long-
standing theoretical questions concerning phase transitions in the presence of
quenched disorder. The random field Ising model is believed to describe the
phase transitions in fluids absorbed in porous materials and the results of this
research should impact chemical physics and chemical engineering.

In order to advance computational studies of spin systems, research is planned
on the development and analysis of algorithms with an emphasis on replica
exchange and cluster methods. Replica exchange methods are among the most
powerful tools available for studying complex systems with competing
interactions. Developing this class of algorithms has an importance that goes
beyond the present study and may be relevant to problems ranging from protein
folding to combinatorial optimization. In addition to providing algorithmic
support for the random field Ising model study, one goal of this research is to
develop cluster algorithms for dynamical problems.

The third topic is a study of the parallel computational complexity of
simulating systems in statistical physics. Efficient parallel algorithms will be
constructed and analyzed for various systems including diffusion limited
aggregation and growing networks. Based on insights gained from examining
various models, general results will be sought relating structural properties
and parallel computational complexity. For example, it is conjectured that,
under relatively unrestrictive conditions, the absence of long-range
correlations implies the existence of a fast parallel sampling algorithm.
Investigations at the interface of theoretical computer science and statistical
physics have the potential for yielding profound insights in both fields.
Computational complexity provides a robust, formal way to measure history
dependence in statistical physics and will sharpen our understanding of how and
why physically complex systems sometimes emerge from simple rules and
randomness.

Besides the usual broader impacts associated with the research, this project
will involve undergraduate physics students in computer simulations, especially
in the third topical area. %%% The broad theme of this award is to understand
complex systems in statistical physics using a combination of computational and
theoretical tools. The research has three related components: the random field
Ising model; the development of new algorithms; and, the analysis of physical
systems from the standpoint of computational complexity.

What is particularly interesting about this research program is that the work is
at the interface between statistical physics and theoretical computer science.
There have been a number of recent examples where statistical physics has
contributed to computer science. This research will continue to focus on this
fertile interface. Students working on these projects will be well positioned to
contribute to both condensed matter physics and computational science. ***