* 0242770
* Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with a Linear Potential
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Carl Mueller, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2006
* USD 148,200.00

Many partial differential equations describing the physical world, such as the
Schrodinger equation, involve a potential term. We propose to study stochastic
partial differential equations with a Gaussian random potential. There are many
examples of such equations, and usually they are treated on a case-by-case
basis. On the other hand, in many cases the solution can be expanded in terms of
multiple stochastic integrals with respect to the noise. There are many tools
available to study such equations, including Wiener space analysis and the
Feynman-Kac formula. We intend to use these tools to study qualitative
properties of solutions, such as asymptotic growth, and the critical parameters
for existence of solutions. For certain parameter values, we expect solutions
taking values in the space of Schwartz distributions. Of course, this is a broad
program, and many such equations have been considered before. However, much less
is known for the case of correlated Gaussian noise than for white noise. Here,
we are referring to specific phenomena, which might occur only for certain
correlation functions of the Gaussian noise. Also, the stochastic heat equation
has received much more attention than other cases. &lt;br/&gt; In the physical
sciences, engineering, and increasingly in biology, the most useful tool is a
partial differential equation. Solving the equation gives us a quantitative
understanding of the physical situation, allowing us to make predictions and to
control the system. However, in the real world, all systems are affected by
random noise, and our models must also include randomness. The field of
stochastic partial differential equations attempts to address this situation.
This field is much newer than partial differential equations, and our
mathematical understanding is much less. This proposal focuses on equations with
a potential term. Such equations model many natural phenomena. In quantum
mechanics, potential terms represent the interaction between particles and
forces acting on the system. Potential terms can also arise in the equations for
the spread of epidemics, and in other situations in population biology. We will
study the effect of a random potential. The goal is to increase our
understanding of the mathematical tools, so that scientists and engineers can
use them more skillfully. &lt;br/&gt;