* 0242031
* Entry, Competition, and Welfare in the Mutual Fund Industry
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Ali Hortacsu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 179,427.00

This research explores a number of facets of the competitive market structure in
the U.S. mutual fund industry, specifically with regard to the nature of mutual
fund firms' strategic decisions. While a considerable amount of research in
financial economics has been devoted to mutual funds, its primary focus has been
on aspects of mutual fund operation in isolation from other industry firms:
portfolio construction, evaluation of fund performance vis-a-vis benchmark
portfolios, and the agency relationship between shareholders and the fund
manager. Previous research has not delved greatly into the strategic decisions
of industry firms. The project fills this gap and builds on the recent increase
of interest among financial economists in the mutual fund industry's competitive
structure. It explicitly models several aspects of competitive behavior in the
industry, offering testable and excludable hypotheses. It also investigates
elements of industry competition that have not been studied in depth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific questions that this project addresses include the
following: (1) Do investors face &lt;br/&gt;significant search
costs/informational frictions when choosing funds? (2) What non-risk or return
attributes characterize investors' demand for mutual funds? (3) How do fund
companies set &lt;br/&gt;management fees? (4) What non-price aspects of
competition exist in the mutual fund industry? &lt;br/&gt;(5) Is the existing
competitive structure of the industry optimal from a social welfare standpoint?
&lt;br/&gt;The project takes several approaches to this aim. Specific topics are
investigated in sector case studies that control for confounding influences on
outcomes and highlight the competitive &lt;br/&gt;decision(s) of interest.
Further, the research involves modeling market interactions and the
&lt;br/&gt;estimation of the models' structural parameters using market data.
This allows the evaluation of actual, anticipated, or proposed market changes on
industry structure and consumer and social welfare, facilitating policy
counterfactuals and hypothesis testing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
offers potentially substantial broader impact. The mutual fund industry is an
important part of the domestic financial system, and as such has been of great
interest to popular media, regulators, and policymakers. In 2001, for example,
over half of U.S. households had mutual fund holdings, and various institutional
fiduciaries held over $3 trillion in assets. The industry also plays a major
role in households' retirement plans: roughly one-third of mutual fund assets
are held in retirement savings vehicles. Given its size and ubiquity, the
industry's competitive market structure and the strategic decisions shaping it
directly affect not only the fortunes of individual funds and fund families, but
consumer welfare as well. Improved &lt;br/&gt;understanding of these decisions
and how they respond to real and prospective changes in the
&lt;br/&gt;competitive environment will undoubtedly yield useful insights to
researchers and policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the project's research
synthesizes elements of the relevant finance literature with
&lt;br/&gt;industrial organization research on consumer search behavior, product
differentiation, producer entry, and oligopolistic price competition. As such,
it holds considerable potential to spur additional interchange of theoretical
and empirical ideas and methodologies between the industrial organization and
finance literatures. The research program will emphasize the development of
novel empirical methods and probe the applicability of current analytical tools
of the industrial organization literature to the financial economics arena.
&lt;br/&gt;