* 0243295
* Transnational Networks of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* John Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

An increasingly important aspect of globalization is in the civic sphere,
including the relations that make up transnational networks of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Emerging spatial and organizational arrangements in many
developing nations have brought into contact three types of NGOs: (1) large
international NGOs, or INGOs, (2) mid-sized national and regional level NGOs,
and (3) small grassroots organizations that carry out locally-based projects.
Pulsating through these networks are project directives (in the form of
requests-for-proposals), philosophies of appropriate development, different
forms of managerial knowledge and financial practices, and procedures for
project assessment and evaluation. Although much is known about how grassroots
NGOs affect the social and economic development possibilities of people in local
contexts, much less is understood regarding how these impacts are mediated
through the transnational linkages that NGOs share with their multi-scaled
counterparts at the regional, national, and international levels. The research
project will focus on two INGO-NGO networks that link organizations across the
globe. Each network is active in the southern Mexican state of Oaxaca. One of
the networks is focused on children's welfare, the other on environmental
issues. Using interviews with INGO managers and in-depth organizational
ethnographies of grassroots NGOs, the investigators will examine the effects of
different spatial strategies and organizational practices that impact the on-
the-ground projects and development possibilities in
Oaxaca.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to newly emerging
scholarship regarding global-local networks among NGOs. The investigators expect
to explore the conditions through which the grassroots involvement of NGOs in
transnational networks affects spatial dimensions of relationships between
developed and developing nations as well as global-local relations. The project
should identify opportunities for NGOs to engage in autonomous social and
economic development. The project should also identify the extent to which INGOs
incorporate feedback from their NGO partners into their own spatial and
managerial strategies. In addition to advancing fundamental knowledge and
providing practical insights for different kinds of NGOs, the project will
provide educational and training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;