* 0243993
* NSF-Europe: Nano-Structured Ionic Materials: Impact on Properties and Performance
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2009
* USD 720,000.00

In this project, we undertake a comprehensive study of the effects of grain
boundaries on the ionic and electronic transport properties of nanoscale ionic
materials in which space charge effects may dominate transport even within the
core of the grains. Thin-film processing methods will be used to generate
fluorite (e.g. ceria) and perovskite (e.g. LSM)-based films with controlled
microstructures resulting in columnar or equi-axed grain structures with grains
sizes ranging from the nano- to the micro-scale. In-diffusion techniques will
further allow selected boundaries to be doped with a variety of elements with
differing ionic radii and charge. Structural and chemical analysis of the
specimens will be carried out by SEM and TEM. HRTEM will be used to obtain
detailed information about the structure of grain boundaries. Photolithographic
methods will be used to fabricate microelectrodes with ability to focus
attention on one or a small number of boundaries and to examine the role of
triple phase boundaries in a highly systematic manner by both electrical and
electrochemical means. Instrumentation will be developed to enable such studies
to be performed in situ as functions of temperature and atmosphere. Models
describing the combined roles of grain boundary structure and chemistry and
grain size on defect equilibria and transport will be refined and examined in
relation to the measurements performed in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic
and mixed ionic-electronic conductors (MIEC) are of interest for strategic
applications related to energy conversion and environmental monitoring including
batteries, fuel cells, permeation membranes and sensors. Fuel cells, for
example, with high-energy conversion efficiencies and low emissions show promise
as a replacement for combustion-based electrical generators of all sizes. Using
nanostructured ionic materials within fuel cells could potentially facilitate
lower temperature operation and thereby provide faster start-up times, improved
stability, reduced cost and less complicated thermal management. Micro-fuel-
cells, fabricated from thin films with nanodimensions, further promise extended
operation of portable electronic devices such as laptop computers. This study
will examine how the properties of materials optimized for fuel cell operation
are influenced by extension to the nanoscale and how these differences can be
utilized in improving the performance of these and related
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Division of Materials Research (Ceramics)
and the International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in
Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is
being carried out in collaboration with the University of Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe,
Germany and the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Stuttgart,
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;