* 0243126
* Diagnostic Question Clusters:  Development and Testing in Introductory Geology and Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2010
* John Merrill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/2010
* USD 501,975.00

Diagnostic assessment is the foundation for instructional improvement. It alerts
instructors to student difficulties in learning particular concepts. In
addition, truly diagnostic assessment yields information as to why students have
difficulties, identifying common conceptual barriers students encounter. This
information can be used to guide instructors in making changes to their
teaching. This project is working to achieve two major goals. One is the
development of a generalized system for creating and using diagnostic assessment
in an undergraduate discipline. The other is to implement this system in geology
and biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the first goal we are piloting a
procedure for developing diagnostic questions that can be used in any field,
developing protocols for online peer review and publication of diagnostic
questions. Further, we are programming the LON CAPA network to support the
online peer review and publication of diagnostic questions and the export of
data on students' responses to questions. (LON CAPA is the Learning Online
Network with Computer Assisted Personalized Assistance. It is a system developed
at Michigan State University for delivery of on-line instructional materials
that is freely available to other institutions.) Finally, we are engaging
faculty in other institutions in development work that will make them aware of
the diagnostic question clusters and help them learn how to integrate diagnostic
questions into their teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is responding
to the dearth of diagnostic questions in geology and biology by producing
clusters of diagnostic questions addressing topics in geology and biology. These
clusters cover three topics in geology: systems, the global carbon cycle, and
the water cycle. In biology they cover two large topics, nitrogen cycling and
carbon cycling. Each of these two are being covered at three different levels:
global, macro, and micro. We are working with biology and geology faculty,
teaching them to use the diagnostic questions as part of their instruction in
order to learn about the conceptual barriers encountered by their students and
modify their instruction in light of this information. Our ultimate goal is to
have faculty in all fields using this procedure for developing diagnostic
questions and adding to the pool. Those who use LON-CAPA will be aided by the
new data export features. The LON-CAPA library of diagnostic questions is a
permanent place for storing peer-reviewed questions available to STEM teaching
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;