* 0243601
* Taylor Expansion of Eisenstein Series and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Tonghai Yang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2003
* USD 34,129.00

The investigator will try to generalize the well-known Kronecker's first limit
formula to `holomorphic' Eisenstein series with characters and study the tangent
line of the Eisenstein series. He will then apply the results to study the
central derivative of automorphic L-functions. In the second project, He, Kudla,
and Rapoport will continue Kudla's fundamental work on the the central
derivative of incoherent Eisenstein series. In particular, they will prove that
the central derivative of certain incoherent Eisenstein series is the generating
function of zero cycles on an arithmetic Shimura surface. He is also working
with M. Stoll on the arithmetic nature of a very nice genus two curve in
relation with the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Finally, he is studying
the exterior cube automorphic L-series of GU(3, 3) in relation with the
associated Shimura variety. Number theory has been one of the most amazing
subjects to study for more than two thousand years and will continue to be so.
Even more so is its surprising and beautiful applications to communications and
cryptography discovered during last 20 years. Automorphic forms and Eisenstein
series the investigator is working on is at the heart of the modern number
theory. Its advances would not only further our understanding of the deep and
beautiful subject of number theory but also find its way to improve our daily
life in the e-world.