* 0243336
* Stochastic Effects in Systems Far from Equilibrium
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Guenter Ahlers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2008
* USD 620,000.00

This work focuses on quantitative studies of fluctuations caused by thermal
noise below and near bifurcations in systems far from equilibrium. Well below
the bifurcation it is expected that the measurements will test recent
predictions about the structure factor of a fluid in a thermal gradient. Near
the bifurcation the nonlinear interactions between the fluctuations should lead
to critical phenomena in the sense that the various measurable quantities will
deviate non-trivially from mean-field (or linear) predictions. The experiments
will focus on Rayleigh-Bernard convection (RBC) in a horizontal layer of a fluid
heated from below, and on electro convection (EC) of a nematic liquid crystal in
an electric field. It has been predicted that RBC belongs to a universality
class first studied theoretically by Brazovskii for which fluctuations change
the bifurcation from a second-order to a first-order transition. For electro
convection there is at present no theory of the critical behavior, but on
general grounds one expects several different universality classes that depend
on the relationship between the nematic director and the convection-roll wave
director. The experiments will open a new research field of critical phenomena
in non-equilibrium systems, and will prepare graduate students and postgraduate
researchers for academic or industrial careers. Within an outreach program they
will offer opportunities for participation by high school students.

Many properties of equilibrium systems exhibit large thermally driven
fluctuations near critical points. An example is the density of a fluid near a
liquid-gas critical point. Nonlinear interactions between the fluctuations then
cause the critical behavior to be different from that which is expected when
fluctuations are small. The same phenomena should occur in a very different
context, namely near transitions in non-equilibrium systems. For example, the
transition from pure conduction to convection in a thin horizontal layer of a
fluid heated from below was predicted to be of second order when fluctuations
were neglected, but to become a first-order transition when they were
considered. This work will determine the critical behavior near transitions in
several non-equilibrium systems, including convection in a fluid heated from
below and convection in a liquid crystal exposed to an electric voltage. This
research will use advanced experimental techniques and sophisticated numerical
image analysis, which will provide excellent training of graduate students for
careers in academic and industrial positions. It also lends itself well to the
participation of undergraduate students. Within an outreach program it is
expected that high school students will also participate in some of the
experiments.