* 0243257
* Generative and Discriminative Methods for Gene Finding and Functional Annotation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2005
* William Noble, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Manfred D. Zorn
* 07/31/2005
* USD 299,550.00

The tasks accomplished by this project are divided into two phases corresponding
to the two tasks of gene prediction and functional annotation. In the first
phase, a gene-finding system is developed and applied. This system is designed
to be scalable and extensible with respect to the gene features it models, the
machine learning algorithms it employs, and the range of experimental data from
which it learns. This project first validates the system by applying it to the
complete C.elegans genome, and then retrains the system for the more difficult
task of recognizing genes in human DNA. The second phase of this project
consists of two parts. First, the software framework used for the gene finding
system from phase one is generalized to model families of related proteins.
Second, in order to learn from non-sequential data, the project develops
functional classification techniques using a discriminative learning method
called support vector machines (SVM's). The statistics calculated by the
sequence-based modeling system functions as one set of features used by the SVM
system. Additional features will come from DNA microarray experiments, the
upstream promoter region of each gene, phylogenetic profiles and similarity
scores to known protein families.