* 0243890
* REU Site: Conservation of the Tallgrass Prairie Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Keith Gido, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 169,954.00

The Kansas State University's (KSU) REU Site on 'Conservation of the Tallgrass
Prairie Ecosystem' provides 8 undergraduate students each summer an exciting
opportunity to conduct independent, field-based research projects on topics in
conservation biology and ecology. The 10-week program offers a stipend of $3500
and has four components that contribute to the professional development of
undergraduate participants: i) a weekly research seminar that educates students
about the conservation issues related to grassland ecosystems, ii) an
independent research project that trains students in field methods and
experimental design, iii) a research symposium that develops student
presentation skills, and iv) a trip to a national scientific meeting where
students have the opportunity to interact with professional research scientists.
Research activities of this REU Site are centered on the Konza Prairie
Biological Station, a 3487 ha tallgrass prairie preserve. Konza Prairie is a key
research site in the Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) Program of the
National Science Foundation, and is internationally recognized for preserving
unique biological resources, including species of conservation concern. The site
is subdivided into 60 experimental units with different grazing (native bison or
domestic cattle) and fire treatments (annual to 20 years). Additional resources
for this REU site includes access to university facilities, a range of
laboratory and field equipment for specialized ecological research, and mentors
selected from a pool of experienced research scientists who are leaders in the
fields of conservation and grassland ecology. Integration of the REU Site with
the LTER program allows students to participate in new and ongoing field
experiments and to utilize long-term data sets that provide context for summer
projects. The conservation theme of the program emphasizes applications of
ecological knowledge to the preservation of the biota of the tallgrass prairie,
and efforts that predict the effects of changing land-use patterns, invasive
species and global change on economically valuable grasslands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deadline for applications is March 1 and participants
are selected based on their research interest. This REU site welcomes
applications from students of underrepresented groups (minority, first-
generation or non-traditional), and students at smaller colleges where research
opportunities may be limited. Prospective applicants are invited to obtain
further information and application forms from the Program Coordinator (Gail
Wilson, PH: 785-532-2892, EM: gwtw@ksu.edu) or by visiting the program website
(http://www.ksu.edu/bsanderc/reu).&lt;br/&gt;