* 0243375
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Towards a Better Understanding of the Hydrology of Lake Nasser, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Mohamed Sultan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/2004
* USD 51,271.00

0243375&lt;br/&gt;Sultan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project is to
support a cooperative research project by Dr. Mohamed Sultan, Department of
Geology, State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York and
Dr. Zeinhom El Alfy, Egyptian Geological Survey and Mining Authority (EGSMA),
Cairo, Egypt. The research will build on the results of the investigators'
preliminary groundwater flow models for the SW corner of Lake Nasser. Predictive
analysis suggest that impedance of silting in Lake Nasser and gradually
decreasing difference between the lake stage and near-lake heads are causing a
general rise in Lake Nasser surface water level and a decrease in recharge rates
from the lake with time. The PI's plan to develop and calibrate regional
groundwater and surface water flow models (1) to examine the validity of their
preliminary findings over the entire lake and its surroundings, (2) to analyze
the interaction between surface water and groundwater in the study area, and (3)
to evaluate and quantify the impact of decreasing recharge rate on the lake
water level and on the surface water diversion scenarios in the surrounding
area. The models will be constrained by observations (e.g., lithologic,
physical, elevation) extracted from remote sensing datasets and by inferences
made from geochemical data for groundwater and surface water samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The PI's will conduct field work by US scientists
in Egypt and joint (EGSMA/UB) analysis of data and training for the Egyptian
scientists in the USA. The results of this study will have mutual scientific
benefits for the US and Egyptian sides. It will have major ramifications for
Egypt's national plans to develop its water resources in SW Egypt (e.g., Tushka
Canal) and could potentially provide straightforward applications for monitoring
storage variability with time in artificial Lakes. The project is funded jointly
by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;