* 0243512
* REU at the Smithsonian: Research Training Program
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Ross Simons, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 195,326.00

REU at the Smithsonian: Research Training Program is a ten-week, museum-based
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site featuring the unique
opportunity for 11 undergraduate students (5 biology, 4 geology, and 2
anthropology) to explore research and study in the natural history sciences
through unparalleled access to the collections, facilities and scientific
community of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History in
Washington, DC. The NMNH is home to the best assemblage of natural history
collections (124 million) and professional scientists (185), offering
inspiration for new discovery and essential evidence about the world around us,
including documentation of changes in the earth and climate, evolutionary
history of plants and animals, and human origins and culture. Program
participants are provided housing, travel, stipend, and research support.

Since 1980 the Research Training Program has actively participated in the
education and training of students seeking to become the next generation of
natural history scientists. Emphasis is placed on providing a first-time
research opportunity for undergraduates, especially women and minorities,
including students who might not otherwise have access to collections-based
projects such as those from institutions where research opportunities in the
natural history sciences are limited.

Participants pursue individualized, hypothesis-testing research topics in the
biological, geological or anthropological sciences. Investigations in the
biological sciences include systematics and biodiversity topics with emphasis on
description of a new species or redefining a particular group of organisms. In
the geological sciences, research focuses on petrologic studies of meteorites,
pegmatites and volcanic rocks, as well as volcanologic studies of eruption
histories, paleoecology, evolution of terrestrial ecosystems including habitats
and climates. In the anthropological sciences projects range from studies of
disease in prehistoric peoples to studying skeletal indicators; taphonomy and
bias in the fossil record to dietary difference among classes in prehistoric
cultures. To conduct their research, participants are given full and free access
to all NMNH facilities and resources including the extensive collections,
libraries and laboratories. Participants come together several times each week
as a group to join an interactive series of lectures, discussions, workshops,
field trips, social events, and collection tours. Community interaction and
communication is fostered through the Academic Resources Center (ARC), a central
gathering space reserved for students in-residence at the NMNH to exchange
information and ideas. Participants are seamlessly integrated into the NMNH
research community and experience the intellectual life of an active
international research institution. Through daily interaction with mentors and
other professionals, including numerous scientific visitors, participants build
valuable contacts for a future career in the sciences. In all aspects, the
Program is designed to prepare participants for major hurdles in young
scientific careers - selecting and entering graduate school, designing and
conducting research, and presenting and publishing results.

All information and application materials for the Research Training Program are
available on-line at: http://www.nmnh.si.edu/rtp/. Direct specific inquiries to:
Mary Sangrey. Phone: 202-357-4548 / Fax: 202-786-2563 / E-mail
sangrey.mary@nmnh.si.edu.