* 0243302
* High Resolution, High density Microarrayer for Genetic Research
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Timothy Chang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 634,486.00

This supports the development of a low cost, high performance, and fully
automated microarray fabrication system expected to lower the cost and increase
the accessibility of DNA array-based technology. Despite the well-recognized
significance of gene expression profiling, research activities are currently
concentrated in major centers and service facilities with the resources to
manage the cost and cycle time associated with preparing and processing DNA
microarrays. Development of an automated system to control spot sizes can
increase the density of arrays and reduce their cost. The proposed system is a
new generation of microarray spotter capable of depositing aqueous samples of
various types (DNA, protein, etc.). The system has the flexibility and cost
advantage of the printing approach, and can be operated remotely via the world
wide web. The key enabling features include a composite piezoelectric device
with nanometer precision in spot size and position. The system will be connected
to the Internet with real-time data streaming and simultaneous multi-client
access. This feature will enable 24/7 monitoring of the microarray facilities as
well as setting the groundwork for web-based collaborative research between
laboratories. It will also complement the dissemination of overall project
information via the Internet. Educational components of the project include
participation of undergraduate and graduate students in the instrument
development effort and summer research opportunities available to high school
students from inner city areas. In addition to journal publications, workshop
and conference presentations will be used to disseminate the project results to
the public. The project will be conducted within a microarray core facility that
has ongoing research projects with 51 collaborators and 14 service users in 24
different institutions across the country. Thus, once developed, this system
will promote broad based genomic research by making the technology available to
other researchers in the nation and by facilitating collaborative research and
education.