* 0243184
* Curriculum Improvement in Practice-Oriented Biology and Computer Science Programs Using Student Portfolios
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Kostia Bergman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 06/30/2008
* USD 498,276.00

This project moves the assessment of practice-oriented science education from
indirect to direct measures of student learning. Northeastern University is a
major research university with a long tradition of practice-oriented education.
Through its well-established cooperative education program, most students
alternate periods of full time course work with periods of full time paid
employment relevant to their major. Even in on-campus settings science education
has moved beyond the traditional classroom, where instructors maintain direct
oversight over students, to include new forms of lab instruction, collaborative
research projects, and independent study. Both the cooperative education model
and the other new forms of instruction raise questions about what is learned in
each setting, how the acquired skills can be assessed, and how this learning can
be integrated into the overall curriculum.

The College of Computer Science and the Biology Department of the College of
Arts & Sciences at Northeastern University have surveyed students and their co-
op employers to evaluate student skills and determine where and how they were
learned. The two units have become campus leaders in assessing learning to
improve curricula and teaching. Building on this base, this project develops
portfolios for students to showcase and archive their work. Student learning is
then evaluated according to well-defined rubrics that set standards of
measurable progress toward proficiency in desired learning goals. The portfolios
are stored in digital form on computer servers (so-called electronic portfolios)
to facilitate communication between the various learning environments.
Development of rubrics to evaluate student learning in different settings is the
first major task of the project. This process requires in-depth, facilitated
discussions among academic faculty, co-op faculty, employer supervisors and
experienced students. The second task is the designing of the portfolio system
prototype following the recommendations of the rubric development teams and
working with an outside database and web-front-end designer. The portfolio is
piloted during the third year of the project, using 200 students in Computer
Science co-op preparation classes, and 200 Biology students from all five years
of their program. During the last two months of each year the project team
reviews progress by consulting with curriculum committees, employer groups,
student groups and an Advisory Committee formed for this project. After the
final evaluation the results are disseminated to the University Community and to
the wider audience of scientists and educators. The process of rubric
development and portfolio construction can be used as a model to understand the
relative contribution of different settings to desired student learning
outcomes, and as a vehicle for regular review and improvement of curriculum. The
model can be used in a variety of settings with a broad range of students; for
instance to help improve skills and clarify goals for students who are the first
in their family to attend college and students for whom English is their second
language.