* 0243025
* US-Lebanon Cooperative Research:  Innovative Maximum Power Tracking Controller Design for Solar Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2006
* USD 35,000.00

0243025 &lt;br/&gt;Batarseh&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports a
cooperative research project between Dr. Issa Batarseh, School of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando,
Florida and Dr. Sami Karaki, Department of Electrical Engineering, American
University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon. They plan to carry out research in
developing a new controller for solar energy source. The new controller will be
designed, simulated and verified experimentally to extract maximum power from
photovoltaic systems under all full-load conditions. The objective of the
proposal is to develop expandable, parallel-connected photovoltaic-based power
system with robust Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) capabilities. The
specific objectives of this project are: 1) Investigate MPPT controller
performance under severe circumstance with computer simulation. 2) Develop an
engineering demonstration prototype for robust MPPT controller. 3) Simulate and
experimentally verify the shared bus current sharing techniques. 4) Evaluate the
feasibility of the proposed system by extensive system level computer
simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The impact of the proposed maximum
power tracker for solar array will lead to future satellites with reduced size,
lower cost and more reliable. Such a system may be also applied to another
renewable energy sources like fuel cells. The proposed distributed power
architecture will have several desired features. This project enables the US and
Lebanese scientists to pool their complementary expertise and resources in
providing a new approach to analyzing the behavior of power control systems. One
US graduate student from UCF will participate in this international
collaborative project. This project is funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Electrical and Communications
Systems. &lt;br/&gt;