* 0243846
* An REU Site for Environmental Research Experiences for  SMET Minority Students in Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Frank Cartledge, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 03/31/2007
* USD 342,666.00

PI: Cartledge&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Louisiana State University &amp;
Agricultural Institution and Mechanical College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at Louisiana State
University &amp; Agricultural Institution and Mechanical College for the summers
of 2003-2005. It will provide research opportunities and supplementary training
and enrichment for 16 minority students from Louisiana institutions primarily,
and Mississippi and Texas. Frank K. Cartledge is the program director. Cheryle
Peters is co-PI of the project. REU students representing all STEM areas will be
recruited. The research will have an environmental theme. Faculty mentors from
the departments of chemistry, mathematics, computer science, biological
sciences, physics, various engineering disciplines and agronomy will provide a
wide spectrum of research projects. Participants will attend a short computer
course, explore research ethics, and attend seminars dealing with technical
writing, graduate school and oral communication skills. All students will
present their results by the end of the summer at an LSU poster conference. This
program will cooperate with others that are ongoing at LSU, including the NSF-
supported Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP) and the NSF and
Howard Hughes REU summer research programs in Chemistry, Biochemistry, and
Chemical Engineering. This REU site is funded by the Division of Chemistry and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematics
and Physical Sciences, and the Division of Human Resource Development in the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;