* 0243583
* REU -Site: Koros Regional Archaeological Project Field School in Hungary: Undergraduate Training in Laboratory Techniques and Participation in Research on East European Archaeology
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Richard Yerkes, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 03/31/2007
* USD 239,008.00

This award provides renewal support for an REU Site in archaeological research
methods in Veszto, Hungary. This is part of a collaborative, multi-disciplinary,
international research project co-organized by Florida State University, Ohio
State University, and the Munkacsy Mihaly Museum, Bekescsaba, Hungary. Ten
students will have the opportunity to participate in research aimed at
understanding the later prehistory of the Great Hungarian Plain. They will help
excavate the Early Cooper Age settlement of Veszto-Bikeri. They will (1) work
side-by-side with Hungarian students as they receive instruction in survey and
excavation techniques; (2) participate in seminars taught by experts on
archaeological method and theory and on the culture and history of Eastern
Europe; (3) visit museums and archaeological sites; (4) plan and complete an
independent research project; and (5) live in the small town of Veszto and learn
about life in Hungary from the villagers and Hungarian students and
archaeologists. The students will be responsible not only for helping excavate
the site, but also for analyzing archaeological material that will provide a
better understanding of prehistoric economic and social organization. They will
present papers and publish their results on the project website and in
archaeological journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to the
Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers
in&lt;br/&gt;science through active undergraduate research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;