* 0243872
* REU Site: An Integrated Assessment of Physical, Ecological, and Socio-economic Aspects of a Watershed System
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Kevin Czajkowski, University of Toledo
* Continuing grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 03/31/2007
* USD 186,714.00

This ten-week REU Site will provide an opportunity for 12 students each summer
to conduct research of global significance using the Maumee watershed as a test
case. This REU will educate students regarding the interconnected nature of
hydrological processes, water quality, demographics and economics, land use
practices, riparian ecosystem quality, sediment contamination, and the legal and
policy implications of river ecosystem degradation. Students will work with a
mentor as they conduct research projects focused on the Maumee River and Lake
Erie health from environmental, biological, social, and policy perspectives.

The research projects will focus on the Maumee watershed and Lake Erie. Among
the Great Lakes, Lake Erie is unique in that its water quality problems are
primarily related to the specific human phenomena of agricultural pollution and
urbanization. The interdisciplinary approach of this REU Site allows for a
thorough examination of the environmental and social issues surrounding the
environmental degradation of the Maumee watershed; possible remediation and
related policy and legal issues will also be explored. Students will gain a
broad understanding of environmental issues and also learn techniques for field
observations through collection of environmental samples (soil, water, and
biological), ground truth observations for remote sensing projects, and the use
of Geographic Information System (GIS) for some projects. This award contributes
to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers
in science through active undergraduate research experiences.