* 0243399
* Partial Support for the 2003 Annual Conference of the National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP) Diversity Projects; Spellman College; Atlanta, GA
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Keith Jackson, National Society of Black Physicists
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2004
* USD 78,680.00

This award provides partial support for the 2003 Annual Conference of the
National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP) and Black Physics Students, which
will be held at Spellman College, Atlanta, GA on February 12-15, 2003. This will
be the 17th Annual Conference, bringing together students and professionals for
both concurrent and parallel sessions. The NSBP seeks to increase the diversity
of the United State community of researchers and educators in physics and
related fields by providing student participants with the motivation and
practical skills to further their education and assimilation into the scientific
and technical professions. The Annual Conference is attended by approximately
250 students, and is supported by a combination of gifts from foundations,
national laboratories, industry, federal grants, and support from the host
institution. This award will provide direct support for the attendance of
approximately 50 undergraduate or graduate students, post-doctoral associates,
or junior physics faculty. Past meetings have demonstrated a strong synergy in
bringing together students and career physics professionals. This is a natural
format leading to new contacts, networks and mentoring opportunities for student
attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for the
2003 Annual Conference of the National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP) and
Black Physics Students, which will be held at Spellman College, Atlanta, GA on
February 12-15, 2003. This award will provide direct support for the attendance
of approximately 50 undergraduate or graduate students, post-doctoral
associates, or junior physics faculty. Further information about the Conference
and the NSNP may be found at www.nsbp.org. &lt;br/&gt;