* 0243914
* REU Site: Research Internships in Neural and Behavioral Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Virginia Blankenship, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2006
* USD 203,435.00

This decade-long interdisciplinary REU program, Research Internships in Neural
and Behavioral Sciences at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, AZ, will
provide hands-on research experience for 8 Native American, African American,
Hispanic, or Asian/ Pacific Islander students, including female students and
White students who are the first in their family to attend college or
university. Students will conduct research in neural and behavioral sciences
under the guidance of scientists from the Department of Biological Sciences and
the Department of Psychology. The 10-week summer research internship will
integrate 7 major components: (1) Faculty mentors will provide hands-on research
experience to students in faculty laboratories, fostering the excitement of
scientific discovery and allowing students to learn science by doing science.
(2) Research faculty will present seminars in which they demonstrate research
techniques, present their research results, and engage students in discussion.
(3) Professional development seminars will provide instruction on how to apply
to graduate school, and present scientific results at professional meetings. At
seminars, students will also discuss ethical concerns in research. (4) Students
will participate in weekly noon symposia where students can socialize, discuss
primary literature in their respective research areas, and report the progress
of their own work. (5) At the end of the summer, students will present the
results of their projects in a joint poster session, ensuring that each student
produces a tangible, research product at the end of 10 weeks. (6) After each
summer program, students and mentors completing projects will submit a
supplementary travel budget to attend a professional meeting in the winter or
spring. This final component will allow students to present their research at a
national or international stage. (7) During the summer, students will
participate in a variety of educational, cultural and social activities. The
Program will support travel and logistical support for these outings and
activities, providing additional opportunities for discussion, exchange of ideas
and fellowship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program has four specific goals. The
first two concern the outcome of student research activities, i.e., that
students (a) produce tangible, research results during the 10-week program, and
(b) present and/or publish these results as science professionals. The second
two goals concern the impact of research training on student careers, and
ultimately on the composition of the future scientific workforce. Thus, a
quantitative method based on evolutionary selection analysis will be used to
assess the rates at which members of different under-represented student groups
(c) proceed through the selection process, relative to other student groups, and
after completing this Program, the rates at which students (d) continue their
education and/or pursue careers in science, relative to other student
populations. This method not only shows the significant contributions the
Program has already made in support of students from under-represented
backgrounds in science, but also provides a means for assessing the success of
other similar programs &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application information, student
presentations from previous years and information on the Program are available
at http//:jan.ucc.nau.edu/~shuster, or from Emily Omana at NAU (928-523-8694;
fax: 928-523-7500).&lt;br/&gt;