* 0243027
* Collaborative Proposal: The Globalization of Engineering and Its Impact on Economic Development: A Study of Knowledge Transfer by Multinationals to Newly Industrializing Economies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Hal Salzman, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/2004
* USD 115,220.00

This collaborative research project examines globally distributed engineering in
multinational enterprises (MNEs) and emerging/new industrializing economies
(E/NIEs) and how this affects the technological and human capital capabilities
of the E/NIEs. The proposed research addresses such questions as: What
strategies guide MNEs in organizing their globally distributed engineering
activities? How do the interactions between home and host country engineers
reshape the organization of globally distributed engineering? How do cultural
differences and perceptions of cultural differences affect strategies and
internal dynamics of globally distributed engineering projects? What impacts do
MNE globally distributed engineering activities have on local educational
institutions? What, more generally, are the positive and negative spillovers in
E/NIEs and in MNE home countries from globally distributed engineering?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These are important questions because multinational
enterprises (MNEs) are increasingly locating key technology functions, including
the development of new products and processes, outside their home countries.
This change has significant implications for development strategies and
opportunities in the E/NIEs. Globally distributed engineering can provide the
opportunity for significant knowledge transfer. On the other hand, it can also
be done in ways that result in a loss or waste of scarce high-level technical
talent in the E/NIEs. Negative results could include "brain drain" or an
imbalance in the skill mixes universities deliver. Conversely, there could be a
loss of highly skilled jobs in the MNE home country. Understanding positive and
negative outcomes, for the MNE, its home country, and the E/NIE, can lead to
higher payoffs for all parties.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
both NSF merit criteria. It extends several streams of research by focusing on
engineering, on the extent of knowledge transfer to E/NIEs, and on the potential
impact on development. It will broaden participation of engineers from newly
industrializing nations (i.e., geographically underrepresented groups in the
context of a global economy). The collaboration of an international research
team from Germany, Korea, Japan, Mexico, India, and the U.S. provides this
project an important means of identifying and addressing issues from multiple
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigation involves close examination
of two MNEs, each of which has 2-3 sites in E/NIEs. Data will include
documentary sources; interviews of engineering managers and engineers at MNE
headquarters; interviews of engineers and engineering managers from both MNE
home country and E/NIE host country; and interviews of educators and government
officials in the E/NIEs. The collaboration and contacts developed in current and
past research by the PIs provide high-level access to firms and government
officials in the countries of study. The International Division of the National
Science Foundation is also contributing to the support of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;