* 0243869
* REU Site: Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience (SAGE)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2009
* George Jiracek, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2009
* USD 541,602.00

This site is co-funded through a partnership of the Department of Defense and
the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;SAGE (Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience)
blends teaching and research into a partnership between universities, industry,
and federal laboratories. The summer portion of SAGE is 4 weeks long for REU; an
additional week is scheduled in early January for follow-up and advanced
research. SAGE faculty come from seven universities and a national
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the REU portion of SAGE is
to actively involve undergraduate students in all phases of exciting, applied
geophysical research using the newest field equipment and latest computer
processing/interpretation tools. The SAGE REU site has 15 REU students of the
25-30 students (including graduate students) that attend SAGE each year. A
target to have one-half underrepresented REU students at SAGE has been
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students at SAGE participate in every phase of a
geophysical research program: they collect data with modern equipment; they
process, model, and interpret the data with workstations and PC's; and they
present their results in both oral and written form. First the students are
introduced to fundamental scientific principles involved when applying
geophysics to geologic problems. Then there are interactive discussions on what
the objectives of the field research are, what geophysical techniques will be
used and why, and how the data will be collected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central activity of SAGE is the hands-on collection and interpretation of field
research data. Students work with faculty, teaching assistants, and industry
experts in a variety of geophysical surveys such as seismic reflection, seismic
refraction, gravity, magnetics and electromagnetics including manetotellurics.
Industry contributions include visits from professionals, evening discussions,
financial donations, and free equipment use and software loans. This allows a
high level of technical expertise not available at most college campuses.