* 0243460
* Java and Object Oriented Design: Professional Development for Secondary Computer Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Shai Simonson, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 02/28/2006
* USD 158,368.00

This is a proposal to provide 25 experienced Massachusetts computer science
teachers with the foundation needed to teach Java-based courses. This is done in
anticipation of the shift in the Advance Placement as well as other courses,
which should ultimately change many related offerings. Teachers attend a two-
week workshop, followed by several school-year meetings, and then a culminating
in a one-week summer workshop. During these, they will learn enough Java and
Object Oriented Programming (OOP) and Design so as to feel comfortable and
competent in teaching an introductory course using Java and
OOP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded activities include creating a local peer
group of computer science teachers and providing local computer science teachers
with access to computing facilities, network connections and faculty expertise.
In addition to addressing the local need, the project staff and participants
develop materials and resources for dissemination to other secondary school
computer science teachers. A nationally publicized conference is scheduled near
the end of the project, during which experienced OOP teachers present their
experiences, lesson plans and student work. Through the web page development, an
Internet News Group and the regional conference, the project will reach a much
needed national audience of secondary school computer science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;