* 0243878
* REU Site: Urbanization Impacts on Stream Ecosystems - An Integrated Training Experience for Undergraduate Researchers
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* B. Michael Walton, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 188,089.00

Urbanization Impacts on Stream Ecosystems - An Integrated Training Experience
for Undergraduate Researchers is a 10-week summer program designed to provide
students with opportunities to investigate urbanization as a critical factor in
the current crisis of declining biodiversity. Students will develop and conduct
independent research projects emphasizing interdisciplinary studies of
biodiversity and ecological function of the Cuyahoga River watershed. The
experience will begin with a two-week orientation and basic training that
includes a tour of the watershed and instructions in stream ecology and
fundamental research skills. The balance of the program will be devoted largely
to independent research. All student projects will be integrated around the
central concept that urbanization alters the ecology and genetic diversity of
stream organisms, but students will select among projects approaching this
hypothesis with different methods and organisms, including studies of ecology or
genetic diversity of plants, invertebrates, fish, and amphibians. Students will
also participate in seminars presented by REU faculty and visiting experts
emphasizing basic research skills, urban ecology, and socio-cultural dimensions
of urban ecosystem studies. In addition, students will attend workshops
emphasizing (1) educational and career opportunities in urban environmental
science, and (2) analysis, interpretation, and communication of scientific data.
The experience will conclude with a research symposium at which students will
present their work to REU faculty, environmental scientists, and resource
management professionals. Student recruitment efforts will target biological and
environmental science majors from urban institutions lacking ecological research
opportunities and under-represented groups in the sciences. For additional
information, contact Dr. B. Michael Walton at 216-687-3979 or
b.walton@csuohio.edu.