* 0243764
* US-Pakistan Workshop:  Research and Development in Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, April 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Ashfaq Khokhar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2005
* USD 45,000.00

0243764 &lt;br/&gt;Khokhar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a US-Pakistan Workshop on Information Technology to be held in Islamabad,
Pakistan, April 2003. The organizers are Dr. Ashfaq Khokhar, Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Illinois at
Chicago and Dr. S.M. Junaid Zaidi, Rector of the COMSATS (Commission on Science
and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South) Institute of
Information Technology in Islamabad, Pakistan. The purpose of the workshop is to
exchange information between the US and Pakistani sides on advances in
information technology and to discuss R&amp;D needs that may be met through
cooperative research projects. The key areas chosen for this workshop include:
role of IT in large scale enterprise infrastructure, security and protection of
IT infrastructure, network centric information and computing, IT based
applications including digital government, e-commerce, e-learning and
bioinformatics, and higher education and research in IT. Several parallel
sessions will be organized to make use of the expertise of expatriate and other
US-based leading researchers. The workshop will include plenary sessions to
introduce cutting edge research in each of the four identified areas, and two
panel sessions to discuss future research trends in IT. The workshop will
provide a platform for fostering research collaborations among the researchers
from US and Pakistan and initiate research and development projects related to
key IT research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project enables US and
Pakistani scientists to discuss an area of great importance to both countries,
and to identify potential collaborative research where the two sides can
complement each other's capabilities. Dr. Khokhar is an experienced researcher
with a strong record of NSF-funded projects. He is also familiar with the
science scene in Pakistan. Dr. Zaidi is also an experienced scientist who leads
a major specialized institute for IT in Pakistan and who will have the backing
of that country's Ministry of Science and Technology. Among the US participants
are five junior scientists. The project will increase collaboration in science
and technology with Pakistan in an area of great importance to both countries.
This project is being supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Computer and Communications Research.&lt;br/&gt;