* 0243959
* REU:  Chemistry with a Purpose - Undergraduate Research Experiences at State University of New York (SUNY) College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* John Smarrelli, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Randall Christnert
* 02/28/2006
* USD 187,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CHE-0243959 Date:
1-17-2003&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY College of Environmental Science and
Forestry&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dibble &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry Department at
the State University of New York - Environmental Science and Forestry (SUNY-ESF)
will be the site for a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program
during the summers of 2003-2005. The site will operate together with the
neighboring institution Le Moyne College. Theodore S. Dibble (SUNY-ESF) is the
site director and John Smarrelli (Le Moyne) is co-PI.. The site will host 13
students (10 NSF supported) for ten weeks. SUNY-ESF has maintained a focus on
applied chemistry while emphasizing the fundamental aspects of chemistry as a
central science. The research projects available to the REU students reflect
this emphasis on "Chemistry with a Purpose". Interdisciplinary chemistry
projects include topics from physical, atmospheric, biochemistry, polymers,
synthetic organic, environmental, biobased materials, biotechnology and green
chemistry. Students will meet each week to discuss topics related to career and
professional development issues. Ethics education will be under the direction of
Dr. Lynne Arnault from Le Moyne College. A poster session will be held at the
end of the summer. &lt;br/&gt;