* 0243046
* Experimental Investigations of Properties of  Electron  Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Thomas Gramila, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of the research supported by this individual investigator grant is to
increase our understanding of electron physics. The project has two parts. One
seeks to understand a surprising and dramatic behavior of electrons: the sign
reversal in a measured transport parameter. This reversal, seen for two-
dimensional electrons in magnetic fields smaller than one Tesla, was entirely
unanticipated, and remains without explanation. Evidence exists that the unusual
behavior is directly related to the electron spin, offering the prospect for new
advances in important areas of electron physics. The second part will use a new
experimental approach to explore two complex and important influences on
electrons: disorder and interactions. These influences have long been
established as central to electronic properties; yet a full understanding of
their roles, particularly when both are present, remains elusive. This project
will use drag to directly measure the electron density fluctuations, thereby
investigating the interplay between disorder and electron interactions in
electron systems. The insight to be gained through this new approach arises from
the substantial difference in density fluctuations theoretically established
between the disorder dominated and the interaction dominated regimes. The
training provided students involved in this research aims toward answering
fundamental questions in the physic of technologically important materials,
while involving a wide range of state of the art technical methods. Such
training is valuable preparation for academic, government, or industrial
scientific careers.

This individual investigator award supports research involving basic questions
about the properties of electronic materials. Two primary research directions
will be examined through experiments. One involves the surprising discovery of
new behavior in a regime that had been widely regarded as well understood: two-
dimensional electrons in small magnetic fields. Evidence that the spin of the
electrons is involved increases the prospect for valuable new understanding. The
other research direction involves a new experimental approach applied to a
longstanding but fundamental issue of electronic materials: the influences of
disorder and of the interactions between electrons. These influences are widely
recognized as being of central importance to a broad range of behaviors in
electronic materials. Our measurements will provide new insights into this
important topic. Complimenting the value of the science investigated here is the
value of the training provided to students. The experiments themselves are
technically challenging, involving low-noise measurement with complex sample
requirements, and the use technologically important materials. They push the
boundaries of measurement technology, sample preparation, and even sample
growth. The basic research explored in this work offers the prospect of
strengthening the intellectual underpinnings of a number of important
technological areas, from spin based electronics to ultra-small devices, which
rely on a broad understanding of electron physics.