* 0243631
* Research Experiences in Physics for Undergraduates at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Carol Hirschmugl, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 11/30/2006
* USD 256,545.00

The Physics Department at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will expand its
NSF-funded REU site program for undergraduate physics majors during the summers
of 2003 - 2005. A Research Experience for Teachers (RET) component will be
combined with the REU program. As well as formal research activities, REU/RET
interns are offered lectures from faculty about current research topics of
general interest, a mini-course in classical mechanics, and site visits to GE
Medical and the Wisconsin Light Source (Synchrotron) at Stoughton. Fields of
experimental work for REU involvement include: optics, optical spectroscopy, and
laser physics, including applications to cutting-edge biophysical and medical
research; studies of condensed matter structure and surface structure, using a
wide range of experimental techniques including Low Energy Electron Diffraction
(LEED), infrared spectroscopy, molecular beam epitaxy and vacuum deposition,
X-ray scattering and other X-ray spectroscopic techniques, and UV and X-ray
photoemission. There are also groups working specifically with electron
microscopy and acoustic propagation in high temperature superconductors. Fields
of theoretical work include computational techniques for the extraction of the
geometrical and electronic structure of materials from electron and X-ray
probes, superconductivity and electronic structure, relativistic astrophysics,
and the analysis of data from the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory (LIGO). Previous REU students have been successfully involved in all
of these fields. It should be noted that the Department is heavily involved with
the LIGO project, one of the biggest and most exciting collaborative projects in
contemporary physics: the detection of gravitational waves, which are predicted
by General Relativity but which have not yet been observed. Students who work
with the LIGO group will be fully involved in the group's work, and have the
opportunity to meet collaborators from other institutions.