* 0243824
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Wesley Lawson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2006
* USD 227,580.00

The Training and Research Experiences in Nonlinear Dynamics (TREND) REU Site
focuses on nonlinear dynamics because of its wide applicability to increasingly
important state-of-the-art research areas and because its consideration of
simple systems is particularly suited to achieve our goal of involving
undergraduates in front-line research. The program is located in the Institute
for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics (IREAP) of the University of
Maryland, an interdisciplinary center, which brings together faculty from
engineering and physical sciences. The program involves ten students who will
spend 11 weeks in the summer on campus involved in research in small teams
consisting of undergraduates, graduate students and faculty&lt;br/&gt;advisors.
Research projects will be theoretical, experimental or both. Examples of
research topics are: theoretical studies of chaos in time and space,
experimental studies of patterns in granular media, the development of
singularities in fluids and solids, nonlinear dynamics in optical systems,
nonlinear dynamics in charged particle beams and devices, and turbulence and
nonlinear phenomena in plasmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A seminar series will be
given to complement and reinforce the learning experience. Students will present
the results of their research at a mini-conference at the end of the session.
They will also be encouraged to maintain contact with group members to further
their research findings and prepare them for publication in journals and
presentation at national meetings. Targeted students are top undergraduates who
have completed their sophomore year in the Physical Sciences and Engineering and
who are interested in the possibility of a career in research and/or education.
Effort will be made to recruit students from under represented groups and
students from schools lacking similar research opportunities. An equal balance
between University of Maryland and non-University of Maryland students will be
maintained. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;