* 0243688
* Collaborative Research:  Energy Sources for Reproduction and Development in a Cold-Seep Mixotrophic Mussel
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Craig Young, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,826.00

Heterotrophic deep-sea animals require a downward flux of material in order to
survive and reproduce, whereas animals with chemoautotrophic symbionts at
hydrothermal vents or cold seeps should theoretically be capable of producing
gametes more-or-less continuously without the benefit of surface-derived
detritus. Mixotrophic mussels at cold seeps are intermediate between these two
situations. They can grow and survive using only methane or sulfide as an energy
source, but are also capable of filter-feeding on detrital particles or plankton
in the benthic boundary layer. Available evidence suggests that supplemental
filtration on bacterioplankton may be necessary to provide sufficient nitrogen
to the mussels. The cold-seep mussel Bathymodiolus childressi, which lives at
methane seeps on the Louisiana slope, demonstrates periodic rather than
continuous reproduction, a pattern not predicted by the commonly accepted
paradigm that food limitation controls reproductive timing in the deep sea.
Thus, mixotrophic mussels present a unique opportunity to investigate the role
of detrital input in the control of gametogenic timing in the deep sea. Lipid
biomarkers and compound specific stable isotopes will be used to determine if
energy from surfacederived detritus is differentially partitioned between the
gonads and somatic tissues of B. childressi. In the deep-sea megafauna, seasonal
breeders virtually always produce feeding larvae, suggesting a possible
mechanistic or evolutionary link between surface production and larval success.
Crisp's rule, the prediction that animals with planktotrophic larvae will time
their breeding to assure optimal nutrition for the larvae, is one such possible
link. Crisp's Rule will be examined in this study by rearing the larvae of B.
childressi in natural water collected at various depths.