* 0243029
* ITR/SI: On Topologies, Power Laws, and Hierarchies
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2006
* USD 380,873.00

Recent work has pointed out the existence of power-laws in the degree
distribution of real-world&lt;br/&gt;networks. In retrospect, these findings
while widely publicized are perhaps not surprising; power-laws&lt;br/&gt;for
various notions of size in real-world phenomena have been known for several
decades.&lt;br/&gt;Nevertheless, these findings have sparked extensive interest
in the structure and macroscopic properties&lt;br/&gt;of the Internet. Such
interest is timely; recent work has also revealed that network topology
properties&lt;br/&gt;may impact protocol performance&lt;br/&gt; Generating
realistic topologies is a prerequisite for understanding the impact of topology
on pro-tocol&lt;br/&gt;performance. Our recent work on topology generation
motivates the proposed research and is&lt;br/&gt;driven by the perceived
dichotomy between structural generators those that explicity embody
some&lt;br/&gt;notion of hierarchy in constructing topologies and connectivity-
based generators those that at-tempt&lt;br/&gt;to generate topologies with
power-law degree distributions.&lt;br/&gt; Our preliminary research on this
larger question reveals several interesting results: that real net-
works&lt;br/&gt;are well-modeled by connectivity-based generators, and that
these generators result in graphs&lt;br/&gt;with a continuum of levels of
hierarchy. Continuing on from this work, our proposed research will at-
tempt&lt;br/&gt;to increase our fundamental understanding of the structure of
real networks, and their impact on&lt;br/&gt;protocol performance. Conceptually,
our proposed research has three interrelated parts: understand-
ing&lt;br/&gt;hierarchy in real networks, devising structural models for
topology construction based on Highly&lt;br/&gt;Optimized Tolerance, and
examining more closely the impact of topology on protocol
performance.&lt;br/&gt; The structure of networks, and their impact on
protocols, has received little attention until recently.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impact, this work has the potential for making fundamental progress in
the areas&lt;br/&gt;of topology modeling. In a larger sense, it may develop
methods that can be used to understand the&lt;br/&gt;physical processes that
lead to the development of other real-world networks, such as the Web
topology&lt;br/&gt;and social networks.