* 0243210
* GOALI:     The Engineering of Noble Metal Catalyst Impregnation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jennifer Holmgren, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 06/30/2006
* USD 324,596.00

This GOALI research program will investigate the fundamental chemical phenomena
associated with the adsorption of noble metal coordination complexes from
solution onto widely used oxide and carbon supports. A highly recognized
predictive tool, the Revised Physical Adsorption (RPA) model, has been developed
which has led to a new understanding of the interaction of anionic or cationic
noble metal complexes and the protonated or deprotonated hydroxyl groups at
surfaces. The "point of zero charge" and the solution pH determine the nature of
the ionic interaction. Proton transfer between the bulk solution and the surface
has been identified as a key mechanistic step. The main focus on this ongoing
research will be on the development of new scientific insight that can be used
to engineer the properties of several important industrial catalyst supports
including carbon. The adsorption of active noble metals such as Pt and Pd will
the primary emphasis because of the importance of these catalysts for
hydrogenation reactions and for fuel cells. Control of adsorption on carbon will
be exercised primarily through the incorporation of specific types of
O-containing surface groups; niobia, sulfated zirconia, and mixed metal oxides
will also be examined. Industrial collaborators will provide key material
synthesis capabilities and complementary characterization techniques. Access to
the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratories is inherent to the
work. Combined in-kind and actual support from the GOALI collaborations is
$500,000 for the 3-year research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reviewers rated
this proposal very strongly, both on the basis of its scientific excellence and
its importance to key catalytic processing technology. The prior research
accomplishments have been recognized as making an innovative, ground-breaking
contribution to the understanding of catalyst preparation. Characterization
techniques such as EXAFS have now allowed key aspect of the theoretical
understanding to be confirmed. A highly respected industrial team is part of
this GOALI project, and the university investigator has a demonstrated record of
interaction with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the work
include the practical applications of the fundamental science to important
national research priorities, such as the development of improved carbon-based
electrodes used in PEM fuel cells. Other aspects of the work will have
applications in improved environmental approaches to catalyst preparation,
especially for heavy metals. Educational aspects of the research project are
strong at both the graduate and undergraduate level. Students will be involved
through a successful NSF REU site on Novel Materials that has involved
significant numbers of students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;