* 0243538
* "Convergence:  Where Mathematics, History and Teaching Interact"  --  An Online Magazine on the History of Mathematics and Its Use in Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Victor Katz, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2010
* USD 801,470.00

The Mathematical Association of America (MAA) proposes to create an online
magazine on the history of mathematics and its use in teaching, entitled
"Convergence: Where Mathematics, History and Teaching Interact." "Convergence"
will make available to teachers and teacher educators (Grades 9-14) a continuous
flow of new material in the history of mathematics, which they can easily use in
the classroom to enrich their courses, spark student interest and make
mathematics more accessible. The types of materials appearing in the magazine
will include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Expository articles with corresponding
discussion groups; &lt;br/&gt;(ii) Translations of original sources, both
Western and non-Western; &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Reviews of resources (books, articles,
websites, etc.) on the history of mathematics; &lt;br/&gt;(iv) Lesson
plans;&lt;br/&gt;(v) Three attractive special sections, updated daily: "A
Historical Problem of the Day," "A Mathematical Quotation of the Day," and "What
Happened Today in History?"&lt;br/&gt;(vi) An up-to-date guide to what is
happening around the world in the history of mathematics and its use in
teaching; and&lt;br/&gt;(vii) Historical illustrations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
magazine will be a part of the MAA Mathematical Sciences Digital Library
(MathDL). Most of the technical work on "Convergence" will be done at "Math
Forum," now housed at Drexel University. "Math Forum," which provides similar
services to MathDL, will host the magazine's web pages, maintain the site and
develop the software for the discussion groups. &lt;br/&gt;