* 0243751
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Watershed Studies at the College of William and Mary
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Randolph Chambers, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2006
* USD 200,621.00

This REU Site will create a summer research program encompassing the scope of
watershed science conducted at the campus environmental field laboratory. Each
year eight outstanding undergraduates from across the country and two from
William and Mary will be selected to participate in student research projects
mentored by faculty in environmental geology, biology, sociology and economics.
The cohort of students will work with W&amp;M faculty mentors to determine the
impacts of changing watershed land use in scientific and socio-economic
contexts. Students will complete research projects on the 16-ha Lane Matoaka
(the oldest man-made impoundment in Virginia) and in streams and associated
uplands of the two watersheds in which the college owns property. Investigations
of current hydrogeologic and ecological status in the two watersheds will be
completed by determining stream discharge characteristics and responses to
stormflows, spatial variation in water quality, lake-wide budgets for water,
sediment and nutrients, and population/community structure in aquatic and
terrestrial portions of the watersheds. Because the status of the watershed
systems is the result of historical changes in land use, sociologic and economic
examinations of residents' perception of development, environmental protection
and water and property rights will be used to determine the current direction
and strength of population and market forcing functions. Access to a richly
detailed history of the Colonial Willliamsburg region will allow development of
a timeline of changes in watershed land use as a context for analysis of
watershed structure and function.