* 0243728
* Collaborative Research:  Generation of Improved Land-surface Data and an Assessment of its Impact on Mesoscale Predictions
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* James Merchant, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 149,558.00

A major problem area for improved numerical modeling of near surface variables
is the sensitivity of model predictions to the accuracy of key land surface
parameters. In particular, the forecasts of near surface quantities such as 2 m
temperatures and relative humidity and 10 m winds are influenced strongly by the
state of the land surface, as is precipitation. The ability to predict these
parameters is important to a wide variety of human activities, ranging from
planning outdoor and weekend activities to transportation routing and energy
conservation. Vegetation characteristics such as fractional vegetation coverage
(FVEG) and leaf area index (LAI) arguably are the most important land surface
parameters that need to be defined accurately. However, present practices for
defining these parameters are overly simplistic and typically are based only on
climatology. Yet vegetation responds to daily variations in rainfall and is far
from static. Recent studies by the PIs demonstrated potentially large impacts
from specifying both FVEG and LAI, at high spatial and temporal resolution, in a
state-of-the-art coupled atmosphere-land surface modeling
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a unique collaboration of
expertise between three institutions in the key areas of mesoscale atmospheric
modeling, land surface modeling and the generation of real-time, high
resolution, satellite-derived land surface parameters. The intellectual merit of
this work consist of: 1) an evaluation and improvement of various land surface
models from the routine daily predictions of near surface variables, 2) the
first four-dimensional assimilation system of both standard observational
network data and raw flux data from the Oklahoma Mesonet, and 3) the development
of an automated knowledge-based system based upon daily polar-orbiting satellite
data to provide daily updates of land surface variables. The focus region for
this study is the Great Plains, especially during the growing season of 2003
(March to October).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
are eventual improvements to short-range predictions of near surface variables
such as temperature and moisture, thereby affecting power load, air quality, and
convective weather forecasting, all of which have significant economic
implications.