* 0243045
* Regional Development and the Reinvention of Local Culture in China: The Case of Tunbao Heritage
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Timothy Oakes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2007
* USD 54,075.00

In many parts of the world, people have turned to their heritage as a
centerpiece of economic development programs focusing on tourism. "Tunbao"
refers to the culture of some 300,000 descendants of Ming Dynasty garrison
settlers stationed on the empire's southwestern frontier during the 14th
century. Having lived in relative isolation for some six centuries, these
villagers are now regarded as "living fossils" of early Ming culture, an
ambivalent label that villagers themselves have nevertheless appropriated and
turned into a mark of cultural prestige. This research project will evaluate the
development of Tunbao-based heritage tourism in southwest China's Guizhou
province. The project will assess the relationship between cultural strategies
of development and local reactions to and incorporations of such strategies in
the local-scale pursuit of tourism development. This two-year collaborative
ethnographic case study will bring together a multi-ethnic and interdisciplinary
research team, and it will introduces innovative theories and methodologies in
human geography to Chinese scholars and graduate students. The project
specifically seeks to address three general questions: (1) How is local culture
used as a resource in regional development strategies? (2) What is the
relationship between cultural strategies of regional development and the
reinvention of local culture? (3) What role do locals play in the reinvention of
local culture and what meanings are associated with such reinvention? Research
methods to me used include interviews with local and provincial government
officials at units most directly responsible for formulating regional
development strategies, external trade and financial ties, and cultural
development and preservation; a comprehensive inventory of contemporary changes
in tunbao cultural reinvention; village surveys; extended open-ended interviews;
and participant-observation of village cultural landscapes, visual cultural
practices, and performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to
broader theoretical work in the human geography of China. It will contribute a
Chinese perspective toward western ideas and experiences of "place marketing"
and cultural change as well as provide a model for sustainable heritage tourism
development in rural China. The project will integrate research and education
while seeking to benefit society at large. The project will help train four
Chinese graduate students in innovative field methods and theoretical approaches
to understanding cultural change and economic development. The project also
seeks to provide a basis for a dialogue between Chinese scholars and local
government officials and tourism industry personnel.&lt;br/&gt;