* 0243588
* Cohomology and Actions of Finite Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Alejandro Adem, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 135,447.00

The principal investigator will apply techniques from algebra and topology to
study a number of basic questions in transformation groups, orbifolds, field
theory, group cohomology and related topics. Among other things he proposes the
following research projects: (1) construction of finite group actions using
methods from group cohomology and homotopy theory; (2) research on
representation spaces and K-theory of the braid groups and other discrete
groups; (3) algebraic topology of orbifolds: the development and study of
topological invariants associated to orbifolds; (4) field theory and cohomology
of groups: the analysis of Galois groups using cohomological methods; and (5)
computation of the cohomology of low rank simple groups, using a combination of
theoretical and computer-assisted methods.

This proposal is interdisciplinary in its conception, as it intends to combine
methods from algebra and topology to address a broad range of problems. Symmetry
is a topic of central interest in mathematics, which can be effectively studied
using topological methods. Research on mathematical aspects of orbifold string
theory is representative of the emerging fusion between geometry and physics.
Many important ideas have originated in physics and they consistently lead to
the opening of new frontiers in mathematics. On the other hand the cohomology of
groups is a subject involving intricate algebraic invariants which very
naturally play a role in representation theory, number theory, field theory,
etc. Recent techniques use advanced methods and capabilities from computer
algebra, and the proposed calculations will serve as benchmarks for further
computational as well as theoretical developments in the field--with many
potential applications. This proposal will seek to develop close and fruitful
interactions between topology, algebra and physics, helping to consolidate the
cohomology of groups as an interactive subject involving both theoretical and
computational methods.