* 0243483
* Hidden Instabilities due to Coexistence Phenomenon in Autoparametric Excitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Richard Rand, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 04/30/2006
* USD 79,868.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When an engineering structure is loaded by a vibratory
source such as a&lt;br/&gt;motor, resonances occur in the neighborhood of normal
modal vibrations. These resonances are&lt;br/&gt;often undesirable, resulting in
large deformations and possible destructive effects. If&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear
effects are taken into account in the engineering model, the normal mode
vibrations are&lt;br/&gt;periodic motions known as nonlinear normal
modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work concerns nonlinear normal modes in two
degree of freedom systems.&lt;br/&gt;Such systems are subject to a phenomenon
known as autoparametric excitation. This&lt;br/&gt;involves energy being
transferred between nonlinear normal modes in a resonant fashion, with
the&lt;br/&gt;possibility that a nonlinear normal mode may become unstable. If a
structure were to be designed to&lt;br/&gt;operate in a particular vibrational
mode, and if that mode turned out to be unstable, the design&lt;br/&gt;would be
a failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The usual procedure for determining whether a
nonlinear normal mode is&lt;br/&gt;stable or not involves using a mathematical
theory known as Floquet theory. This offers&lt;br/&gt;predictions of instability
based on for example numerical integration of the differential equations
of&lt;br/&gt;motion. In the proposed research, we address a situation (called
coexistence) in which Floquet theory predicts stability, but which involves
instabilities which would result if the model was changed
slightly.&lt;br/&gt;Since no engineering model perfectly represents a physical
situation, such instabilities in models with&lt;br/&gt;coexistence are
inevitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although coexistence occurs in a variety of
models of physical systems very&lt;br/&gt;little research has been aimed at
understanding the associated instabilities. This project aims 1)
to&lt;br/&gt;determine which systems exhibit coexistence (from a general class
of systems), and 2) to examine the&lt;br/&gt;nature of the resulting
instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fund a graduate research
student at the doctoral level and&lt;br/&gt;thus will integrate research and
education. The results of the research will be broadly disseminated
by&lt;br/&gt;being presented at a scientific/engineering meeting and published
in a scientific journal. In&lt;br/&gt;this way it is hoped that engineers will
be made aware of possible design trouble that could be caused by
the&lt;br/&gt;hidden instabilities which are the subject of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;