* 0243314
* Unique Polymeric Materials by Novel Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Joseph Kennedy, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2009
* USD 778,000.00

This proposal consists of three research thrusts, each focusing on the creation
by novel strategies of unique polymeric materials of potential use for medical
and high technology applications. The first thrust concerns "smart" (stimuli-
responsive) amphiphilic networks and membranes that rapidly change their
micromorphology depending on the surrounding medium. The aim of this thrust is
to synthesize, characterize and evaluate conceptually new tricomponent
tricontinuous amphiphilic membranes with improved O2, permeability, mechanical
properties, and precisely designed pore dimensions. The immediate objective will
be to prepare immunosiolatory capsules for beta cells for the treatment of
diabetes. The walls of the capsules will be novel membranes that contain a
continuous hydrophilic poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) phase for the transport of
water and aqueous solutions, a continuous oxyphilic polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
phase for O2 transport, and a continuous polypentamethylcyclosiloxane (PD5)
phase that provides crosslinking of the PEG and PDMS moieties, and
reinforcement. Polysiloxanes are known to possess high O2 permeability, and thus
will yield channels for O2 transport across the membrane; Thus O2 will diffuse
through membrane walls via water-mediated transport by water-swollen PEG phases
and by oxyphilic (oxygen-specific) PDMS/PD5 channels. The synthesis of these
novel amphiphilic membranes is based on a recently discovered
cohydrosilation/hydrolysis/polycondensation process: Thus, vinyl-telechelic PEG
and -PDMS moieties will be cohydrosilated by pentamethylcyclosiloxane (D5H), the
residual SiH functions of D5H will be hydrolyzed to SiOH groups, and the latter
will crosslink to give novel membranes. Well-defined molecular weight PEG and
PDMS prepolymers will be used which will result in well-controlled structures.
Earlier research with first generation bicomponent membranes will provide
guidance toward the preparation of improved biocompatible membranes that will be
jointly evaluated with biologists and medical scientists. These unique membranes
will be designed to become components that will be jointly evaluated with a
bioartificial pancreas to correct diabetes. The second thrust is built upon the
recent discovery that D5H can be readily polymerized in the presence of a
hydrosilation (Karstedt's) catalyst and water to PD5, a new material with a
combination of unprecedented properties, i.e., the lowest Tg on record (~150
degree C), high thermal resistance, etc. The mechanism of the D5H-&gt; PD5
polymerization will be studied (role of water, stoichiometry, etc.), and efforts
will be made to define conditions for the synthesis of PD5 clusters of defined
sizes, volumes and morphology. A further objective is to create by new
processes, and by the use of a combination of inexpensive linear- and cyclic
polysiloxanes, unique elastic networks that exhibit outstanding heat and
oxidative stability. These networks will be synthesized by the use of HO-PDMS-OH
and PD5, and will be based on the discovery that PD5 contains a small but
sufficient number of SiH groups that will combine with the HO-telechelic PDMS to
give thermally resistant elastic networks. Indeed, preliminary experiments have
indicated that the proposed synthesis is feasible. The aim of the third thrust
is the synthesis, characterization and testing of novel fully aliphatic
thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs). These TPEs will be tri-and star-blocks of soft
PIB inner segments bonded to high Tg (~300degrees C) polynorbornadiene outer
segments. The objective will be reached by first preparing by living cationic
polymerization PIB blocks or stars fitted with tert-chlorine termini, and using
these groups, in conjuction with TiCl4, to induce the polymerization of
norbornadiene. The characteriztion and testing of these new polymeric materials
are integral parts of the thrusts. All the necessary instrumentation, major
equipment, and expert advise are available to complete the tasks. These studies
will be of significance for the generation of a new family of aliphatic TPEs
with potential electronic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The envisioned
activities will significantly advance discovery and understanding, while
fostering teaching and training of young professionals (graduate students and
postdoctorals). Various collaborations with researchers at The University of
Akron, neighboring universities and hospitals (both in Akron and in Cleveland),
and research institutes in Germany and Hungary are in place and will be
continued. Students will, as before, participate at local, national, and
international meetings and workshops. Special mentoring of undergraduates and
graduate students has started and will continue. The envisioned research in
inherently multidisciplinary and will lead to extensive participation in
interdisciplinary symposia and conferences. Results of this research will be
published in highest quality professional journals and presented at
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;