* 0243153
* Conchopata Archaeological Analyses, 2003
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* William Isbell, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 83,398.00

With National Science Foundation support the Conchopata Archaeological Analysis
- 2003, directed by Dr. William H. Isbell, will complete laboratory study of
artifact collections excavated at Conchopata between 1998 and 2001. Conchopata
was the second largest city in Central Highlands Peru during the initial stages
of the Andean urban revolution and formation of pristine empires Conchopata has
been recognized as a center of important religious developments that may have
promoted imperialism and city life, and our new excavations suggest that the
site consisted of palaces, tombs and temples, plus dense concentrations of
residences clustered around these important buildings. This new program will
bring together archaeologists from the USA, Peru, Argentina and Canada in a
coordinated effort to learn more about early urban life in one of the first
Andean cities, from power, religious ideology and class difference to
subsistence and the organization of labor. Between 1998 and 2001, under Dr.
Isbell's direction, archaeologists excavated the largest area of prehistoric
architectural remains ever exposed for a highland Peruvian city of early Middle
Horizon date. The buildings exposed contained artifacts, ranging from food
remains to burial offerings that document the way people lived during Conchopata
s apogee. Painstaking analysis of these remains will teach us about how the
residents supported themselves, what kind of industries they practiced, their
religious rituals, their system of government, how power was consolidated, and
the role of symbolic communication and ideology in the profound changes
associated with Peru's early urban revolution.

These results have broad significance for understanding culture change in the
past and present, the production of social difference, and the emergence of
centralized political authority. Do all societies follow similar paths in the
evolution of cultural complexity and production of differential wealth and
power? Some scholars argue that all cultures have developed along similar lines,
while others insist that Central Andean civilizations were unique, so processes
of culture change are historical and contingent. On the basis of preliminary
examinations of our excavated remains from Conchopata it appears that this
ancient city shared some features, particularly in the domain of subsistence and
economic organization, with other early cities of the New and Old Worlds. On the
other hand, it appears that the core of Conchopata consisted of small palaces,
occupied serially, that were centers from which ideology, politics and craft
manufacturing were organized, until the became mortuary monuments. Perhaps, the
first elites also specialized in manufacturing things like ceremonial offering
pottery, replete with highly symbolic iconography. This may be a pattern unique
to Andean Native America. The analyses will discover much more information about
the lives lived at Conchopata, showing how this early Andean city does or does
not conform to current theories of universal culture change and processual
evolution.