* 0243091
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Modeling of Physical Conditions in High Z Protogalaxies
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2007
* USD 26,191.00

Description: This award supports the US-India cooperative research project
entitled &lt;br/&gt;Modeling of Physical Conditions in High Z Protogalaxies.
Professors Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky and Raghunathan Srianand, Inter-
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics will jointly study star
formation activity in proto-galaxies. The research objective is to develop a
model of the physical conditions in high redshift proto-galaxies by combining
high quality observational data with extensive modeling of the physical
conditions. While there is a wealth of observational information, modeling
efforts have thus far failed to take into account all of the relevant physical
processes simultaneously in a cosmological setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project brings together the unique computer modeling expertise of the US
investigator and the extensive observational experience of the Indian
investigator. The Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics in Pune
is one of India's premier institutions. This joint project will allow computer
simulations to directly address questions concerning the origin of galaxies and
the establishment of the galactic environment around us today. India's
Department of Science and Technology (DST) jointly supports this research under
the NSF/DST program.