* 0243414
* RUI: Gender Socialization Through Play Among Fijian Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Karen Brison, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 05/31/2004
* USD 43,376.00

Research in North America indicates that children selectively reinterpret
messages about gender and social roles from adults to form their gender and
personal identity. Cultures in general offer individuals multiple, often
contradictory, models of self, gender, and community. This is particularly true
in our contemporary global village where increased exposure to alternative
ideologies and lifestyles through mass media, travel and migration lead to
increased scope for individual "imagination." This project adds a cross-cultural
dimension to a literature now based largely on studies of Western children. This
will advance our understanding of how children actively construct gender roles
and will shed light on the factors that influence the salience of gender as a
category for children. The researchers seek to explore in much greater detail
the findings of a preliminary study, which indicated that gender roles among
adults were clearly defined and dichotomized; children, however, did not focus
on gender. This situation contrasts to the emphasis on gender among many Western
children. These findings suggest that neither biology nor an adult emphasis on
gender will necessarily cause children to focus on gender. The proposed research
will also enhance our understanding of gender in the contemporary Pacific by
exploring the many possible ways of constructing gender available in
postcolonial Fiji and the factors that make diverse models meaningful to
individuals. The project will involve life history interviews with Fijians of
all ages, videotaping of children's play and other typical routine interactions,
and analysis of aspects of children's speech indexing gender and other
identities. The broader impacts of this research include fostering the
integration of research and education by building on an existing term abroad in
Fiji in order to give undergraduates an unusual opportunity to participate in
anthropological research. Research findings will be integrated into an existing
webpage about the Fiji Term abroad. Undergraduate research will be included in
subsequent publications and in class presentations