* 0243884
* GOALI:    High Field Transport and Device Modeling of Carbon Nanotube Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Kevin Brennan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 04/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Over the past several decades scaling of MOS transistor technology to smaller
dimensions has given rise to a rapid increase in integrated circuit performance.
It is however well recognized that continued scaling is limited by quantum
phenomena that dominate the characteristics of devices on the nanometer scale,
even if the escalating investments can be absorbed successfully.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an eventual alternative to scaling MOS technology,
research is directed at new devices and new operational paradigms that are tied
to quantum phenomena on the one hand and to nanotechnology on the other. Many
parallel paths towards a technology of molecular electronics are being explored.
Among the most promising structures in this context are so-called carbon
nanotubes (CNTs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposed program is a
study of high-field, high-temperature charge carrier transport in CNTs and,
building on these results, the formulation and analysis of device models,
specifically for CNT-based field effect transistors (CNT-FETs). It is planned to
adapt and apply a new Monte Carlo technique that was developed under previous
NSF funding. In that earlier work the traditional Monte Carlo paradigm of
semiclassical transport theory was generalized to allow for interband tunneling
transitions. It is also planned to construct semianalytical CNT-FET models that
are suitable for an exploration of realistic device operating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity
includes the advancement of the understanding of high-field charge carrier
transport. CNTs are well suited as an example material with the desired
flexibility because of the strong dependence of their electronic structure on
the tube geometry. This will allow for a direct correlation of bandstructure to
transport without adding the complication of having to compare results for
chemically different materials. Furthermore, CNT-based devices are excellent
candidates for future nanometer scale electronics applications and the proposed
program can make significant contributions to a quantitative assessment of these
prospects. To ensure that the calculations have maximum relevance for
experimental exploration the research will be conducted in close interaction
with Dr. Phaedon Avouris and his group at IBM's T.J. Watson Research Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program has broader educational impact
through the involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in the exciting
fields of nano technology and in the collaboration with industrial partners. The
lead graduate student at the University of Minnesota will serve as the point of
contact for a researcher to be identified in the IBM group. This student will be
responsible for accurate and timely exchange of information also between the
University of Minnesota and Georgia Tech groups. It has been our experience that
the direct involvement of students in this type of interaction gives them an
opportunity to display initiative and to set up working relationships with
industry that are potentially valuable for their future career. In addition, the
PIs have a track record of incorporating their on-going research into classes,
off-campus presentations to students, and textbooks. The educational aspect of
their research therefore reaches an audience beyond their immediate research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;