* 0243001
* Experimental Studies of Organic Crystals, Metals and Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Paul Chaikin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Roy G. Goodrich
* 10/31/2006
* USD 420,000.00

This condensed matter physics project describes novel investigations of dense,
strongly interacting electron systems. These organic conductors are of primary
interest because of the variety of ground states that they display. Materials
such as (TMTSF)2PF6, a Bechgaard salt, have served as an exciting laboratory for
these fundamental studies. They exhibit almost all of the condensed electronic
phases discovered in other materials, and some new ones. (TMTSF)2PF6 is
metallic, insulating, semi-metal, semi-conducting, superconducting, spin and
charge density wave, one, two or three dimensional, with a Field Induced Spin
Density Wave (FISDW) state that exhibits the quantum Hall effect (QHE) in bulk,
and both Fermi liquid and non-Fermi liquid behavior as temperature, pressure and
magnetic field are varied. However, there are still basic questions which remain
and which are at the heart of the correlated electron problem. The nature of the
metallic and superconducting states, dimensional crossover, commensurability,
competition between the many ground states and the effects of applied fields are
just beginning to be understood. This research involves training graduate and
undergraduate students in the use of high magnetic fields, high pressures, low
temperatures and a variety of techniques including transport, NMR, magnetic and
thermodynamic measurements. This training prepares students for careers in
industry, academe, or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
the microscopic interactions responsible for the electronic properties of
materials. The experiments should lead to a better understanding of how to make
metals, insulators, magnets, and superconductors. The materials are mostly
organic crystals chosen for their potential ease of fabrication and their
mechanical properties but also for their variability and control. A goal is to
answer fundamental questions about how the structure of the crystals, with chain
like stacking of the flat molecules and hence quasi-one dimensional behaviors,
influences the electron conduction mechanism and the ability of the electrons to
avoid each other. The repulsion between the electrons and their self-avoidance
is responsible for the different states found in these crystals:
antiferromagnet, Quantum Hall conductor, superconductor, and a host of
insulating phases. In direct contact with high school students and through the
Princeton Materials Institute programs we encourage research and visits to our
labs by K-12 students. Our work involves the extensive training of
undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs in state of the art measurement
and fabrication techniques, from nanolithography to high pressure, high magnetic
field and low temperature experiences. This training prepares students for
careers in industry, academe, or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;