* 0243332
* Spectral Entropy and Adaptive, Lossy Source Coding
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Jerry Gibson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Venugopal V. Veeravalli
* 02/29/2004
* USD 232,488.00

The efficient digital representation of voice, still images, high quality audio,
and video, called lossy source compression, has a host of commercial
applications today. These applications include digital cellular telephones, MP3
players, DVDs, HDTV, videoconferencing, Internet telephony, and the
transmission/storage of still images. The best approaches to source compression
in these applications are adaptive in nature and are based upon a technique
called nonlinear approximation. However, these compression methods have been
designed primarily based on experiments without any guiding theory. This
research investigates a new approach to adaptive lossy source compression based
upon a mathematical quantity called the spectral entropy. This new approach to
source compression, denoted as the SpEnt (spectral entropy) method, offers a
fundamentally sound approach to adaptive source compression that has been
missing heretofore. This work develops SpEnt-based lossy compression methods for
speech, video, and still images that should find applications in many commercial
products.

The most successful methods for lossy source compression today are sample-
function adaptive coders (also called input-by-input adaptive or realization-
adaptive). In sample function adaptive coders, not only might the number of
parameters transmitted in each block or frame vary from block-to-block (frame-
to-frame), but for a given number of transmitted parameters, which parameters
are transmitted in each block may vary. For such coders with a fixed set of
basis functions, it is usually said that the coefficients corresponding to the
best n basis functions are sent, rather than the first n, and this is called
nonlinear approximation in harmonic analysis. Campbell derived the quantity that
he called the coefficient rate of a random process in 1960, and he showed that
the coefficient rate depends on the spectral entropy (the entropy of the power
spectral density of the original process). No coding theorems were proved and no
possible implications of coefficient rate for source compression were stated.
Recent work by the PI and his students produced two new derivations of
Campbell's coefficient rate. One derivation allows coefficient rate to be
interpreted with respect to a quantity called the effective bandwidth of the
process. The other derivation reveals a new approach to source compression based
upon coefficient rate that adapts to each realization of the source. More
specifically, by studying the dominant terms in the series expansion of the
product of terms, it was shown that in a sequence of N samples of a particular
coefficient, the number of coefficient samples that should be coded is
proportional to the coefficient variances. Thus, whether a particular
coefficient is being coded or not is changing from block-to-block, and thus,
lossy compression based upon the spectral entropy clearly falls in the class of
nonlinear approximation methods. Motivated by these results, this research
formulates a new approach to lossy source compression, called the spectral
entropy (SpEnt) method, and develops SpEnt based coders for lossy compression of
wideband speech (50 Hz to 7 kHz), video, telephone bandwidth speech, and still
images. Further, this work examines the role of spectral entropy and Campbell's
coefficient rate as fundamental quantities in adaptive coding of a sequence of
source realizations.