* 0243492
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Complete Genome Sequencing of the Extremely Halophilic Archaea Haloferax Volcanii
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Jonathan Eisen, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2007
* USD 247,185.00

The primary goal of this project is to sequence to completion the 4.2 megabase
genome of the extremely halophilic Archaea, Haloferax volcanii and to aid
scientists and educators in making use of this data. This project can be divided
into four distinct aims: (1) to carry out whole-genome shotgun sequencing,
assembly, and closure of the genome of H. volcanii; (2) to facilitate community
annotation using the TIGR MANATEE software and analyze the genome sequence (3)
to establish a user-friendly access to the H. volcanii genome sequence and to
the genome annotation and analysis, by the general biological and biomedical
research community; (4) to aid science educators in the development of tools for
using this species as a model for genome-enabled microbiology education. Extreme
halophilic Archaea are uniquely able to survive in high salt environments
because they balance the internal salt concentration with that of the external
environment and because they have adapted their intercellular macromolecular
components (proteins, nucleic acids, etc.) to function a high salt milieu. H.
volcanii is an excellent model system for the study of the general biology of
Archaea. It is easily cultivated at moderate temperatures and is amenable to
genetic and molecular manipulation. This organism, in addition to being salt
dependent, is desiccation and radiation resistant and is being used as a model
to study novel metabolic pathways, adaptation to changing salinity and for
heterologous expression of gas vacuole and bacterio-opsin encoding genes. Only
one complete genome is currently available from this group of halophilic
Archaea. Having multiple genomes from this group will allow comparative genomic
analysis which has been found to provide remarkable insight into the evolution,
mutation, and biology of microbial species. Because of its ease of growth, non
pathogenic character and interesting biological properties, we believe H.
volcanii can become a model for undergraduate science education courses.