* 0243982
* Research in Random Matrices and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Harold Widom, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 125,999.00

PI: Harold Widom, UC Santa Cruz DMS-0243982

*********************************************************************

There are four projects, the first three joint with Craig A. Tracy and the
fourth joint with Estelle L. Basor. The first is to search for a system of
partial differential equations for the finite-dimensional distribution functions
for the Airy process, which is expected to describe all growth processes in the
KPZ universality class. (This has already been accomplished.) The second project
is to find limit theorems for the Hall-Littlewood polynomials, interpolating
known results for the Schur functions (Johansson) and the shifted Schur
functions (Tracy and the PI). New methods are needed here because of a lack of
determinantal representation. The third project is to complete earlier work on
the asymptotics of solutions to the periodic Toda equations by determining the
asymptotics on the critical curves, where the asymptotics will take a very
different form. The fourth project is to prove correct the conjectured constant
in an asymptotic expansion of Dyson related to the spacings between eigenvalues
of random matrices in the GUE universality class. To this end it is hoped to
refine the method recently used by Basor and the PI to obtain the asymptotics of
Wiener-Hopf determinants with Fisher-Hartwig symbols.

Many physical systems possess such complicated behavior that exact predictions
become impossible. Random matrix theory provides mathematical models that allow
a simulation of such behavior and predictions that allow comparison with
experiment. This was its original motivation, but it has since had significant
applications in other areas of mathematics, science and technology. Work of the
PI (largely collaborative) in this subject has had application in statistics
where it has been applied to the analysis of large data sets, in communications
where it has been used to study the start-up behavior of a long production line
or the transient flow of messages over a long path in a communications network,
and in physics and technology where it has had an impact on the theory of gap
fluctuations in a metal grain or quantum dot. This project is concerned with
different aspects of the theory including the search for the solution to
unsolved problems. The project is also concerned with the connection of random
matrix theory with combinatorics and growth processes. This is a more recent
development that could shed light on the question of universality of probability
distributions related to the Airy process mentioned above.