* 0243019
* Physics and Chemistry of Hydrogen-Bonded Nanoparticles and Their Interactions with Strong Adsorbates
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2006
* J. Paul Devlin, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 294,000.00

Paul Devlin of Oklahoma State University is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to study the properties of icy nanoparticles and
their interactions with strong adsorbates at the molecular level. The research
focuses on two topics: (1) solvation in two dimensions: spectroscopic studies of
acid adsorbates on surfaces of hydrogen-bonded nanoparticles, and (2) electrical
properties of ice particles. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and
computer simulation methods will guide the effort to understand the comparative
nature of water ice and methanol particle surfaces, and their respective
interactions with strong hydrogen-bonding adsorbates at temperatures less than
140 K. Adsorbates capable of cleaving normal hydrogen bonds, such as the acids
HCl, HBr, HI, HF, and nitric acid, will be given a special emphasis. Methanol
particles will enable studies complementary to those for water ice, and are
expected to lead to new insights into both systems. Studies into electrical
properties of ice nanoparticles aim to advance molecular level understanding of
issues including surface and interior mobility of ionic and orientational
defects. Collaborations will continue with theorist Victoria Buch of Hebrew
University, and others. The outcomes of this research are expected to impact
related problems in atmospheric, planetary, and biochemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice plays an important role in a variety of
natural phenomena, including precipitation, electrical storms, atmospheric
chemistry, and space science. This research is expected to lead to increased
understanding of the structure of ice surfaces and the mechanisms by which
molecules adsorb strongly and weakly onto ice nanocrystals. Results will be
pertinent to scientific areas of current interest, including hydrogen bonding in
biochemical systems, proton transfer and transport in the atmosphere, and
properties of charged icy particles in the atmosphere. In addition, this
research is expected to improve the understanding of diurnal variations in the
atmospheres of the icy moons of Jupiter, chemistry of the icy mantels of
interstellar dust particles, and clathrate hydrates important in fuel science.
&lt;br/&gt;