* 0243071
* A Workshop to Synthesize and Interpret Data from an International Iron Analysis Intercomparison
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2003
* James Moffett, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2003
* USD 9,604.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0243071&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fifteen scientist
who participated in the initial international intercalibration exercise carried
out under the auspices of the SCOR Working Group 109 will be invited to
participate in a workshop to be held on December 5, 2002 in San Francisco. The
objective of the workshop is to analyze and interpret dissolved Fe measurements
obtained by about 20 laboratories for a water samples collected in the South
Atlantic. Initial evaluation of the data obtained for this sample by the
different laboratories shows values ranging from 0.3 nM to 2.0 nM. Given the
importance of this element as a micronutrient which can limit primary
production, it is imperative that the reasons for the variability in the results
be identified. Amongst the possible problems that could be contributing to the
variability in the values obtained thus far are the following: (1) contamination
in the laboratory where the initial sample was separated into separate aliquots;
(2) contamination in the participants laboratory; and (3) different recoveries
by the various methods used to obtain the Fe values. It is expected that during
this workshop the factors responsible for the observed variability in Fe
concentrations for a single sample will be identified, as well as that
guidelines for the next intercomparison exercise be established.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;