* 0243789
* REU Site Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology at Rochester
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Elaine Sia, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 181,791.00

This REU Site Program is designed to organize the resources, environment and
experience of a major research University so as to provide enhanced research
opportunities in Cellular and Molecular Biology to promising undergraduate
students. The Program builds upon major strengths in the University of
Rochester's programs in the Biological Sciences and it is intended not only to
provide outstanding research experiences, but also to encourage participating
undergraduates to pursue career paths in the biological sciences. Students will
be recruited principally from four-year colleges, including minority-serving
institutions with which the Program Director has developed linkages. The central
research experience will take place during a 10-week, full-time work period each
summer. At this time, each REU student will pursue an independent research
project under the supervision of a specific faculty mentor, and with the hands-
on guidance of a "bench advisor" such as a graduate student or postdoctoral
fellow, who will provide assistance with laboratory methods and new techniques.
The summer experience will be enriched through seminars on a range of research
topics and career-development issues (including a roundtable discussion of
careers in science). In addition, a GRE prep course will be offered for
interested students, and all participating students will be encouraged to get to
know each other through scheduled social activities. All students who do not
live in the Rochester area will also be offered no-cost housing for the summer
in a single on-campus dorm, located within 5-minutes walk of the laboratories in
which they will conduct their research. All students will be given the
opportunity to enhance their communication skills by presenting posters on their
research at the end of the summer, at a mini-symposium that will be attended by
other trainees and faculty members. Finally, all students will be strongly
encouraged to present their research at national and local scientific meetings,
and to continue part-time research work during the academic year. The major goal
of this program is to help to support the progression of promising
undergraduates into Ph.D. programs in the Biological Sciences.