* 0243856
* Aqueous Surfaces:   Probing their Molecular and Adsorptive Properties with Experiment and Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2008
* USD 867,500.00

This research project examines the structure of the free aqueous interface,
water surfaces in contact with hydrophobic layers, the aqueous interface in the
presence of molecular ions and sulfur-containing adsorbates, as well as the
interaction of biomolecular species at the oil/water interface. With the support
of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Richmond and her
collaborators at the University of Oregon are carrying out experimental and
computational studies of these complex and important systems. Vibrational sum
frequency spectroscopy, in combination with molecular dynamics simulations, is
used to obtain structural and dynamic information about the liquid/liquid and
liquid/vapor interface in these studies. The fundamental understanding obtained
in these studies is of importance in a variety of chemical process,
environmental, and biological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Richmond is examining
the structure and dynamics of aqueous interfaces. Vibrational spectroscopic
information obtained using sum frequency generation and molecular dynamics
simulations provide an understanding of these important interfaces. Results of
this work are relevant to a broad range of environmental, chemical, and
biological processes involving the water interface. &lt;br/&gt;