* 0243915
* An REU Site for Astrophysics at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Christine Jones, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Linda S. Sparke
* 03/31/2008
* USD 705,863.00

Proposal ID: AST-0243915&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jones, Christine &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) will continue its Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Summer Intern Program at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Ten students will be recruited each
year with an emphasis on women, underrepresented minorities, and students from
colleges where research opportunities in astronomy are limited. A wide range of
research topics will be offered in the following areas: planetary science,
supernovae and their remnants, star formation, theoretical studies in astronomy
and in atomic and molecular physics, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, large scale
structure, active galactic nuclei, laboratory astrophysics, and detector
development. Based on their research, each student will write an internal paper
and give a presentation at an Intern Symposium. Other activities will include an
introduction to current astrophysics through a series of six scientific
colloquia and a short lecture course in Cosmology, visits to nearby
observatories, social events, and a trip to the winter meeting of the American
Astronomical Society (AAS) to present their work. During the ten-week program,
interns will live in a Harvard graduate school dormitory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the first time, the SAO will add a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) program. Each summer, two science teachers from
Boston high schools or middle schools will spend two months participating in
research and use this experience to develop a new curriculum unit for their
classrooms. Each teacher will return for one month during the following summer
to update the curriculum unit and prepare a web-based version of the curriculum
unit, as well as complete, if necessary, their research projects. The teachers
will participate in all REU activities with the undergraduates, and will also
present their research at an AAS meeting. &lt;br/&gt;***