* 0243102
* Collaborative Research: Socio-Spatial Processes of Road Extensions and Forest Fragmentation in the Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Robert Walker, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2006
* USD 111,270.00

Previous research on the Amazon has not systematically documented the link
between the socio-spatial processes of road construction and the geometric
signature of road networks on landscapes and ecosystems. Ecology literature
approaches the issue of roads as a purely spatial phenomenon, and emphasizes the
ensuing environmental impacts of habitat fragmentation without attending to the
social processes driving road construction in the first place. Social science
research has only addressed the aggregate impact of road construction on
deforestation, a rather blunt measure given the important ecological
implications of various spatial geometries of forest fragmentation. As a result,
a gap remains between the knowledge bases of ecological and social scientists
concerned with roads and environmental change. This project aims to start
bridging that gap by examining the social processes of road extensions and the
resulting spatial architecture of expanding road networks in a tropical forest
frontier in the Brazilian Amazon. The investigators ground the project in a
theoretical framework for understanding the socio-spatial processes of road
extensions and how the spatial logic of extensions leads to road networks with
variable spatial architectures. That framework draws on insights from
microeconomic theory, work on tenure institutions and property rights, and
political ecology to understand the process of road extensions by loggers,
landholders, and coalitions of interest groups who seek to amplify road networks
in the Amazon. On the basis of this framework, loggers and landholders are
expected to extend roads as they respond to different forces. As these agents
fulfill different objectives with different forms of capital, the resulting road
networks are expected to have distinct spatial architectures and to have
different impacts on forest fragmentation. Research methods include interviews
with loggers, landholders, and other participants in road extension efforts
along the Transamazon highway, with special attention given to the socio-spatial
processes leading to construction of individual road sections. The field
interviews will generate a sample of road extensions under different historical
and economic circumstances along the Transamazon. The investigators will combine
the interview data to digital maps covering the study area, thereby linking
extension processes to the spatial architecture of resulting road networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project should help fill a gap left between
the ecological and social science literatures on road building, human land use,
and forest fragmentation. In the context of new infrastructure projects in
Brazil and the rapid pace of environmental degradation in the Amazon, research
on the social processes and spatial architecture of roads is very timely. A
synthetic and more coherent understanding of the social, economic, and
ecological dimensions of human land use and ecological change in the Amazon will
be fostered through the inclusion of Brazilians in both U.S. and Brazilian
universities in this project. The investigators also expect to disseminate
teaching modules and visualization products concerning road extensions and
forest fragmentation for university instruction, scholarly presentations, and
meetings with stakeholder groups.&lt;br/&gt;