* 0243591
* Reduced Dimension Models for Hydrodynamical Systems: Experiment, Computation and Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Anette Hosoi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 93,923.00

This project is designed to develop reduced dimension models for hydrodynamical
systems and to foster undergraduate participation in mathematical research.
While the fundamental equations describing fluid motion, the Navier-Stokes
equations, are well-known, it is generally computationally expensive and
analytically infeasible to solve the full equations exactly. To better
understand these systems, it is necessary to turn to simplified or reduced
models resulting from systematic approximations of the full equations. The semi-
discrete approximation techniques which are utilized in this project focus
primarily on reducing the dimension of the full fluid equations by exploiting
symmetries or widely disparate lengthscales in specific systems. The resulting
predictions from the reduced models will be compared qualitatively and
quantitatively with experimental data.

Fluid dynamics arises in a multitude of biological, environmental and industrial
applications. This project is designed to develop models that describe basic
hydrodynamical phenomena such as hydraulic jumps that can arise in jet
impingement cooling systems and hydrodynamical systems with flexible boundaries.
The latter include spinning magnetic media such as disk drives, and biological
problems such as insect flight, blood flow in arteries and dynamics of the
syrinx in song birds. Undergraduate participation is an integral part of both
the experimental and mathematical aspects of the program. Mathematical models
will be tested in the new Fluid Dynamics Laboratory which will provide a hands-
on environment in which students learn to integrate mathematics with physical
phenomena. This unique approach encourages students to apply their mathematical
skills in consort with their physical intuition within the framework of
contemporary research.