* 0243011
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Development and Characterization of Conjugated Polymer Films Suitable for Photovoltaic Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Jayant Kumar, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0243011&lt;br/&gt;Kumar &lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-India
Cooperative Research: Development and Characterization of Conjugated Polymer
Films Suitable for Photovoltaic Devices. &lt;br/&gt;US PI Jayant Kumar,
University of Massachusetts Lowell and P.K. Bhatnagar, University of Delhi will
study conjugated polymeric thin film solar cells with particular emphasis on
material properties and material issues in device performance. Polymer-Polymer,
Polymer-Fullerene and Inorganic-Polymer solar cells will be developed using spin
casting, electrostatic deposition and vacuum evaporation techniques. The
objective is to obtain interpenetrating homogenous nanostructure to improve the
quality of the photovoltaic devices. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaboration brings
together the combined expertise of two active research groups in the area of
photovoltaics. The Indian group has expertise in design, fabrication and
characterization in organic semiconductor solar cells; the US group has
considerable experience in organic and conjugated polymer devices. The
interaction is expected to lead to synergistic advances in the development and
application in environmentally attractive solar energy solutions with potential
global benefits. This research has a strong educational component in so far as
it includes broad student participation. This activity is funded by the Indian
Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;