* 0243085
* The Role of EnvZ and OmpR in Osmoregulation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Linda Kenney, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth E. Hood
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

All cells need to communicate with their environment in order to survive.
Bacteria employ two-component regulatory systems to accomplish this objective.
The simplest systems consist of a sensor kinase, responsible for sensing an
environmental change and a response regulator, whose output is altered in
response to the signal (usually a change in gene expression). The system under
study consists of EnvZ, the sensor and OmpR, the response regulator. OmpR
regulates the genes encoding outer membrane proteins and their expression
fluctuates in response to changes in the growth medium. The EnvZ/OmpR system is
essential for many intracellular pathogens to replicate inside of host cells.
The long-term goals are to understand how OmpR regulates gene expression, what
the signal is that EnvZ senses and how this is transmitted across the membrane
and eventually to OmpR. Recent work revealed two distinct signaling states of
OmpR and proposed experiments will employ cysteine-substitutions and cross-
linkers to examine the orientation of OmpR while bound to its target DNA.
Previous measurements of EnvZ binding to OmpR have raised doubts regarding the
ability of EnvZ to regulate OmpR-P levels in vivo and emphasize the need for a
systematic examination of the biochemical properties and partial reactions of
EnvZ. The goal is to delineate the steps important for signaling in molecular
terms. Understanding how OmpR functions as a transcriptional activator and
repressor, as well as the cues that it responds to will aid in understanding
signal transduction in general as well as how OmpR regulates expression of
virulence genes in pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact-The goal is
to contribute to the training of the nation's scientists and inspire young
people to become interested in science. After visiting the lab, an eighth-grader
wrote: "I really enjoyed learning from you about E. coli. I had no idea that
studying E. coli could lead to curing different diseases." The lab participates
in various science outreach programs that mentor high school students. This
gives them an opportunity to participate in laboratory research and as a result,
some of them choose science as a career. One of these students, now an
undergraduate at Bowdoin College, is a co-author on her second scientific
publication. Through the American Society of Microbiology, Mexican students were
sponsored to work in the laboratory to learn new approaches, thus fostering
international collaborations. Presently, a collaboration with colleagues in
Mexico to establish a course sponsored by the ASM entitled "Application of
Bacterial Genetics and Genomics to the Study of Infectious Disease" is underway
for participants in Latin America. In addition to the impact gained by advancing
scientific knowledge in our field, the research impacts on the training of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;