* 0243558
* Developing Facilitators of Practice-based Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2009
* Nanette Seago, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 10/31/2009
* USD 1,496,633.00

The project is a three-year project to develop facilitator capacity and
leadership for scaling up the use of "Video Cases for Mathematics Professional
Development (VCMPC)" materials for professional development as well as adapting
the materials for use in pre-service courses. Using teacher written work, video
clips from VCMPD seminars and other PD sessions, an online forum for
facilitators and other materials as tools, the project staff will design a
Facilitator Institute to engage participants in experiences as learners and to
consider implementation issues. The first Facilitator Institute will be
conducted during the summer of 2003 with recruitment to emphasize districts with
large numbers of underrepresented students, district teams and Mathematics and
Science Partnership projects. Using feedback from the first FI, additional FIs
will be held the following two summers, with the development of a leader guide
and responsibility for leading such institutes shifted toward participants in
previous institutes to develop a larger leadership capacity culminating in
technical assistance to sites wishing to offer their own FIs. One member of the
project staff will establish a framework for using PD curriculum, beyond just
VCMPD, as a vehicle for developing the skills and sensibilities of secondary
teachers to take on roles of leadership in mathematics professional development.
This framework will be tested in Seattle and Philadelphia. All FI participants
will be subscribed to the online facilitator forum using the LessonLab web-
based, course builder software and portal and will participate in a lesson-study
approach to preparing, enacting and reflecting on the use of the VCMPD materials
with teachers. The project PIs will also provide technical assistance to MSPs
and districts that have had facilitators trained to use VCMPD. The materials
will also be customized to meet the needs of teacher preparation programs by
creating a supplemental guide and initially tested at the University of
Pittsburgh and the University of Washington for use in elementary and secondary
methods courses. The project will study teacher learning, teacher integration
into practice and facilitation, as well as identify areas for future research.
Horizon Research, Inc., will conduct formative evaluation focusing on the
quality of the DFPBM institutes and the development of the pre-service
supplement materials and summative evaluation on the quality and impacts of the
project. The project will impact at least 75 facilitators, 1000 teachers, and
pre-service teachers at four universities.