* 0243360
* Force-induced Conformational Transitions in Single Polysaccharide Molecules by AFM
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Piotr Marszalek, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2007
* USD 469,511.00

Force-induced conformational transitions in single polysaccharide molecules by
AFM&lt;br/&gt;Pyranose ring-based molecules are of extraordinary importance to
biological systems (e.g.&lt;br/&gt;glucose). Many biologically important
polysaccharides are composed of pyranose rings and they&lt;br/&gt;are placed
under tensile stress in a wide variety of cellular structures such as the cell
wall of&lt;br/&gt;plants or the extracellular matrix (ECM) in animal tissues.
Mechanical stress is thought to&lt;br/&gt;regulate assembly and physiological
properties of these complex elastic systems. The&lt;br/&gt;polysaccharides
respond to that stress by mechanical rearrangements of their components
but&lt;br/&gt;the underlying mechanism is not well understood. The simplest view
assumes that&lt;br/&gt;polysaccharides are entropic springs and the pyranose
ring structure is typically portrayed as&lt;br/&gt;inelastic and locked into a
stable conformation. The development of single molecule AFM&lt;br/&gt;techniques
allowed for critically examining these views. AFM instruments can
stretch&lt;br/&gt;mechanically single molecules and have superb length and force
resolution. Stretching of&lt;br/&gt;polysaccharides by AFM revealed that they do
not behave as simple entropic springs but that&lt;br/&gt;they display yielding
phenomena. The origin of these elastic deviations was pinpointed to
the&lt;br/&gt;pyranose ring that was found to undergo, upon stretching,
conformational transitions such as&lt;br/&gt;chair-boat or chair inversion.
These forced transitions change, in a step-wise fashion,
the&lt;br/&gt;separation of the glycosidic oxygen atoms, and therefore affect
the contour length of the&lt;br/&gt;polysaccharide chain and its elasticity.
Axial glycosidic bonds were found to drive those&lt;br/&gt;transitions by acting
as atomic levers. The long-term objective of this proposal is to
understand,&lt;br/&gt;at the atomic level, the mechanism of these force-induced
conformational transitions in&lt;br/&gt;polysaccharides. During the second grant
period single molecule AFM techniques will be&lt;br/&gt;combined with the tools
of computational chemistry to examine in detail force-
induced&lt;br/&gt;conformational transitions in the pyranose ring. The
mechanical properties of the ring and its&lt;br/&gt;mechanical conformational
transitions will be probed by pulling on the ring from
various&lt;br/&gt;directions and by different attachment points.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will determine the contribution of each type
of the monomer to the&lt;br/&gt;complex elasticity of a mixed chain and will be
valuable in interpreting the molecular elasticity of&lt;br/&gt;many native
polysaccharides. The experimental and theoretical findings of this proposal will
be&lt;br/&gt;integrated to develop an AFM-based methodology for identifying
individual polysaccharide&lt;br/&gt;molecules in solution from their unique
force-extension spectra. Such a methodology will be an&lt;br/&gt;important
addition to the arsenal of analytical tools for carbohydrate research.