* 0244169
* Fate and Transport of an Endocrine Disruptor in Soil-Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Jiri Simunek, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 04/30/2007
* USD 349,673.00

0244169 Casey The objectives of our proposed project are to identify the fate
and transport mechanisms of the endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC),
17b-estradiol, in soil-water systems. We chose 17b-estradiol because it is a
prototype for many EDCs, it has high potency, it has the potential of being
prevalent in the environment, and little is known about it. Our purpose for
doing this research extends beyond academic interests. We hope to share the
results from this research to advance the knowledge of exposure to EDCs in the
environment; to increase our ability to predict the mobility and persistence of
EDCs in the environment; to use the result to help develop methods to treat
polluted soil and water or to remediate contaminated areas; and to educate and
train the local community to promote awareness and interest in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;In the environment, EDCs interfere with endocrine systems by
disrupting normal function and/or interfering with development at all life
stages. Often, EDCs mimic the reproductive hormones (e.g., estrogens) produced
naturally by humans and wildlife, and can produce adverse effects at remarkably
low concentrations (&lt; 1 ng L -1 ). Numerous studies have suggested that EDCs
have caused widespread physiological and reproductive disorders in birds, fish,
shellfish, turtles, gastropods, and mammals. Additionally, EDCs have been
implicated in recent adverse trends in human reproduction (i.e., an increase in
female breast cancer and decrease in male sperm counts). A recent reconnaissance
of surface waters in the U.S. has detected EDCs in approximately 50% of the 139
streams tested. However, little or nothing is known about the fate of these
chemicals and how they move in soil before they contaminate our groundwater
and&lt;br/&gt;surface water resources.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the objectives of
this research, we formed a unique research team that
include&lt;br/&gt;individuals from biochemistry, soil science, mathematical
modeling, and biosystems engineering and environmental sciences. We developed
six goals: 1) identify fate and transport mechanisms of 17b-estradiol and
metabolites in soil; 2) identify transformation/degradation mechanisms of
17b-estradiol to form metabolites; 3) discover the influence of preferential
flow on the transport of estrogens; 4) develop, apply, and evaluate a predictive
computer model; 5) integrate this research with education; and 6) disseminate
this research to a broader community using presentations and publications. We
proposed experimental methods and strategies that would be used to accomplish
each of these goals. A series of soil batch, degradation, and column experiments
would be used to identify the sorption, transformations, and mobility of
17b-estradiol and its metabolites in a variety of soils with different particle
sizes, organic matter contents, and structures. This information would be used
to formulate a hypothesis of fate and transport and develop a computer model,
which would be used to analyze the data. The research would be integrated into
education by recruiting graduate students, by including this research in
university courses, and by developing a close working relationship with a local
K-12 teacher. Preliminary research done by the team of collaborators on this
proposal demonstrates the likelihood of success of this project. Furthermore,
the proposed project improves networks and partnerships of individuals from
diverse areas and backgrounds. The networking of different organizations will
also improve facilities by making unique analytical equipment available to other
institutions that do not have access to these instruments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;