* 0244464
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Topological Invariants and Matrix Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Cumrun Vafa, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 691,591.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0244464 &lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Cumrun Vafa and Shing-Tung Yau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory
has had a spectacular impact on many areas of&lt;br/&gt;modern mathematics,
including algebraic geometry, differential&lt;br/&gt;geometry, topology,
representation theory, analysis and&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial geometry. In
particular, string dualities suggest&lt;br/&gt;unexpected relations between
these diverse areas, many of which&lt;br/&gt;have been proven mathematically.
Recent advances in matrix model&lt;br/&gt;techniques suggest further relations
in mathematics. It can now&lt;br/&gt;be expected that number theory will become
related as well. It&lt;br/&gt;is proposed to investigate unifying themes in
duality symmetries&lt;br/&gt;in search of a deeper understanding of these
symmetries. It is&lt;br/&gt;also proposed to work on a range of mathematical
problems which&lt;br/&gt;these dualities inspire. Particular dualities include
mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry, originally elucidated in the context of Gromov-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;theory, and S-dualities, which are duality symmetries
of&lt;br/&gt;supersymmetric gauge theories and string theories. More
recently&lt;br/&gt;both have been related to Matrix integrals. In the case
of&lt;br/&gt;supersymmetric gauge theories this gives a relation
between&lt;br/&gt;perturbative Feynman diagrams on the one hand and
certain&lt;br/&gt;computations on moduli spaces of instantons on the other,
which&lt;br/&gt;the PIs propose to elucidate further. In the particular case
of&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten theory, connections have been found with
knot&lt;br/&gt;theory. This leads to a complete computation of
the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding invariants for non-compact toric Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;threefolds. The PIs propose to extend these ideas to the
compact&lt;br/&gt;case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will be exploiting existing
connections and forging new&lt;br/&gt;ones between physics and mathematics to
address a wide range of&lt;br/&gt;cutting-edge open problems in both fields.
These ideas are&lt;br/&gt;expected to create new links between diverse areas
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, as certain ideas in physics are equivalent
to&lt;br/&gt;important unsolved problems in mathematics. The
techniques&lt;br/&gt;introduced into mathematics are expected to have a
revolutionary&lt;br/&gt;influence on core areas of mathematics as related
techniques have&lt;br/&gt;in the past. This project occurs at the same time as
an ongoing&lt;br/&gt;effort by the string theory community and will help set
future&lt;br/&gt;directions in that field. String theory seeks to unify the
force&lt;br/&gt;of gravity with the electromagnetic and nuclear forces; this
is&lt;br/&gt;the problem that eluded Einstein. It is anticipated
that&lt;br/&gt;numerous diverse areas of mathematics will become related to
each&lt;br/&gt;other in unexpected ways and that this will have
profound&lt;br/&gt;consequences for mathematics and physics. Due to the broad
scope&lt;br/&gt;of the project, a multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional&lt;br/&gt;approach is indicated. The PIs will be bringing together
their&lt;br/&gt;networks of collaborators, postdocs, and graduate students
and&lt;br/&gt;directing an intense collaborative effort in these areas.
An&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary math/physics curriculum will be created
to&lt;br/&gt;train future leaders in areas at the interface of mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;physics. The PIs will expand their use of existing
internet&lt;br/&gt;videoconferencing technologies for collaborative purposes,
and&lt;br/&gt;will organize workshops on the topics of this project. This is
a&lt;br/&gt;joint award of the Division of Mathematical Sciences programs
in&lt;br/&gt;Geometric Analysis and Algebra, Number Theory, &amp;
Combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;