* 0244505
* Growth of Rosette Ice Crystals and Impact on Cirrus Development
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Pao-Kuan Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 03/31/2008
* USD 353,972.00

Clouds are the most important atmospheric constituent for determining the
earth's albedo. Many clouds are composed of ice crystals. The life of such
clouds and their effect on solar and terrestrial radiation depend on the sizes,
shapes, and concentration of the ice crystals, and their growth and evaporation.
This project is a theoretical study of certain microphysical properties of
rosette-shaped ice crystals, which are a common constituent of cirrus clouds. In
particular, the work focuses on developing an accurate formulation of the growth
and evaporation of rosette crystals by the condensation-diffusion process. The
rate of growth of an ice crystal in a given environment is determined by the
size and shape of the crystal and the excess vapor pressure over the equilibrium
value for ice. The conventional theory that describes these effects makes use of
an analogy between the equation for the diffusion of water vapor in air and the
equation in electrostatics that describes the distribution of potential around a
charged conductor. Using this analogy, the shape is described in terms of the
electrical capacitance of a conductor having the same shape as the ice crystal.
This provides a great simplification in the theory of crystal growth. A single
parameter, the capacitance, is used instead of solving for the rate of vapor
deposition point-by-point over the complex surface of the crystal. Values of the
capacitance are known for simple crystal forms such as plates, columns, and
needles, but not for rosettes, which are the predominant form at temperatures
colder than about -40C. In the first part of this study, mathematical
approximations will be formulated to describe the shapes of rosette crystals of
various thickness, lengths, and numbers of branches. For those that closely
approximate the crystals that have been observed in cirrus clouds, the
capacitance will be computed using finite element numerical techniques. In the
second part of the study, the capacitance values will be employed in an existing
numerical model of cirrus clouds to establish accurate parameterizations of
rosette growth rates. Simulated clouds including crystals of various forms will
then be employed with existing radiative transfer codes to determine the effects
of cirrus clouds through their life cycles on solar and terrestrial radiation.
Sensitivity studies will produce useful information for the broad scientific
community to access the influence of cirrus clouds on the global climate
process.