* 0244140
* REU: SURFing the Chemical Science and Technology Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Jeanice Thomas, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
* Interagency Agreement
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2006
* USD 123,450.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CHE-0244140 Date:
1-15-2003&lt;br/&gt;Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology
PI: Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the Chemical Science and Technology Laboratory of
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) for the summers of
2003-2005. The program director is Albert Lee assisted by co-PI, Jeanice Thomas.
Five technical divisions at NIST will be involved: Biotechnology, Process
Measurements, Surface and Microanalysis Science, Physical and Chemical
Properties, Process Measurements. Nine staff scientists from these divisions
will supervise the students. Five students will be supported during the summer
for 10-12 weeks of research. Research projects will focus on various areas in
chemistry, chemical engineering, and biotechnology such as synthesis, analysis,
spectroscopy, bioinformatics, chromatography, and microscopy. The program will
have weekly seminar meetings. A symposium and student presentation of their work
will conclude the program. This site is supported by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;