* 0244515
* Banach Spaces and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Nigel Kalton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2007
* USD 285,245.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Kalton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the
aim is to study a number of problems&lt;br/&gt;related to Banach space theory
and its applications. Part&lt;br/&gt;of the project deals with the theory of
extensions of one&lt;br/&gt;Banach space by another. For example it is planned
to study&lt;br/&gt;the problem of classifying those Banach spaces such
that&lt;br/&gt;every minimal extension is trivial. This problem can
be&lt;br/&gt;reformulated as a problem in approximation theory. It
is&lt;br/&gt;also planned to study applications to problems in
the&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear theory of Banach spaces, related to problems
of&lt;br/&gt;existence of uniform homeomorphisms between two
Banach&lt;br/&gt;spaces or between their unit balls. In a somewhat
different&lt;br/&gt;direction the proposer plans to continue his
ongoing&lt;br/&gt;research on Rademacher-bounded families of operators
with&lt;br/&gt;applications to sectorial operators and
semigroups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of extensions can be considered in
the following&lt;br/&gt;terms. Suppose we are given a centrally symmetric solid
in&lt;br/&gt;three or more dimensions and we are allowed only to
compute&lt;br/&gt;its cross-section by a slice in some directions and
the&lt;br/&gt;shadow cast by the body in the perpendicular
directions.&lt;br/&gt;This gives us some information about the solid, but does
not&lt;br/&gt;permit complete reconstruction. The idea of
studying&lt;br/&gt;extensions is to obtain more complete information about
the&lt;br/&gt;body under certain additional conditions. Many questions
of&lt;br/&gt;importance in mathematical analysis and
applications,&lt;br/&gt;although not formally expressed in this way, can
be&lt;br/&gt;visualized in terms of extensions. Sectorial operators
are&lt;br/&gt;of importance in the basic theory of partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations of evolution type; such equations are
very&lt;br/&gt;important in physical applications. Typically a
sectorial&lt;br/&gt;operator is a differential operator acting on some
suitable&lt;br/&gt;space of functions. By understanding the properties
of&lt;br/&gt;sectorial operators and the semigroups they generate
one&lt;br/&gt;gains a better understanding of the behavior of solutions
of&lt;br/&gt;certain partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;