* 0244704
* Advanced Analysis of Electromagnetic Waves for Intrinsic Soil Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Vincent Drnevich, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2006
* USD 201,377.00

This project will apply time domain and frequency domain analyses of Time Domain
Reflectometry (TDR) signals to estimate intrinsic soil properties such as water
content, density, conductivity, specific surface area, and macroscopic soil.

Time Domain Reflectometry is a technology widely accepted as fast, safe, and
economical for geotechnical, geo-environmental, and agricultural engineering
applications. In conventional TDR analysis, volumetric water content is
determined from the travel time of the electromagnetic waves in a soil probe,
and conductivity is obtained from the amplitude of the signal at long times.
However, much more information about the intrinsic properties of the soil is
contained in the measured TDR waveforms, which is generally not utilized. The
additional information can be obtained by using inversion theory in the
frequency-domain. To achieve this goal, accurate models are needed to describe
the electromagnetic wave propagation in the TDR system and to relate soil
intrinsic properties to the soil electromagnetic properties. The methodology
makes use of full waveform analysis of the TDR system combined with a volumetric
dielectric mixing model for the soil properties. This research involves refining
and validating both forward modeling and inverse theory. The four major tasks of
this research include: 1) Advance the dielectric mixing models and forward
models for electromagnetic wave propagation in soil; 2) Extend the inversion
theory using the refined dielectric models and perform resolution and covariance
analysis; 3) Validate the forward and inverse solutions; and 4) Develop a robust
methodology for practical use.

The overall goal is for the TDR technique to become a more powerful and yet
practical tool for identifying soils and determining soil intrinsic properties.
Results of this research also will make TDR a more valuable tool for studying
fundamental soil behavior including compositional characteristics, volumetric
fraction of soil phases, soil-water interaction, and soil microstructure. The
research will enhance the value of electromagnetic measurements not only in
geotechnical and geo-environmental engineering, but also in agronomy, soil
science, and agricultural engineering.

Broader impacts of this research will be achieved by the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students, continuation and expansion of participation
of testing partners from academia, industry, and government, development of ASTM
Standards for the newly developed technologies, publication in the open
literature, presentations at technical society meetings, and short courses to
introduce these new technologies.