* 0244257
* FRG:   Collaborative Research:    Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations of Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems in Hyperbolic Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Yuxi Zheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 101,800.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FRG: Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler
Equations&lt;br/&gt; of Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems&lt;br/&gt;
in Hyperbolic Conservation Laws&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, fluid and
solid mechanics study the motion of&lt;br/&gt;incompressible and compressible
materials, with or without internal&lt;br/&gt;dissipation. For gases and solids
with internal dissipation as a&lt;br/&gt;secondary effect, the gross wave
dynamics is governed by inviscid,&lt;br/&gt;thermal diffusionless, dynamics.
Within these categories, compressible&lt;br/&gt;motion for solids corresponds to
the study of elastic waves and their&lt;br/&gt;propagation; compressible motion
for fluids is usually associated with&lt;br/&gt;inviscid gas dynamics.
Furthermore both compressible solids and &lt;br/&gt;fluids exhibit shock waves
and hence we must search for discontinous &lt;br/&gt;solutions to the underlying
equations of motion.&lt;br/&gt;Incompressible motion on the other hand
concerns&lt;br/&gt;itself with the motion of denser fluids where the
idealization of&lt;br/&gt;incompressibility is useful, e.g. water or oil, as
well as the motion of&lt;br/&gt;certain solids like rubber. While there are
still many important&lt;br/&gt;mathematical issues to be resolved for
incompressible fluids, for example,&lt;br/&gt;the well-posedness of the Navier-
Stokes equations in three space&lt;br/&gt;dimensions, the mathematical study of
compressible&lt;br/&gt;solids (as represented by the equations of nonlinear
elastodynamics) and&lt;br/&gt;fluids (as represented by the Euler equations of
inviscid flows)&lt;br/&gt;in two and three space dimensions is even less
developed.&lt;br/&gt;This provides the motivation to the proposers to
collaborate in a&lt;br/&gt;three year effort to advance the mathematical
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;multi-dimensional equations of inviscid
compressible fluid dynamics&lt;br/&gt;and related problems in
elastodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;The core of our plan is to arrange a sustained
interaction between and&lt;br/&gt;around the members of the group, who
will&lt;br/&gt;(1) collaborate scientifically, focusing on the advancement of
the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of multi-dimensional compressible flows by developing
new&lt;br/&gt;theoretical techniques and by using and designing effective,
robust and&lt;br/&gt;reliable numerical methods;&lt;br/&gt;(2) work together
over the next several years to create the environment&lt;br/&gt;and manpower
necessary for the research on multi-dimensional compressible&lt;br/&gt;Euler
equations and related problems to flourish; and in the meantime,&lt;br/&gt;(3)
share the responsibility of training graduate students
and&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted
to a mathematical study of the Euler equations&lt;br/&gt;governing the motion of
an inviscid compressible fluid and related&lt;br/&gt;problems. Compressible
fluids occur all around us in nature, e.g. gases&lt;br/&gt;and plasmas, whose
study is crucial to understanding aerodyanmics,&lt;br/&gt;atmospheric sciences,
thermodynamics, etc.&lt;br/&gt;While the one-dimensional fluid flows are rather
well understood, the&lt;br/&gt;general theory for multi-dimensional flows is
comparatively mathematically&lt;br/&gt;underdeveloped. The proposers will
collaborate in a three&lt;br/&gt;year effort to advance the mathematical
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;multi-dimensional equations of inviscid
compressible fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Success in this project will advance
knowledge of this fundamental area of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and mechanics and
will introduce a new generation of&lt;br/&gt;researchers to the outstanding
problems in the field.&lt;br/&gt;