* 0244819
* Collaborative Research:      Heavy-Quark Reaction Cross Sections at RHIC:     Studies of Quark-Gluon Plasma Signatures
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Horace Crater, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2006
* USD 137,000.00

We propose a program of calculations of heavy-quark hadron cross sections which
are&lt;br/&gt;of great importance in the identification of a quark gluon plasma
(QGP) in heavy-ion colli-&lt;br/&gt;sions. This program will involve the
calculation of reaction cross sections of various hadrons&lt;br/&gt;which have
been proposed as QGP diagnostic probes, such as heavy quarkonia,
hyper-&lt;br/&gt;ons, and antihyperons. Most of these cross sections are not
accessible experimentally at&lt;br/&gt;present, and as such can only be
estimated using theoretical models. The central compo-&lt;br/&gt;nent of this
proposal consists of calculations of these cross sections using the well-
established&lt;br/&gt;constituent-interchange model, assuming standard quark
model forces and a scattering for-&lt;br/&gt;malism developed previously by two
of us (Barnes and Swanson). This approach is known to&lt;br/&gt;give reasonable
agreement with existing experimental low-energy scattering data for a
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of analogous hadron-hadron scattering processes. Additional
research topics which&lt;br/&gt;will be addressed are the generalization of the
approach to multichannel and relativistic&lt;br/&gt;regimes, the incorporation
of qq pair production amplitudes, a comparison of microscopic&lt;br/&gt;and
effective Lagrangian descriptions, and the development of a T-matrix formalism
that will&lt;br/&gt;allow direct application to bound state problems. The cross
sections obtained here should&lt;br/&gt;be useful as estimates of the various
hadronic contributions to the proposed experimental&lt;br/&gt;signals for the
quark-gluon plasma. These hadronic contributions must be understood
and&lt;br/&gt;incorporated in simulations of heavy-ion collisions before QGP
formation can be established&lt;br/&gt;through various signatures; for this
reason a third component of our program is a close&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with
researchers involved in Monte-Carlo simulations of RHIC
experiments,&lt;br/&gt;so that the experimental implications of these hadronic
contributions for RHIC can be as-&lt;br/&gt;sesssed. This will be facilitated by
the presence of a large RHIC experimental group from&lt;br/&gt;PHENIX at ORNL
and University of Tennessee.