* 0244100
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Moduli Spaces of Riemann Surfaces and String Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Dennis Sullivan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 356,125.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0244550 and
DMS-0244100&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Ralph L. Cohen, Jun Li,
&lt;br/&gt;and Dennis P. Sullivan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
the topology of&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces, their applications
to string&lt;br/&gt;topology, and certain mathematical questions arising from
string&lt;br/&gt;theory in physics. It is a collaborative project
involving&lt;br/&gt;algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, and Riemann
surface&lt;br/&gt;theory. It will pursue significant new research
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;arising from three recent important developments:
The&lt;br/&gt;Madsen-Weiss proof of the famous conjecture of Mumford on
the&lt;br/&gt;stable cohomology of moduli spaces, the discovery by Chas
and&lt;br/&gt;Sullivan of the new structures on the topology of loop spaces
of&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, and recent advances in open string theory in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of this project is to understand
the&lt;br/&gt;implications of Madsen and Weiss' theorem on the Chas-
Sullivan&lt;br/&gt;"String topology" theory. Another aspect of this project is
to&lt;br/&gt;study the relationship between string topology and Gromov-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;theory in algebraic geometry. A longer term goal of this
project&lt;br/&gt;is to investigate how this theory can help to give a
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;framework for analyzing certain specific questions
motivated by&lt;br/&gt;open string theory in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric questions have long been motivated by
the attempt to&lt;br/&gt;understand physical theories. Einstein's general theory
of&lt;br/&gt;relativity, and the attempt to place it in firm
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;foundations, motivated much of the development of
differential&lt;br/&gt;geometry throughout the 20th century. During the last 20
years&lt;br/&gt;of the century generalizations of the famous Maxwell's
equations&lt;br/&gt;for electricity and magnetism led to new techniques for
studying&lt;br/&gt;geometry and topology in dimensions three and four.
String&lt;br/&gt;theory is a relatively new quantum theory of gravity. Placing
it&lt;br/&gt;in firm mathematical foundations is quite challenging, and
has&lt;br/&gt;motivated quite a bit of new research in geometry. For
example&lt;br/&gt;the techniques of string theory predicted the answers to
some&lt;br/&gt;classical questions in enumerative geometry, many of which
were&lt;br/&gt;later verified using a new theory in algebraic geometry due
to&lt;br/&gt;the mathematician M. Gromov, and the physicist, E.
Witten.&lt;br/&gt;String theory involves understanding how vibrating strings
evolve&lt;br/&gt;through time. As a string evolves, it maps out a two
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;"world sheet". So the mathematics behind string theory
must&lt;br/&gt;study spaces of "strings", or curves and loops, as well as
spaces&lt;br/&gt;of two dimensional surfaces in an ambient space. This
project&lt;br/&gt;has been motivated by recent advances in understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;topological structure of spaces of strings, ("string
topology"),&lt;br/&gt;as well as a separate breakthrough in understanding the
space of&lt;br/&gt;two dimensional surfaces. The goal of this project is
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the implications of this breakthrough on
"string&lt;br/&gt;topology", understand how this topological theory is related
to&lt;br/&gt;the geometric theory of Gromov and Witten, and to apply
these&lt;br/&gt;theories to certain specific questions arising from string
theory&lt;br/&gt;in physics. This award supports a Focused Research Group
based&lt;br/&gt;at Stanford University and SUNY at Stony Brook.&lt;br/&gt;