* 0244142
* REU Site: Increasing Science Education through the Study of Scientific Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Charles Abramson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 03/31/2007
* USD 320,627.00

This award provides funds for an REU Site in Psychology at Oklahoma State
University. The purpose of the Site is to provide twelve undergraduate research
scholars with an intensive eight week summer research experience in experimental
psychology. In this unique experience they will learn all aspects of the
research process, including formulating hypotheses, integrating and analyzing
scientific literature, study design, data collection, data analysis, and oral
and written presentation of findings. The scholars will work on research teams
in areas such as infant memory, children's social development, adult cognition,
and language processing. It is expected that scholars will be able to conduct
their own independent projects by the summer's end. Contact will be maintained
with all scholars to assure they are receiving adequate support to pursue such
projects at their home institutions. A special feature of this program is that
the participants will attend several weekly seminars focused on statistics and
research methods and attend workshops on how to apply to graduate school, how to
write successful resumes, and how to study for the GRE. Additionally, students
will be paired with a graduate student mentor to enhance their summer
experience. Further, students will attend weekly brown bag research seminars in
which the faculty mentors will present their programs of research. The goal is
to have students who are better consumers and supporters of science throughout
their lives, enhancing the appreciation of science in the lives of those around
them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to the Foundation's
continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
active undergraduate research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;