* 0244409
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Prairie View A&M University
* NONE,NONE
* 08/02/2002,08/31/2006
* Laura Carson, Prairie View A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,663.00



Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU), a historically black university (HBU), will
establish a year round undergraduate research program which will provide
research experience for minority undergraduates in a positive friendly
environment. Four students will participate during the academic year while eight
(four preferably from community colleges) will participate during the ten week
summer program. These students will work with pre-selected mentors on research
projects in electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, biochemistry,
physics and agriculture focused on "Material Science for Space and Aerospace
Applications." The academic research program will start Fall semester while the
summer program will start around the start of June. Orientation will begin on
day 1 of the academic year, and revisited at the beginning of the summer
program. Faculty mentors will meet with their students to focus on the progress
and/or problems in research projects. Seminars will be held weekly throughout
the program. Speakers will be invited from research-intensive universities
(Baylor College of Medicine, University of Texas Houston Medical School and MD
Anderson Cancer Center), industry and government. Representation of minority and
female presenters will be given special attention. A seminar series will give
the students an appreciation of the diversity of available research fields. A
panel of minority and women scientists from academia, industry and government
will discuss the job opportunities that are available to persons who are
involved in scientific research. A second panel discussion will involve former
students of PVAMU who have entered Ph.D. programs at Research Intensive
Universities (RIUs). There will be three workshops throughout the academic year
and summer which will be half-day sessions with open discussion and will include
computer tools and technology, scientific writing, and professional career
development. Field trips will be arranged to Research Intensive Universities
(RIU), agencies and companies such as the Texas Medical Center (TMC) and NASA
Johnson Space Center throughout the program. At the end of the ten-week summer
session, students will present their research in oral and written form. E-mail:
Laura_Carson@pvamu.edu or Gloria_Regisford@pvamu.edu for information and an
application.



