* 0244286
* Collaborative Research:  Adaptive Search in Global Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Zelda Zabinsky, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 09/30/2007
* USD 168,372.00

Global optimization is a rapidly growing field, due to the increased
availability of computing power and improvement in methods. A synergy is
occurring where the emerging technology is enabling applications to blossom, and
the experience with new applications is inspiring better methods. We are
developing the capability, not only to describe complex systems, but also to
prescribe solutions. The primary objective of this research is to develop theory
and algorithms for global optimization problems that may include both discrete
and continuous variables, including ill-structured black-box objective functions
for which only an estimate (such as a stochastic simulation) is available. The
team's approach is based on theoretical insights drawn from the average linear
complexity of Pure Adaptive Search, developed by the authors, for global
optimization. Adaptive Search attempts to realize this polynomial efficiency by
constructing sampling distributions that yield a high likelihood of sampling
improving points. A practical implementation hinges on developing an efficient
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampler. A key research step is to develop
discrete Hit-and-Run as a general MCMC sampler for a discrete domain and embed
it within a generalized Adaptive Search framework to support a hoped for
polynomial time, on average, algorithm. An attempt to reap the promise offered
by the theoretical studies will be applied to practical
arenas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many global optimization heuristic methods,
including simulated annealing and genetic algorithms, would be strengthened by
rigorous approaches to determining better algorithmic parameters and stopping
criteria. The research will develop the theory and methodology to address these
issues for a general global optimization problem. The intellectual merit of this
work primarily resides in enriching the field of global optimization, but also
may shape, as it has in the past, more fundamental work in MCMC samplers. The
broad impact of this work lies in the potential of the algorithms developed to
optimize complex engineering systems. The prevalence of powerful computer
technology is providing an opportunity to accurately model complex systems with
software simulations, replacing traditional closed-form mathematical equations.
The resulting models require robust optimization techniques that presume little
known structure for the underlying models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;