* 0244570
* Electronic Transport in Thin Film Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Hanno Weitering, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The primary objective of the proposed research is the investigation of quantum
electrical transport in thin film nanostructures on silicon substrates. The
project focuses on atomic-wire arrays and on atomically smooth metal films.
Under certain growth conditions, individual metal atoms "self-assemble" into
macroscopic domains of parallel "atom wires" with equal but tunable spacing
between the wires. These arrays are ideal for studying the fundamentals of
quantum electrical transport a function of system dimensionality and Fermi
surface topology using nanoscopic probes such as a four-tip Scanning Tunneling
Microscope, as well as macroscopic measurement probes such as electron- or laser
beams. Atomically smooth metal films will be synthesized via a novel self-
assembly mechanism that is driven by the quantum-size effect, which allows for a
systematic investigation of the conductivity in relation to quantum
interference, quantum confinement, and classical size effects. These studies
will allow researchers to extract the key characteristics that are relevant for
the operation of future nanoscale devices. The proposed science and supporting
infrastructure at The University of Tennessee and nearby Center for Nanophase
Materials Sciences provide an excellent setting for the education and training
of internationally competitive students and postdocs. These young people will
take their place in the highly skilled workforce that will continue to drive
innovation and prosperity in today's high-tech society.

Quantum electrical transport is at the heart of nanoscience. The idea of
assembling single atoms or molecules and small chemical groups into much faster
and powerful electronic devices no longer belongs to the realm of science
fiction. Recently, researchers wired up their first molecular-scale electronic
circuits, an achievement Science Magazine selected as the "Breakthrough of
2001". Researchers now face the daunting task of taking this new technology from
basic electronic components to complex integrated circuits that can rival
silicon's low cost performance and reliability. Reaching that level of
complexity requires several scientific breakthroughs besides the obviously
needed revolution in chip fabrication and design. In this project, researchers
will align individual metal atoms into "atomic wires" or arrange the atoms into
a perfectly smooth film that is only a few atom layers thick. These
nanostructured materials are ideal model systems that will allow researchers to
explore the fundamentals and key characteristics of electrical currents in
nanophase materials. Quantum transport marries the most fundamental laws of
nature, namely quantum mechanics, with applied electrical engineering and
emerging materials technologies. The proposed science and supporting
infrastructure at The University of Tennessee and the nearby Center for
Nanophase Materials Sciences of the Department of Energy provide an excellent
setting for the education and training of internationally competitive students
and postdocs using specialized national research facilities. These young people
will take their place in the highly skilled workforce that will continue to
drive innovation and prosperity in today's high-tech society.