* 0244435
* Signature Sequencing for Quantitative Expression Analysis and Gene Discovery
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Blake Meyers, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* TEST user
* 09/30/2004
* USD 638,266.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is
to demonstrate the utility of a novel technology called 'massively parallel
signature sequencing' (MPSS) for the quantification of gene expression in
plants. MPSS is a rapid method to produce 17 base pair sequence tags that are
precisely representative of the population of messenger RNAs in a given tissue.
Approximately eight libraries from diverse plant tissues will be sequenced by
MPSS, generating ~500,000 tags per library, for a total of four million tags.
The 17-bp tag is derived from the 3' end of a messenger RNA or 'transcript' and
provides a virtually unique, experimentally derived identifier for each
expressed gene. The number of identical tags in a library for a given gene is
precisely indicative of the level of expression of that gene. The MPSS sequence
data provide quantitative or 'digital' expression information for the entire
'transcriptome', avoiding problems inherent in microarray analysis such as
cross-hybridization, pre-selection of probe sequences and low signal.
Statistical methods for the analysis of quantitative expression data have
demonstrated that these data are robust. In comparison to the limited sets of
data derived by the EST and SAGE techniques, these data will be the first large-
scale quantitative expression data for plants in the public domain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MPSS sequence data is most informative when the tags
are compared to either a completely sequenced genome or to large collections of
ESTs. To take full advantage of the MPSS technology, the initial libraries will
be generated from the model plant Arabidopsis (ecotype Columbia) and the MPSS
tags compared to the complete genomic sequence. This comparison identifies the
individual genes from which the tags are derived. These data then will be used
to: quantify and experimentally confirm gene expression and mRNA transcripts in
diverse wildtype and treated plant tissues (including shoot, root,
inflorescence, silique, anthers, callus); estimate the frequency of alternative
polyadenylation in plant tissues; study co-regulated gene pairs and estimate
promoter strength and tissue specificity; assess global transcriptional changes
in the disease resistance response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sequence tags
generated through this project will be accessible via the web, and the interface
will provide tools for data analyses. These data also will be placed in public
expression databases (such as those at the National Center for Biotechnology
Information, 'NCBI') for comparison to microarray data, facilitating the
expression analysis of either any single gene or all genes present in these
libraries. These experiments constitute a proof of concept for massively
parallel signature sequencing in plants for the global analysis of gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
deliverables for this project are available electronically at:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;a
href=http://www.dbi.udel.edu/mpss&gt; http://www.dbi.udel.edu/mpss &lt;/a&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;