* 0244093
* Transport and Separation of DNA Molecules at Liquid-Solid Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Vladimir Samuilov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 03/31/2004
* USD 50,001.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: SGER: Transport and
Separation of DNA Molecules at Liquid-Solid Interfaces&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: CTS-0244093&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Vladimir
Samuilov&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal
is to develop methodology for the separation of DNA by size on nanopatterned
surfaces. The separation mechanism is based on nanoscale dimension variations of
an attractive potential within the plane of the surface. This will be achieved
by using controllable chemical patterning techniques to create a surface with a
variable surface energy. Nanoscale patterns on surfaces will be produced by
using the process of self-assembly of block copolymers to form etching masks
that will enable the production of patterned structures with feature sizes of 10
- 100 nm on silicon substrates. The micelles are versatile in that they can act
simultaneously as pattern, mask, and resist. Preliminary work showed that this
method of electrophoretic separation of DNA molecules has the potential to
significantly increase the resolution of molecules by size. The current
hypothesis is that DNA surface contact friction is the primary factor
determining mobility. Measurements of diffusion constants and mobility will be
performed as a function of molecular weight and ionic strength. Since the
proposed method of electrophoresis on a surface does not require any topological
confinement of DNA molecules in the direction of separation, there are no
limitations on the size of the molecules to be separated. In terms of the
broader impacts, this work could lead to more efficient methods for separating
DNA by size, which is at the heart of genome mapping and sequencing. Accurate
genome mapping could lead to improved understanding and diagnosis of
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;