* 0244998
* Parity Violating Electron Scattering at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Ani Aprahamian
* 12/31/2007
* USD 670,023.00

The members of Louisiana Tech University's Center for Applied Physics
&lt;br/&gt;Studies (CAPS) are deeply involved in the current and future parity
&lt;br/&gt;violation experiments at Jefferson lab. The Group's primary
experimental &lt;br/&gt;involvements are the study of the substructure of the
proton as members &lt;br/&gt;of the G0 experiment, and testing the basic theory
of&lt;br/&gt;modern physics, the Standard Model, as members of the newly
approved &lt;br/&gt;Qweak experiment. They are also developing their own
scientific program &lt;br/&gt;as spokespersons for the E01-115 experiment which
will measure the&lt;br/&gt;parity violating asymmetry in the reaction when the
proton is excited &lt;br/&gt;into its first resonant state, the Delta. The
experiment will be &lt;br/&gt;performed using the G0 apparatus in its backward
angle mode, and will &lt;br/&gt;probe an important component of the proton's
structure, a quantity known &lt;br/&gt;as the axial vector transition form
factor, inaccessible in other &lt;br/&gt;reactions. This form factor measures
the contribution of the proton's &lt;br/&gt;intrinsic spin to the dynamics of
this transition. To facilitate the &lt;br/&gt;backward angle measurements for
both the G0 elastic and N --&gt; Delta &lt;br/&gt;experiments, Louisiana Tech is
working on the design, installation, and &lt;br/&gt;testing of the Cryostat Exit
Detectors (CED's) which also includes&lt;br/&gt;development of the associated
signal processing electronics. &lt;br/&gt;Commissioning for the G0 forward angle
measurements has been completed, &lt;br/&gt;and the next set of measurements is
scheduled to be run in October of&lt;br/&gt;2003. The backward angle
measurements are expected to start early in 2005.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Group
has taken on a crucial role in the Qweak experiment which will &lt;br/&gt;search
for physics beyond the standard model by measuring the proton's &lt;br/&gt;weak
charge. Since the inception of the Qweak experiment,&lt;br/&gt;the CAPS Group
has been working on the design of major components and &lt;br/&gt;attributes of
the spectrometer and detector systems. The Group's &lt;br/&gt;responsibilities
for the upcoming experiment will be the design,&lt;br/&gt;testing, construction,
and installation of a component of the forward &lt;br/&gt;tracking system which
will play a crucial role in measuring the &lt;br/&gt;kinematics and background
of the experiment. These new detectors will be &lt;br/&gt;based on the
innovative technology of Gas Electron Multiplication (GEMs) &lt;br/&gt;which
have been recently developed at CERN. To continue Louisiana Tech's
&lt;br/&gt;program of parity violation measurements, the group submitted an
Letter &lt;br/&gt;of Intent to the JLab PAC to extend its own program of
measurements of &lt;br/&gt;the the parity violating asymmetry in the N --&gt;
Delta transition at &lt;br/&gt;forward angles. This experiment will measure a
fundamental coupling &lt;br/&gt;constant of dynamic theories of the weak
interaction of hadrons, and &lt;br/&gt;will also test symmetry breaking
mechanisms which take place at higher
&lt;br/&gt;energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of CAPS in modern
experiments is not unnoticed in North &lt;br/&gt;Louisiana. It is motivation and
opportunity for students at all levels &lt;br/&gt;in this region to participate
in state of the art science. It also &lt;br/&gt;provides an opportunity to
involve local high school teachers in &lt;br/&gt;forefront science and, through
their involvement, spread modern science &lt;br/&gt;and technology even further
into the local student population. This &lt;br/&gt;component of the CAPS program
is considered as important as their &lt;br/&gt;scientific
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;