* 0244676
* Collaborative Research:     Fundamental Studies of Vapor-Liquid Interfaces with Phase Change in Microdevices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Vladimir Ajaev, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 130,768.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0245396,
CTS-0244676&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR INITIATED
(COLLABORATIVE)&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: GEORGE M. HOMSY, VLADIMIR S.
AJAEV&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U.C. SANTA BARBARA, SOUTHERN METHODIST
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: FUNDAMENTAL STUDIES OF
VAPOR-LIQUID INTERFACES WITH PHASE CHANGE IN MICRODEVICES&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
addresses fundamental issues of fluid mechanics and heat transport in
evaporation and condensation at vapor-liquid interfaces in constrained
geometries. Combined theoretical/computational and experimental studies of a
range of phenomena are proposed which will allow insight into the underlying
mechanisms common to many different applications such as micro heat pipes,
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and optical switches. This is a
collaboration between engineering scientists at UCSB and applied mathematicians
at SMU. Two closely related sets of problems are addressed. The first involves
studies of three-dimensional steady interfacial configurations in complex
geometries in which evaporation is balanced by condensation in the colder
regions. Challenges here include solving nonlinear free-boundary problems where
fluid flow and heat transfer are coupled together. Experiments in which
simultaneous measurements of heat flux, temperature distributions, and vapor
bubble configurations will be conducted. The second set of problems to be
addressed involves unsteady motion of constrained interfaces. The proposed
research has broad technological impact. This includes improvements in the
design of heat pipes for effective cooling of electronic components, and
underpinnings for the development of a new type of an optical switching device,
which can lead to a dramatic increase in the speed of communication networks.
The project will promote learning through research and interdisciplinary
scientific collaborations. Graduate students will gain valuable research
experience and expand their knowledge beyond their field of study by interacting
with both PIs and with students of different backgrounds and perspectives.
Outreach is provided to high school students during the summer months as part of
the organized UCSB program for prospective engineering and science majors. To
further increase the educational value of the project, the results will be
incorporated into an educational module as part of Volume 2 of Multimedia Fluid
Mechanics, educational software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
the Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulics, Interfacial Transport and Thermodynamics and
Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Programs in the Division of Chemical
and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;