* 0244101
* REU Site: Ecology in Context: Research Strategies and Applications for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Stuart Findlay, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 246,991.00

The Institute of Ecosystem Studies (IES) will provide undergraduate summer
research opportunities through our "Ecology in Context" program through funding
from the National Science Foundation (NSF). Each summer NSF provides support for
10 students who will carry out cutting-edge investigations of their own design,
working closely with a mentor scientist. The program emphasizes the community
nature of the scientific enterprise. As participants design and complete their
independent research projects they consult with other scientists, present their
plans for critique, and then speak in our annual Undergraduate Research
Symposium and write a paper for a peer-reviewed IES Occasional Publication. The
program provides students many opportunities to reflect upon and think about the
process of science and its place in the world. Seminars and informal meetings
provide for training in many facets of the research process. Through a case
study of a regional environmental issue, a career forum, and a day spent
teaching high school students from a nearby city, students explore the social,
political, intellectual and personal dimensions of being an ecologist. The
twelve-week program provides undergraduate students $3,600 stipend and free
housing in an Institute dormitory. Some assistance is also provided for travel
to and from the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information and to apply
(applications must be postmarked by 15 February 2003):&lt;br/&gt;Look at our
website at: www.ecostudies.org/education/reu/reu2.html&lt;br/&gt;Or contact
Heather Dahl (Undergraduate Research Program) at (845) 677-9150 or
dahlh@ecostudies.org. &lt;br/&gt;