* 0244188
* Reconstructing Rivers:  Interpreting the Cretaceous Paleo-environment of the Cedar Mountain Formation, Utah - REU Site
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Julie Maxson, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2006
* USD 237,917.00

This eight-week project, to be hosted by Gustavus Adolphus College, will provide
participants with an exceptional opportunity to contribute to timely research in
Sedimentary Geology. Eight undergraduate students, two student Teaching
Assistants, and the PI will investigate, through field research, the sedimentary
history of fossil-bearing Lower Cretaceous strata of the Cedar Mountain
Formation (CMF) in northeast and east central Utah. In order to gain a better
understanding of the processes of distribution and deposition of the CMF,
participants will design and develop experiments in fluvial sedimentology at the
University of Minnesota's Saint Anthony Falls
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent discoveries of dinosaur fossil
localities in the CMF have led paleontologists to recognize that large
sauropods, previously thought to be extinct in North America in mid-Cretaceious
time, were still extant. Currently, five academic and governmental research
groups have fossil excavations and geochronologic study underway. Yet
sedimentologic analysis, especially facies interpretation to characterize
dinosaur habitats and fluvial processes, is relatively undeveloped in the CMF.
The proposed project will build on the PI's four-year history of student-
centered research in and around Dinosaur Naitonal Monument, which has included
an REU project during summer 2002. During summer 2003, the project will be
geographically expanded to include CMF outcrops in east central Utah and in
Arches National Monument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
progressively develop students' research skills toward an understanding and
environmental interpretation of the CMF. The results of this project will be
highly significant to North American paleontologists, and will thus provide
student participants with an immediate sense of the relevance of their research.
Throughout the program, the PI and visiting scientists will develop students'
thinking about observation, interpretation, and experimentation. As in the past,
the PI will recruit with the explicit goal of achieving diversity in gender,
geographic distribution, and minority status of participants.