* 0244025
* REU Site:  Integrated Biology for Undergraduates at the University of Utah
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Michael Bastiani, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 202,500.00

The Summer Molecular Research Experience for Students Underrepresented in
Science will provide an intensive 10-week research experience at the University
of Utah in Salt Lake City. A total of 10 students will be selected to
participate. Students who come from underrepresented backgrounds and from
institutions with limited research opportunities are especially well served in
this program. Students will receive a stipend of $3000 for 10 weeks of full time
research, as well as room and board at the newly constructed student housing
which was used as the Olympic Village during the 2002 Winter Olympics. Travel
expenses to the University of Utah will be covered. Students accepted to the
Program will have the opportunity to choose from a wide variety of projects that
employ molecular techniques. A few potential projects
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paternity tests for birds. Techniques include DNA
extraction and microsatellite-based paternity analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetics
of chemical defenses in tropical trees. Techniques include High Pressure Liquid
Chromatography and testing the toxicity of compounds in bioassays with
insects.&lt;br/&gt;Co-speciation of doves, lice and microbes. Techniques include
DNA extraction, PCR, cloning, and DNA sequencing. &lt;br/&gt;Regulation of
cytoskeletal arrays in algae and plants. Techniques include transcript
identification by RT-PCR and protein levels by Western blot.
&lt;br/&gt;Detoxification capacities of mammalian herbivores. Techniques include
DNA microarray analysis and microsomal assays.&lt;br/&gt;Systematics of
Solanaceae. Techniques include PCR and sequence analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
machineries that regulate division and fusion of mitochondria in budding
yeast.&lt;br/&gt;Development of the macronucleus from the germline micronucleus
of the ciliate, Oxytricha. Use PCR to infer the nature of the rearrangements and
sequence modifications that are employed in generating the
macronucleus.&lt;br/&gt;Promotion of homologous recombination by the generation
of linear &lt;br/&gt;DNA in the nematode, C. elegans.&lt;br/&gt;The role of
chemoreceptor clustering in chemotactic signaling by&lt;br/&gt;Escherichia
coli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon arrival at the University of Utah students will
spend two days becoming acquainted with the campus, their research groups and
the surrounding area. To maintain the cohesiveness of the group, 4 weekly
meetings will be scheduled for the duration of the program. A GRE preparation
class and classes to assist students with their graduate school applications
will be offered. At the conclusion of the program students will write a research
report and present their research in an oral Bioscience Symposium. Students will
be encouraged to present their research at National meetings. For more
information, contact Dr. Rosemary Gray at (801) 581-5013 or
BioURP@bioscience.utah.edu.&lt;br/&gt;