* 0244221
* REU: Environmental Science Summer Program
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Richard Foust, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 212,251.00

Northern Arizona University will partner with three local tribal colleges (Dine'
College, Crownpoint Institute of Technology, and the Southwestern Indian
Polytechnic Institute) to host an NSF-REU site focusing on environmental science
research. Recruitment will focus on tribal colleges and community colleges in
northern Arizona and New Mexico that are known to have large Native American and
Hispanic enrollments. We will utilize existing agreements with these colleges to
identify the students who will most likely continue their education in a science
field. Students for the program will be selected based on their performance in
science classes and their demonstrated interest in pursuing a scientific
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eight students will be selected to participate in
the 10-week research program which will coincide with NAU's 10 week summer
school session. In addition to opportunities for undergraduate research, NAU's
REU program will include components on scientific writing, data analysis and
interpretation, communication skills, scientific reasoning and ethics. A social
program will foster ongoing personal relationships among the students and with
their mentors. Because the majority of the students recruited for the program
are currently enrolled in either tribal colleges or community colleges, which do
not offer Bachelor's degrees, it is likely that the researchers will continue
their education at Northern Arizona University. The research mentors have
significant external research funding; therefore, it is anticipated that the REU
students will be able to continue their research activities in the academic
year, after completion of the summer REU program. Moreover, because the research
mentors are well established, it is anticipated that a significant number of
participants will become co-authors on scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the success of similar programs at
NAU, we believe that NAU's summer REU program will significantly increase the
number of Native Americans entering science careers. Point-of-contact for the
NAU Summer REU Program is Dr. Richard D. Foust, Jr., at 928-523-7077 or
Richard.Foust@nau.edu.&lt;br/&gt;