* 0244529
* FRG: Synchrony and Structure in Coupled Cell Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Martin Golubitsky, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2007
* USD 960,758.00

Golubitsky&lt;br/&gt;0244529&lt;br/&gt; A coupled cell system can be described
by a collection of&lt;br/&gt;individual interacting differential equations. Cell
systems are&lt;br/&gt;used as models in a variety of applications such as
neuronal&lt;br/&gt;networks, speciation, arrays of Josephson junctions, and
gene&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. In this Focused Research Group (FRG) project,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators develop a mathematical theory for coupled
cell&lt;br/&gt;systems and with colleagues explore implications of that
theory&lt;br/&gt;in applications. The network architecture is a graph that
shows&lt;br/&gt;the couplings between cells and which cells and couplings
are&lt;br/&gt;identical. Symmetries in the network architecture have been
used&lt;br/&gt;previously to explore certain properties of solutions to
cell&lt;br/&gt;systems, such as synchrony or traveling waves. Symmetry,
however,&lt;br/&gt;applies directly only to the most regular of networks. For
a&lt;br/&gt;larger class of coupled cell networks, local symmetries
defined&lt;br/&gt;on part of the network can replace symmetries as a predictor
of&lt;br/&gt;interesting and important dynamics. These local symmetries
form&lt;br/&gt;a groupoid and it is this groupoid structure that is used
to&lt;br/&gt;analyze properties of solutions and transitions between
solutions&lt;br/&gt;in coupled cell systems. The investigators and students
develop&lt;br/&gt;a theory of robust synchrony and investigate synchrony-
breaking&lt;br/&gt;bifurcations in coupled cell systems (for example,
network&lt;br/&gt;architecture often forces Takens-Bogdanov singularities to
occur&lt;br/&gt;in codimension one at such bifurcations). They also
investigate&lt;br/&gt;the consequences for coupled cell systems of particular
features&lt;br/&gt;of the internal equations of single cells, such as symmetries
and&lt;br/&gt;fast/slow variables.&lt;br/&gt; Symmetry and symmetry-breaking
have been used widely by&lt;br/&gt;scientists and mathematicians to investigate
a variety of&lt;br/&gt;physically and biologically interesting topics,
including&lt;br/&gt;important types of fluid flows, crystal lattices, the
existence&lt;br/&gt;of elementary particles, and the characteristic markings of
the&lt;br/&gt;skins of tigers and leopards. The crucial feature of
this&lt;br/&gt;approach is that it is model-independent in the sense that
in&lt;br/&gt;appropriate situations symmetry permits the development of a
menu&lt;br/&gt;of possible outcomes and the physics or chemistry or
biology&lt;br/&gt;chooses from this menu. Indeed, the theory of coupled
cell&lt;br/&gt;systems with symmetry has been applied succesfully to
the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of different gaits in animals, pattern formation in
the&lt;br/&gt;visual cortex, and speciation. Relaxing the requirement that
the&lt;br/&gt;network under consideration has symmetries extends
the&lt;br/&gt;applicability of this approach to a wider range of problems,
in&lt;br/&gt;particular to models of gene networks, as well as other
network&lt;br/&gt;models from neuroscience. In these applications it is rare
that&lt;br/&gt;the exact model equations are known. It is therefore
important&lt;br/&gt;to develop mathematical tools that study model-
independent&lt;br/&gt;features of solutions, tools that focus on solution
properties&lt;br/&gt;that are determined by the general structure of the
equations&lt;br/&gt;(such as network architecture) rather than by the details of
the&lt;br/&gt;equations. This approach will benefit researchers outside
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics by describing a menu of possible dynamics that
a&lt;br/&gt;network can be expected to exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;