* 0244786
* Collaborative Research:      Heavy-Quark Reaction Cross Sections at RHIC:     Studies of Quark-Gluon Plasma Signatures
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* C. Wong, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2006
* USD 122,000.00

We propose a program of calculations of heavy-quark hadron cross sections which
are of great importance in the identifcation of a quark gluon plasma (QGP) in
heavy-ion colli- sions. This program will involve the calculation of reaction
cross sections of various hadrons which have been proposed as QGP diagnostic
probes, such as heavy quarkonia, hyper- ons, and antihyperons. Most of these
cross sections are not accessible experimentally at present, and as such can
only be estimated using theoretical models. The central compo- nent of this
proposal consists of calculations of these cross sections using the well-
established constituent-interchange model, assuming standard quark model forces
and a scattering for- malism developed previously by two of us (Barnes and
Swanson). This approach is known to give reasonable agreement with existing
experimental low-energy scattering data for a wide range of analogous hadron-
hadron scattering processes. Additional research topics which will be addressed
are the generalization of the approach to multichannel and relativistic regimes,
the incorporation of qq pair production amplitudes, a comparison of microscopic
and effective Lagrangian descriptions, and the development of a T-matrix
formalism that will allow direct application to bound state problems. The cross
sections obtained here should be useful as estimates of the various hadronic
contributions to the proposed experimental signals for the quark-gluon plasma.
These hadronic contributions must be understood and incorporated in simulations
of heavy-ion collisions before QGP formation can be established through various
signatures; for this reason a third component of our program is a close
collaboration with researchers involved in Monte-Carlo simulations of RHIC
experiments, so that the experimental implications of these hadronic
contributions for RHIC can be as- sesssed. This will be facilitated by the
presence of a large RHIC experimental group from PHENIX at ORNL and University
of Tennessee.