* 0244977
* Nonlinear Control Problems for Rest-to-Rest Maneuvers of Multi-Body Vehicles using Prismatic Actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Nathaniel McClamroch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Page A&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes a novel
research program on nonlinear control of multi-body&lt;br/&gt;vehicles operating
under the action of gravitational forces and control forces
generated&lt;br/&gt;by prismatic actuators. Multi-body vehicles are mechanical
systems consisting of a rigid&lt;br/&gt;base body that can translate and rotate
in three dimensions and auxiliary bodies that are&lt;br/&gt;constrained to move
relative to the base body and to one another. The multi-body
vehicles&lt;br/&gt;are controlled using prismatic actuator devices, mounted on
the base body. These are&lt;br/&gt;linear electromechanical actuators that move
a proof mass along a track fixed to the base&lt;br/&gt;body. This is a novel
actuation technology that has great potential for providing
new&lt;br/&gt;maneuvering capabilities, namely precision translation and global
attitude maneuvers, for&lt;br/&gt;multi-body vehicles. On the other hand, the
design and operation of such multi-body&lt;br/&gt;vehicles present many
challenges since they are not fully actuated in the sense that
there&lt;br/&gt;are fewer control inputs than there are degrees of freedom to be
controlled. Key aspects&lt;br/&gt;of the proposed research, from which arise the
major research challenges, are: (1) the&lt;br/&gt;presence of controlled
mechanical symmetries and their associated integrals of motion and&lt;br/&gt;(2)
the objective of achieving arbitrary rest to rest maneuvers for the multi-
body&lt;br/&gt;vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;Although some nonlinear control problems for
multi-body mechanical systems are relatively&lt;br/&gt;simple, the problems
posed in this research can not be adequately handled based on
the&lt;br/&gt;current state of knowledge. The proposed research is the
culmination of the NSF supported&lt;br/&gt;research of the principal
investigator over the last fourteen years. It represents an&lt;br/&gt;extension
of his previous research on nonlinear control of constrained and
underactuated&lt;br/&gt;mechanical systems to new problems that have not
previously been amenable to study using&lt;br/&gt;traditional nonlinear control
methods. The expected contributions of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;research are: (1)
the development of nonlinear control theory for the class of multi-
body&lt;br/&gt;vehicles studied, (2) the development of innovative new system
design and control&lt;br/&gt;strategies for multi-body vehicles, and (3)
educational impacts through student&lt;br/&gt;participation in the research. The
research concepts are to be applied to maneuvering&lt;br/&gt;vehicles operating
in space or under water, and they are ideally suited for small-
scale&lt;br/&gt;intelligent autonomous sensor systems operating in space or
under water. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;research has the potential to provide new
and enhanced maneuvering capabilities for&lt;br/&gt;multi-body vehicles, thereby
contributing to the overall engineering infrastructure
in&lt;br/&gt;transportation, exploration, remote sensing, and surveillance.