* 0244953
* RUI:    Studies of Neutron-Rich Rare Isotopes With the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) Detector at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Bryan Luther, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Continuing Grant
* Ani Aprahamian
* 08/31/2006
* USD 72,188.00

Concordia College will participate in the investigation of neutron-
rich&lt;br/&gt;nuclei using the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) in experiments with
fast rare&lt;br/&gt;isotopes at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory. Concordia College at Moorhead&lt;br/&gt;is a member of the MoNA
Consortium and has played a leading role in testing&lt;br/&gt;and assembling the
MoNA detector modules. Concordia undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;will
participate in experiments at the NSCL using the MoNA detector and perform
analysis at Concordia College on the data taken during these experiments. MoNA
is planned to come online in the Spring of
2003.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concordia College will be part of the
effort to use MoNA to begin a program&lt;br/&gt;of study of nuclear systems
along the neutron drip-line. The high detection&lt;br/&gt;efficiency (70%) and
modular design of MoNA will allow the study of the&lt;br/&gt;structure of short-
lived nuclei via selected break-up reactions. Once the&lt;br/&gt;sweeper magnet,
currently being constructed at Florida State University,&lt;br/&gt;becomes
operational MoNA will be used to explore the break-up of very&lt;br/&gt;neutron-
rich nuclei in coincidence with the charged fragments being deflected by the
sweeper magnet. The neutron-unbound ground states of nuclei far from stability
will be studied using sequential&lt;br/&gt;particle decay spectroscopy. In
addition studies of multi-neutron halos and collective&lt;br/&gt;excitations in
neutron-rich systems using the MoNA detector and the sweeper will
be&lt;br/&gt;explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;