* 0244537
* Reconnaissance Survey of the September 9, 2002 Papua New Guinea Earthquake and Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Costas Synolakis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 12/31/2003
* USD 36,000.00

This action is to support a reconnaissance survey of the September 9, 2002 Papua
New Guinea earthquake and tsunami, with a team of US and PNG engineers and
scientists. The tsunami reportedly killed 2 people as opposed to the 1998 PNG
tsunami that killed 2200. The 2002 earthquake was a stronger earthquake with
epicenter located at approximately the same relative distance off the most
impacted coastline as compared to the 1998 event. The question arises as to why
the 2002 tsunami had a smaller impact than the 1998 event. This is particularly
important for the western coast of the United States where offshore earthquakes
of similar magnitudes are possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reconnaissance
survey includes a significant public outreach component, with lectures and talks
planned in numerous locales and schools in the affected areas. In terms of
technology transfer, the team will implement standard tsunami hazard mitigation
numerical tools on servers at the University of Papua New Guinea, as well as
field train PNG university students in tsunami field survey techniques. The team
will also participate in local seminars discussing earthquake hazard mitigation
in PNG. The team will work entirely in PNG, and the budget will support both US
and PNG scientists as participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
survey will be available as a work in progress on the principal investigator's
USC web site.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;