* 0244922
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:   ADVANCE-US:   Applying a Business Model to a University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Christine Hult, Utah State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kelly M. Mack
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,998,953.00

National data show that women are under-represented in academic positions,
particularly at full professor and in administration; further analyses reveal
that negative campus climates are often to blame. Previous funding initiatives
have focused on educating or boosting the careers of individual women faculty
members, either by providing differential funding opportunities or
competitiveness training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than .fixing under-
represented individuals, this proposal seeks to improve recruitment, promotion,
and retention of women faculty in sciences and engineering at Utah State
University by transforming: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Departmental Climates.
Working at the department level to reduce assumptions and stereotypes that
adversely affect women including minority women faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Policies and Procedures. Updating university policies
to provide support for gender-related conflicts and to provide training for
administrators and faculty committees to eliminate biased decisions and
procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Faculty Support Infrastructure. Creating
university-wide structures to foster collaborative research, reduce isolation,
improve data collection and reflective evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these objectives the PIs propose two novel
strategies:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dual Agenda Approach. The Dual Agenda Approach
is a business model for creating sustainable change by engaging work units in
creative dialogs to identify how gender equity and work effectiveness can
improve simultaneously. This approach has not been applied in academic settings,
and experienced private-sector consultants will help USU adapt dual agenda
procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Targeting Critical Structural Problems.
Faculty encountering junctures where &lt;br/&gt;advancement is stymied can most
clearly identify needed changes. The PIs interviewed 43 of 50 current and prior
women faculty to locate where institutional change is needed, including policies
that differentially impact under-represented faculty and critically absent
infrastructure, which limit advancement. They will supervise changes to critical
structural problems and full adoption by the university. The success of these
two approaches in achieving gender equity will &lt;br/&gt;be judged in three
ways: statistical analysis of faculty representation and survey data,
qualitative data collection, and a population modeling approach revealing
significant effects of subtle biases. &lt;br/&gt;