* 0244538
* The Carleton College Summer Mathematics Program
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Stephen Kennedy, Carleton College
* Continuing grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/2007
* USD 426,236.00

Mathematics faculty from Carleton College will continue their intensive four-
week summer mathematics program for eighteen talented undergraduate women in
each of the next three summers. The program will be staffed by mathematicians
who are active professionals and outstanding teachers. The students will immerse
themselves in mathematics, living and working in a supportive community of women
scholars (undergraduates, graduates, and post-graduates) who are passionate
about learning and doing mathematics. The program's intent is to excite these
young women about mathematics and mathematical careers, to provide them with the
tools they will need to succeed in a mathematical career, to plug them into a
network of fellow female mathematicians, and to propel them on to advanced
degrees in mathematics. The impact and success of previous Summer Mathematics
Programs (formerly known as the Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges' Summer
Mathematics Program), is measured both by the fact that 80% of the graduates
have gone on to advanced degrees or careers in mathematics (65% have gone on to
graduate school), as well as by the participants' post-program evaluations.

The Program: Students will attend two courses which meet on weekday mornings and
are led by female instructors and teaching assistants. In each of the classes,
the students will be introduced to fields of mathematics beyond calculus that
students usually do not have the opportunity to study in a standard
undergraduate mathematics program. Topics for these courses in the past have
included algebraic coding theory, graph theory, low-dimensional dynamical
systems, and functional analysis. Through these courses, and the homework
assigned in them, the students will have the opportunity to improve their skills
in conjecture and proof and written and oral presentation. Students will not
receive course credit for, or grades in, these courses. Each student will
receive, at the close of the program, written evaluations of her performance and
accomplishments from her instructors.

Other Activities: Recreational problem solving will be offered each week for
those students who want to work on solving interesting problems. Use of the
computer for communication and computation will be a daily routine during the
program. Each Tuesday afternoon there will be a discussion on a topic pertaining
to the students' continued scholarship: succeeding as a math major, career
options, choosing and surviving a graduate program, and being a woman scientist.
Each Tuesday and Thursday there will be a colloquium on a stimulating area of
mathematics.

The Colleges: Carleton's $6.5 million Center for Mathematics and Computing and
her faculty which are recognized for their professional activities and
commitment to undergraduate education are among the attributes that make
Northfield an attractive location for this summer program.