* 0244159
* Regulation of Telomerase and Telomeres in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Thomas McKnight, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 10/31/2007
* USD 175,000.00

Telomeres are specialized nucleoprotein complexes at the ends of eukaryotic
chromosomes that are essential for proper chromosome behavior and stability of
the genome. Telomerase, a complex ribonucleoprotein with reverse transcriptase
activity, is responsible for synthesizing and maintaining telomeric DNA in most
organisms. Telomere biology has received a lot of attention in the last 10
years, largely for its potential roles in aging and cancer in mammals, but the
critical functions of telomeres and telomerase are conserved in nearly all
eukaryotes. The model plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a multicellular organism
with a vast array of genetic tools make it an ideal system for investigating the
regulation of telomerase. Although plants and animals became multicellular
through independent evolutionary pathways, the fundamentals of telomere biology
are broadly similar in these diverse lineages. At least some of results obtained
in Arabidopsis should be applicable to a wide range of eukaryotes, including
mammals. The overall goal of this project is to identify and characterize genes
that regulate telomerase activity by screening activation-tagged lines of
Arabidopsis for mutants that ectopically express telomerase in their leaves. The
identification of one such gene has validated the utility of this approach. This
gene, TELOMERASE ACTIVATOR 1 (TAC1), encodes a previously uncharacterized
protein with a single zinc finger that appears to regulate telomerase activity
by altering auxin metabolism. One aim of this project is to further define the
mechanism by which TAC1 activates telomerase. Three additional telomerase-
activation mutants, tac2, tac3, and tac4, have been isolated. A second aim of
the work is to identify and characterize the gene in the tac2 mutant that
activates telomerase. Characterization of tac3, tac4, and any newly identified
mutants will proceed as resources allow. This research will elucidate
fundamental mechanisms for maintaining stability of the plant genome, and at
least in part, should be broadly applicable to other eukaryotes. Even the
discovery of plant-specific mechanisms will provide illuminating examples for
comparative telomere biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;