* 0244899
* Fundamental Studies in Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Steven Koonin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 03/31/2006
* USD 3,792,001.00

Research at the Kellogg Radiation Laboratory of the California Institute of
Technology includes both experimental research and theoretical research
addressing key issues in nuclear physics and related areas of particle physics
and high-energy astrophysics. Research topics include high-energy electron
scattering, ultra-cold neutron research, and ultra-high energy cosmic ray
studies. Participation by postdoctoral scholars, graduate students and
undergraduate students is integrated throughout the program, affording young
researchers exceptional opportunities to advance their training and education in
these frontier areas of nuclear physics and astrophysics .&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of our research in high-energy electron scattering are twofold: a.) study of the
internal structure of the protons and neutrons that are the basic constituents
of the atomic nucleus, and b.) high-precision testing of the basic theory of
weak and electromagnetic interactions to reveal potential new physics. We will
perform theoretical work related to the interpretation of the results of these
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;We will also embark on a new experimental program
utilizing novel techniques to produce and study ultra-cold neutrons. These
neutrons are converted to very cold temperatures where they can be trapped for
long periods of time, enabling very precise measurements of their properties.
The first experiment will study the violation of mirror symmetry in the decay of
ultra-cold neutrons. We will also perform research and development towards a new
measurement of the electric dipole moment of the neutron. The goal of the new
electric dipole moment experiment is to improve the precision by a factor of 100
compared to previous measurements; observation of the electric dipole moment
signals violation of time reversal, and would provide important information
related to the origin of matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe and the new
physical phenomena responsible. Theoretical studies related to these
experimental efforts are also part of this program.&lt;br/&gt;We will continue
our deployment and operation of the first phase of the California HIgh school
Cosmic ray ObServatory (CHICOS). The goals of this innovative program are a.)
establish an important scientific facility for ultra-high energy cosmic ray
research by utilizing the Los Angeles area school system infrastructure, b.)
provide LA high school science teachers and students with an exciting
opportunity to participate in a frontier scientific research project. During
this grant period we plan to complete the deployment of ~90 sites to form the
largest operating ground array in the northern hemisphere and begin to collect a
sample of ultra-high energy air shower events. Operation of this array during
this period will yield results capable of shedding light on the origin of these
remarkable events and will demonstrate a new cost-effective approach to
constructing and operating very large ground arrays. In addition, the impact of
the CHICOS program in providing opportunities in research for the high school
teacher and student population of Los Angeles is potentially enormous&lt;br/&gt;