* 0244906
* Numerical Simulation of Gravitational Wave Sources and Other Dynamical Spacetimes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Lee Lindblom, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This project will develop mathematical and computational techniques needed to
perform computer simulations of realistic astrophysical sources of gravitational
radiation: in particular binary black hole and neutron star systems. This
research will investigate the following technical problems: 1) pseudo-spectral
methods for use in 3D simulations of the binary black hole problem; 2) stability
of 3D evolutions in various formulations of the Einstein evolution equations; 3)
various methods of constructing astrophysically realistic binary black hole
initial data; 4) hyperbolic formulations&lt;br/&gt;of the combined dynamical and
gauge evolution equations; 5) tail effects in scalar fields in single black hole
spacetimes; 6)variational integration techniques for solving the Einstein
evolution&lt;br/&gt;equations; 7) tidal disruption of neutron stars in neutron
star/black hole binaries; 8) the dynamics of axisymmetric spacetimes; 9)
software development for fully constrained 3D evolution with adaptive mesh
refinement; 10) 5D black string spacetimes; 11) and characteristic adaptive mesh
refinement code development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next decade will be an
exciting time for gravitational wave (GW) science. During this time the initial
LIGO (2002--2006), followed by the advanced LIGO (ca. 2007--2012), and then the
LISA (ca. 2011) GW detectors should become operational. These detectors (LIGO in
the high-frequency band, 10 to 2000 Hz, and LISA in the low-frequency band,
0.0001 to 0.1 Hz) will become sensitive enough to detect a wide variety of
astrophysical GW sources such as binary black hole and neutron star systems, and
their observations of these sources will make it possible to do a wide range of
new science. Theoretical predictions of the waveforms generated by these sources
will be needed for GW searches themselves in some cases, and for extracting the
waves' information in all cases. Only by comparing theoretical waveforms with
observed ones will it be possible to deduce&lt;br/&gt;the nature, structure and
dynamics of the source. The strongest and most interesting sources will involve
astrophysical systems with strong gravitational fields. These sources are so
complex and&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear that they can be analyzed only with fully
dynamical numerical simulations. This project will develop the mathematical and
computational tools that will make it possible to perform the needed simulations
of realistic astrophysical gravitational wave sources.