* 0244889
* A Program of Medium Energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Douglas Beck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ani Aprahamian
* 06/30/2007
* USD 6,900,000.00

UIUC PROJECT ABSTRACT

The NSF-supported Program of Medium Energy Nuclear Physics will allow the
nuclear physics group at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to
continue to lead and contribute to high-impact experiments in international
nuclear physics research. The research program fea-tures two central themes,
namely 1) The structure and interactions of nucleons and nuclei; and 2) Tests of
fundamental symmetries and the standard model. Specific activities include the
estab-lished international experiments: G0, HERMES, PHENIX, RCS, Muon g-2, Lan,
and Cap. Additionally, the group has a local feasibility effort in hydrogen
atomic parity violation (H-APV) and is helping to develop a new neutron electric
dipole moment (n-EDM) experiment. The goal of all of these experiments is to
help answer important questions in subatomic physics. For ex-ample, in G0,
HERMES, RCS and the PHENIX spin program, a common query is "How is the proton
built?" The experiments use different tools such as parity-violating electron
scattering, polarized electron-nucleon scattering, real Compton scattering, and
polarized proton-proton col-lisions to discover the roles that constituent
quarks, sea quarks and gluons (the partons) play to result in the well-known
properties of the proton. The experiments should help settle the debate about
how the proton obtains its half-integer spin. They will also shed light on the
relative im-portance of different types of quarks inside the proton revealing,
for example, how strange quarks contribute to the proton's charge and magnetic
structure. In the PHENIX program at RHIC, deuteron-nuclei collisions will also
be studied to investigate the role that partons play in nuclei. The Muon g-2,
H-APV, and n-EDM activities are all aimed at the second theme, asking the
question "Is the current standard model correct?" The most mature of these
efforts, g-2, has already provided exciting and suggestive evidence that some
type of standard model extension might be required. Completion of this effort
and possible extensions will provide either a very stringent limit on new
physics or, alternatively, a strong indication that it must be present. Other
precision measurements of fundamental parameters are featured in the ULan and
UCap experi-ments. The first of these will determine the muon lifetime to a
precision of one part per million, which can then be interpreted as a 20-fold
improvement in the determination of the weak interac-tion strength. The second
experiment will accurately measure the least-well-known weak form factor (gP) of
the proton. This will provide a stringent test of precise theoretical
predictions founded on basic symmetries of strong interactions at low energies.
In addition to direct physics research out-comes, the group has reached beyond
the laboratory to make significant contributions to educa-tion and outreach and
will continue to do so. Research projects contribute substantially to the
education of a large number of postdocs, graduate, and undergraduate students.



