* 0244441
* Fundamental Properties of Superconductors and Mesoscale Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Michael Tinkham, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 425,000.00

This Condensed Matter Physics project, involving experiment and data analysis,
and theoretical modeling, will study the physical properties of nanoscale device
structures, fabricated of superconducting, normal metal, ferromagnetic, and
organic conductors. One of the most active issues in fundamental research in
superconductivity is clarification of how superconductivity is weakened and
eventually destroyed by quantum phase-slip processes in a superconducting wire
as it is made thinner and thinner, approaching the true one-dimensional limit.
This issue also has potential practical importance in setting a limit on
miniaturization of superconductive electronics. Experiments involving controlled
external damping are planned to clarify the role of dissipative processes in
suppressing quantum phase slips, and perhaps driving a phase transition at T = 0
to a truly zero resistance state. The effect of heating on I-V characteristics
at finite current levels also needs to be understood. Other planned experiments
study charge and spin transfer between ferromagnetic and superconducting metals
in geometries involving nanometer length scales. Such experiments probe the
length scales required for possible applications in quantum computing and tests
of Bell's inequality. Research will also be done on carbon nanotubes, using
Raman scattering to determine the chirality of individual nanotubes used in
transport and scanned probe measurements, to eliminate a major source of
uncertainty in the interpretation of experimental data. Students and postdocs
involved in this project will become expert in techniques of fabrication and
measurement of nanostructures, essential to development of modern
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental measurements and theoretical
analysis will be carried out to increase our understanding of the physical
properties of nanoscale device structures fabricated of a wide range of
materials: superconducting, normal metal, ferromagnetic, and organic. In
addition to the pursuit of scientific knowledge and intellectual understanding,
this work will have broader impact in two separate directions: (1) Understanding
of the unique quantum properties of materials when their dimensions are reduced
to the nanometer scale is essential to exploiting opportunities and avoiding
barriers to technological progress as the miniaturization epitomized by Moore's
Law proceeds in the future. (For example, a superconducting wire becomes
resistive if its diameter is reduced too much.); (2) Researchers in this program
(ranging from undergraduates to postdocs and visiting faculty) receive thorough
exposure to a wide range of fabrication, measurement, and interpretation skills,
which provides excellent preparation for careers in academia, industry, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;