* 0244465
* Bayesian Estimation of Host-Parasite Cospeciation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/18/2002,08/31/2003
* John Huelsenbeck, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 58,490.00

DEB-0075406&lt;br/&gt;John P. Huelsenbeck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. John P.
Huelsenbeck of the University of Rochester, has been awarded a grant to use
Bayesian statistacal methods to study coevolutionary interactions between
parasites and their host species. He is collaborating with Dr. Bret R. Larget of
Duquesne University and Dr. Bruce H. Rannala of the University of Alberta
(Canada) on this research. Parasites are organisms that are dependent on another
organism (the host) for their survival and reproduction and are typically
harmful to the host. Often, the association of a host and parasite is highly
specific and ancient. In such cases, it is possible to infer the history of
association between hosts and parasites by examining the phylogeny (genealogy)
of related hosts and parasites. It is not uncommon for the phylogenies of hosts
and parasites to be fully or partially concordant as the two groups have evolved
in parallel. For example, if A, B, and C are the host species, and a, b, and c
are the respective parasite species (species a parasitizes host A, and so on), a
concordant phylogeny of three hosts and parasites might be ((A,B),C) and
((a,b),c). The host phylogeny is consistent with species A and B being each
others closest relatives. Similarly, the parasites associated with A and B
(namely, a and b) are also each others closest relatives. This pattern is
consistent with cospeciation of the hosts and parasites; a speciation event in a
host causes the associated parasite to speciate via allopatric
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically, the phylogenies of hosts and
parasites are not completely concordant. Morevoer, the phylogenies of the hosts
and parasites are never known without error. We have taken a Bayesian approach
to infer the history of host-parasite association. The research funded by NSF
proposes to estimate rates of host-switching, parasite speciation, and parasite
extinction while accommodating uncertainty in the phylogenies of hosts and
parasites. A numerical technique called Markov chain Monte Carlo will be used to
perform the Bayesian
inference.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;