* 0244859
* Applied Analysis of the Navier-Stokes and Related Equations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Charles Doering, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 267,000.00

This is a proposal for fundamental research in mathematical physics and applied
mathematics fo-&lt;br/&gt;cused on the challenges presented by the
incompressible Navier-Stokes and related equations of&lt;br/&gt;uid mechanics.
The Navier-Stokes equations constitute the basic mathematical model of
uid&lt;br/&gt;ow, and are believed to contain turbulent dynamics among their
solutions. Turbulence in uid&lt;br/&gt;mechanics remains one of the outstanding
challenges for theoretical physics and applied mathe-&lt;br/&gt;matics with
important applications in, and implications for, many areas in the physical
sciences&lt;br/&gt;and engineering. The work in this project will be carried out
via modern applied analysis and&lt;br/&gt;numerical computation and simulation
by the principal investigator (PI), Prof. Charles R. Doering&lt;br/&gt;of the
University of Michigan, and graduate students performing doctoral dissertation
work. This&lt;br/&gt;project has three specific objectives:&lt;br/&gt;For one, a
mathematical technique for deriving rigorous bounds on turbulent dissipation
and&lt;br/&gt;drag, which has come to be known as the \background method," will
be developed and expanded&lt;br/&gt;to new areas including magnetohydrodynamics,
drag-reducing polymer ows, and ows over rough&lt;br/&gt;boundaries. The
background method was introduced by the PI and his collaborator a decade
ago&lt;br/&gt;for the Navier-Stokes equations, and since then it has been
developed and applied by the PI, his&lt;br/&gt;students, and many other
researchers to a number of fundamental shear ow and thermal
convection&lt;br/&gt;problems. One particular goal of this project will be to
explore applications to a wider variety of&lt;br/&gt;problems of scientific
interest.&lt;br/&gt;Another focus of this project is to continue the ongoing
investigation of theoretical and mathe-&lt;br/&gt;matical issues in the analysis
of thermal convection models where the background method is capable&lt;br/&gt;of
putting limits on the heat transfer rate. Problems of concern here include
laminar and turbulent&lt;br/&gt;convection with free-slip boundaries, xed-ux
convection, ows driven by internal heating, and&lt;br/&gt;infinite Prandtl
number models inspired by applications in geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;In a third
direction of research, power consumption and enstrophy generation will be
studied&lt;br/&gt;for forced ows and free ows in the absence of rigid
boundaries. The PI and collaborators have&lt;br/&gt;recently developed a new
approach for the analysis of turbulence driven by time-independent
body-&lt;br/&gt;forces, and it is proposed to extend the results to time-
dependent forces. A distinct problem for&lt;br/&gt;unforced ows is to solve a
variational problem for the maximum enstrophy-generating
configuration&lt;br/&gt;and study how it relates to structures observed in fully
developed turbulence or the potential&lt;br/&gt;development of
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;With regard to the intellectual merit of this activity,
knowledge gained from this project will&lt;br/&gt;further our understanding of
some basic mathematical models in uid dynamics of direct relevance&lt;br/&gt;to
many branches of engineering and applied science. In the long term, this kind of
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;research could help the development of practical
techniques for the prediction and/or control of&lt;br/&gt;physical processes
ranging from meteorology to materials manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;And with regard
to this activity's broader impacts, there are several significant advanced
train-&lt;br/&gt;ing aspects to the project. For one, it provides research
support and opportunities for graduate&lt;br/&gt;students within the University
of Michigan's new Ph.D. program in Applied &amp;
Interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics. Moreover, this project also involves
other investigators|including graduate students&lt;br/&gt;and postdoctoral
researchers from the University of Michigan as well as other
institutions|who&lt;br/&gt;will collaborate in the research.