* 0244815
* Replacement Phosphorimager for the Physical Biochemistry Instrument Facility at IUB
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Andrew Feig, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 82,713.00

A grant has been awarded to Indiana University, Bloomington (IUB) under the
direction of Dr. Andrew Feig for the acquisition of phosphorimager system that
will become part of the Physical Biochemistry Instrumentation Facility. The
facility houses a variety of instruments for structural, spectroscopic,
thermodynamic and kinetic characterization of biochemical systems. More than 20
faculty members from at least 6 departments (Chemistry, Biology, Psychology,
Medical Sciences, Physics and Optometry) use this facility although the majority
of the users derive from the Chemistry and Biology Departments. The instrument
acquired through this grant will be used primarily for its phosphorimager
capabilities, but the model chosen also has the ability to do direct
fluorescence imaging (red and green excitation) and chemiluminescence. The
instrument can be upgraded in the future if blue wavelength excitation is
needed. This instrument is also capable of reading microarrays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phosphorimager will allow laboratory experiments that
make use of fluorescent or chemiluminescent tags in lieu of traditional 32P
labeling. Thus, excellent experiments that were removed from the undergraduate
lab curriculum can be re-incorporated using this imaging system. The microarray
reading capabilities of the instrument will also be used in curriculum
enhancement through development of novel experiments for the undergraduate lab
analyzing expression profiles during stress response. Thus, undergraduates will
be exposed to state-of-the-art instrumentation in their laboratory course. The
equipment will also be used by more than 50 graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows. The major and minor users of the instrumentation are actively involved
in several programs at IUB (MEDIC-B, IU Stars and McNair Scholars) that attract
minority students interested in careers in science. &lt;br/&gt;