* 0244526
* Electro and Photoproduction of Kaon and Eta Mesons
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Frank Tabakin, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2008
* USD 186,000.00

This is a request for support for research on predicting spin observables in
the&lt;br/&gt;photo- and electro-production of mesons. Our goal continues to be
to use the&lt;br/&gt;new and precise cross-section and spin observable data,
from Je.erson Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;(JLAB) and from other GeV electron beam
facilities, to determine the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms of electromagnetic
meson production and the associated&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of excited nucleons, and
perhaps the nature of hadrons themselves.&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of nucleon excited
states and their form factors provides important&lt;br/&gt;information about the
non-perturbative regime of QCD. The photo- and&lt;br/&gt;electro-production of
p, ., kaon, and vector mesons are being measured with&lt;br/&gt;high precision
using the impressive JLAB large angle spectrometer (CLAS) detector&lt;br/&gt;and
the high resolution magnetic spectrometers in Halls A&amp;
C.&lt;br/&gt;Polarized targets and beams at JLAB and at other facilities allow a
variety&lt;br/&gt;of single and double spin observables to be measured. Our
focus is on the&lt;br/&gt;questions: Can we develop a analysis tool that can be
used to extract reliable&lt;br/&gt;isobar information from electromagnetic
production experiments? What can&lt;br/&gt;one learn from such measurements? Can
quark dynamics be incorporated into&lt;br/&gt;the coupled-channels approach we
have developed over the last several years?&lt;br/&gt;Does evidence exist for
the excitation of unusual baryon states and/or those&lt;br/&gt;predicted by
quark models?&lt;br/&gt;The hope is to answer such questions by examining the
sensitivity of beam,&lt;br/&gt;target, and recoil-particle cross-sections and
spin-observables to underlying resonances,&lt;br/&gt;t- and u-channel exchanges,
and to threshold e.ects. In earlier publications,&lt;br/&gt;we deduced general
features of spin observables for 0-(p, .,K) and&lt;br/&gt;1-(., ., f) meson
production, which are helpful guides in amplitude analyses,&lt;br/&gt;model
calculations and in planning experiments. We have been combining
such&lt;br/&gt;insights with viable dynamical coupled-channels(CC) calculations,
for which collaborations&lt;br/&gt;with Saclay and Argonne National Laboratory
have been established&lt;br/&gt;and hopefully will continue. The codes we have
developed provide .exible, dynamical&lt;br/&gt;(o.-shell) methods for including
important spin-dependent .nal state&lt;br/&gt;interactions along with threshold,
cusp, and isobar excitation e.ects. Recently,&lt;br/&gt;we .gured out how to
incorporate quark model dynamics. Developing this code&lt;br/&gt;has been a slow
process, but we are now ready to apply this project to recent&lt;br/&gt;data and
to extend the research to a wider range of mesons and to electroproduction.