* 0244162
* NSF-Europe:    Nanoparticle Sintering Under the Influence of External Electrical Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Joanna Groza, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 107,468.00

This project is a joint study with Fraunhofer Institute Silicatforschung (ISC)
in Germany on sintering nanoparticles under the influence of an external
electrical field. The final goal is to understand the fundamentals and exploit
the benefits of field-assisted sintering to enable the processing and
manufacture of bulk nanomaterials. Field-assisted processing has emerged as a
topic of current interest due to new phenomena, which occur upon field exposure
such as microdischarges, with resultant surface effects and electrodiffusion.
Technologically, electrical field application has distinct benefits: enhanced
sintering rates, control and production of novel microstructures, and flexible
manufacturing capabilities (near net shape, modulated structures). Laboratory
experiments at UC Davis have succeeded in processing difficult-to-sinter
materials by a field assisted sintering technique (FAST) equally applicable to
ceramics and metals, to composites and nanometer size powders. ISC has developed
a microwave processing (MWP) facility capable to control the MW energy and heat
flow. The system also enables the application of extremely high heating rates,
which are known to suppress grain growth during powder sintering. A high
sensitivity thermo-optical measuring (TOM) technique at ISC is capable of
monitoring neck formation, changes of the chemistry of contact points, and
densification of powders. The objective of this proposed research is to study
the operative mechanisms in the early stages of sintering of nanopowders and to
quantify their interaction with the externally applied fields.

Building the partnership with Germany will bring benefits to the scientific
community by advancing the knowledge and predictive capability for processing of
nanopowders. The quantification of field effects possible due to this
partnership is critical to the advancement of field-activated processing and is
valuable for both research and teaching. The new perspectives opened by this
collaborative work will better prepare graduate students to work in an
increasingly interdependent world economy and motivate undergraduate students to
pursue doctoral studies. This NSF project is co-funded by the Division of
Design, Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation and the International Office
(Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF
and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with
the Fraunhofer Institute Silicatforschung (ISC), Wuertzburg, Germany.

