* 0244155
* Research Experiences in Plant Science at the Danforth Center/REU Site
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Mark Running, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 250,300.00

The goal of the summer REU program at the Danforth Center is simple: to provide
an opportunity for a student to mature into a young scientist. To do this, we
have created a program that gives students experience with all aspects of modern
scientific research, from design to implementation to reporting, while providing
insight into the personal qualities of a good researcher, the steps to take on
the road to becoming a scientist, and the broader implications of scientific
discovery. The Danforth Center is an independent, non-profit research institute
newly established in St. Louis, Missouri. It is devoted to fundamental research
in plant science leading to discoveries for the benefit of human health and
nutrition and agricultural sustainability. Students in all life science fields,
not just those interested in plant science, can benefit from the program.

The Danforth Center provides a welcoming atmosphere in a small, friendly
institution and at the same time exposes students to a rich research environment
because of the wide range of expertise present, including cell biology,
molecular biology, structural biology, biochemistry, microbiology, chemistry,
computational biology, bioinformatics, developmental biology, genetics,
genomics, nematology, and plant pathology. During the eleven-week summer
program, the student will 1) design and conduct a laboratory research project in
collaboration with a faculty mentor, present findings in a final symposium, and
prepare a written report summarizing the research; 2) learn the application of a
wide variety of instrumentation and the latest techniques in life science
research; 3) learn about potential career pathways and strategies; 4) discuss
the ethical, social, and political issues surrounding current plant science
research, including exploring the potential of genetic engineering and
challenges for improving agriculture in developing countries through
biotechnology.

Students interested in applying to the program should visit the web site
www.danforthcenter.org/internship. An application is available for download and
information is available on research areas at the Center. Students will be
matched with research areas that best suit their interests and experience.
Students who are members of groups under-represented in the sciences are
especially encouraged to apply.