* 0244422
* Precision Electromagnetic Studies of the Structure of Few Body Nuclei and Nucleons at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Martin Epstein, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2007
* USD 597,046.00

The nuclear physics group at California State University, Los
Angeles,&lt;br/&gt;studies nuclear structure of low mass nuclei and the
structure of the&lt;br/&gt;neutron and proton. These studies use the high energy
electron&lt;br/&gt;accelerator at Thomas Jefferson National Laboratory, and
similar lower&lt;br/&gt;energy accelerators at other sites. In the present
research period we&lt;br/&gt;will be leading a group to study the nuclear
structure of the most&lt;br/&gt;common isotope of helium, helium-4. Helium-4 is
an excellent laboratory&lt;br/&gt;for testing theoretical models of how
neutrons, protons and exotic&lt;br/&gt;particles combine to form the nuclear
ground state. Helium-4 is also of&lt;br/&gt;particular interest because about
25% of the visible mass in the&lt;br/&gt;universe is bound up in helium-4
nuclei. Understanding this nucleus will&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;tell us something
significant about a large component of the visible&lt;br/&gt;universe, as well
as serve as a testing ground for nuclear
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students and graduate students are
significantly involved&lt;br/&gt;with our research. These students participate
in the research in&lt;br/&gt;meaningful ways, working directly with us or in
teams. They will do and&lt;br/&gt;have done data reduction and analysis,
contributed to the construction&lt;br/&gt;of experimental equipment for approved
experiments, participated in&lt;br/&gt;running the experiments, and learned how
to use Monte Carlo simulation&lt;br/&gt;techniques in understanding complex
pieces of apparatus. Our goal is to&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;bring students into a
research experience as soon as possible in their&lt;br/&gt;college careers. This
experience serves our students well, either if&lt;br/&gt;they decide to go on to
graduate level research, or to enter industry,&lt;br/&gt;where their background
in team work to solve complex problems will be
an&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;advantage. High School science teachers have also
contributed to our&lt;br/&gt;research effort by doing data reduction and
analysis. We hope to have a&lt;br/&gt;teacher do a Master's thesis in physics
using our data.&lt;br/&gt;