* 0244033
* REU Site:    Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Optics, Lasers, and Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2003,11/30/2008
* David Hagan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 11/30/2008
* USD 440,062.00

0244033 Siders&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a five-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Central Florida
(UCF) for ten students each summer. The program is designed as a twelve-week
summer experience with research opportunities and other educational experiences
in the area of optics, lasers, and materials. A primary emphasis of these
programs will be on encouraging talented undergraduate students, in particular
students from groups underrepresented in research fields in engineering, to
pursue graduate studies in the field of optics and lasers. Ten internationally
recognized faculty in the School of Optics Center for Research and Education in
Optics and Lasers (CREOL) will serve as research supervisors in the program. The
program will include (1) Introductory informal coursework on the basic
principles of optics, lasers, and optical materials; (2) Research seminars for
undergraduates by the School of Optics/CREOL Faculty; (3) Industrial site visits
to numerous companies in the area; (4) Seminars, workshops, and discussion
sessions on issues of ethics in engineering research; and (5) Continuous
monitoring of the students' progress by the principal investigators. The summer
program will conclude with a poster session in which the REU students will
present their research results to the UCF community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;