* 0244972
* Precision Measurements with Polarized Cold Neutron Beams and 3He
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ani Aprahamian
* 08/31/2006
* USD 627,500.00

The neutron is a sub--atomic particle that&lt;br/&gt;comprises more than half of
the matter in the&lt;br/&gt;world. Within the nuclei of most atoms,
the&lt;br/&gt;neutron remains stable, but when freed from the&lt;br/&gt;nucleus,
it is unstable. Free neutrons are thus&lt;br/&gt;an important tool for study
of&lt;br/&gt;sub--atomic physics, because the decay and&lt;br/&gt;interactions
of free neutrons reveal the&lt;br/&gt;interactions of its constituents and
decay&lt;br/&gt;products. Neutrons also have spin, the
quantum&lt;br/&gt;mechanical property of the most fundamental&lt;br/&gt;pieces
of matter that distinguishes two states called&lt;br/&gt;spin--up and spin--
down. Spin is responsible&lt;br/&gt;for the nuclear magnetism exploited, for
example,&lt;br/&gt;in NMR and MRI. The spin states also affect
the&lt;br/&gt;decay and interactions of neutrons, and so the&lt;br/&gt;control
of neutron spin becomes useful for more&lt;br/&gt;detailed study of sub--atomic
interactions. In&lt;br/&gt;the proposed research, free neutrons produced
by&lt;br/&gt;a particle accelerator at Los Alamos National&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory
and at the nuclear reactor at NIST&lt;br/&gt;will be used in experiments that
control the&lt;br/&gt;neutron spin to reveal weak interactions
and&lt;br/&gt;possible new physics beyond the Standard Model that&lt;br/&gt;
summarizes known elementary&lt;br/&gt;particle
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neutron spins in a beam of neutron will
be manipulated by&lt;br/&gt;selecting predominantly one spin state with
a&lt;br/&gt;spin filter based on laser polarized $^3$He. The&lt;br/&gt;neutron
spin can be reversed using&lt;br/&gt;magnetic fields that couple to the
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;magnetic moment. Very precise measurement of
the&lt;br/&gt;neutron polarization ({\it i.e.} the excess&lt;br/&gt;fraction of
the selected spin state) and precise&lt;br/&gt;spin reversal are required to
mitigate false&lt;br/&gt;effects that may arise. The techniques
of&lt;br/&gt;$^3$He polarization, the spin filter, and spin&lt;br/&gt;flipping
will be greatly improved as we undertake&lt;br/&gt;these
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Los Alamos experiment
is&lt;br/&gt;measurement of the weak interaction effects on&lt;br/&gt;the
absorption of neutrons by hydrogen. The weak&lt;br/&gt;interaction&lt;br/&gt;is
characterized by absorption and emission of&lt;br/&gt;particles that have a
handedness that correlates&lt;br/&gt;the spin orientation with the direction of
motion.&lt;br/&gt;This handedness allows observation of the
weak&lt;br/&gt;interaction amidst the much stronger interactions&lt;br/&gt;of
neutrons and protons. Definitive characterization of the
weak&lt;br/&gt;interaction between the neutron and proton is&lt;br/&gt;crucial
to fully understanding the forces that&lt;br/&gt;bind the nucleus. The
experiment at NIST measures&lt;br/&gt;the dependence of neutron decays on the
spin&lt;br/&gt;state. In a dedicated detector, neutron decays&lt;br/&gt;are
observed by simultaneously detecting the proton and&lt;br/&gt;electron.
The&lt;br/&gt;third particle emitted, the neutrino, is too elusive
to&lt;br/&gt;detect with high efficiency. A dependence of&lt;br/&gt;the
electron's and proton's relative motion on the neutron spin&lt;br/&gt;state
would reveal interactions that are not&lt;br/&gt;symmetric under reversal of
time, a special&lt;br/&gt;signature that could reveal new physics
beyond&lt;br/&gt;the Standard Model, physics that may&lt;br/&gt;explain the
origin of matter in the Big Bang. The advanced&lt;br/&gt;techniques of spin
state selection, precision&lt;br/&gt;polarimetry, and spin flipping will be
applied to&lt;br/&gt;a planned experiment with the objective of
precisely&lt;br/&gt;measuring the handedness of neutron decays.
When&lt;br/&gt;combined with other neutron decay measurements&lt;br/&gt;these
measurements will also probe physics beyond the&lt;br/&gt;Standard
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work probes deep intellectual
questions&lt;br/&gt;about the most fundamental&lt;br/&gt;pieces of matter. The
aim is to collect data&lt;br/&gt;that will help complete the picture of
elementary&lt;br/&gt;particles and their interactions. The
techniques&lt;br/&gt;have much broader impact. Laser polarized&lt;br/&gt;$^3$He
and $^{129}$Xe used in related experiments&lt;br/&gt;are now used in biomedical
research, materials&lt;br/&gt;science, and may be applied in advances
of&lt;br/&gt;quantum computation. This research is a
remarkable&lt;br/&gt;training ground for undergraduate and
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The technical challenges combined
with&lt;br/&gt;the deep intellectual issues provide motivation&lt;br/&gt;and
develop technical skills. Several undergraduates will&lt;br/&gt;gain research
experience working along with graduate students and&lt;br/&gt;senior
researchers. Graduate students emerge&lt;br/&gt;broadly capable and move on to
prepare for&lt;br/&gt;faculty positions as well as
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research. This work has also led to
development&lt;br/&gt;of new courses for non--physics majors and to
a&lt;br/&gt;set of public lectures on Nuclear Magnets.&lt;br/&gt;The theme for
the public is&lt;br/&gt;that, in the context of probing
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;problems of physics -- exciting in their
own&lt;br/&gt;right, the hardest problems produce the most&lt;br/&gt;innovative
solutions with spin--offs unimaginable&lt;br/&gt;at the outset. Atomic clocks,
enhanced MRI, and&lt;br/&gt;probing the origin of matter all follow from
the&lt;br/&gt;control of nuclear magnetism.