* 0244492
* FRG-Collaborative Research: Physical, Mathematical, and Engineering Problems in Slow Granular Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 621,578.00

Proposal: DMS-0244492&lt;br/&gt;PI: David G. Schaeffer&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Duke University&lt;br/&gt;Title: FRG: Collaborative Research: Physical,
Mathematical and Engineering Problems in Slow Granular
Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses
a spectrum of fundamental and applied problems in the slow flow of granular
materials. It includes coordinated efforts in experiment, mathematical analysis,
modeling, and numerical simulation, supported by a long-standing industrial
collaboration. Continuum models of granular materials are desirable from several
points of view, but the associated partial differential equations are typically
ill-posed, a mathematical difficulty that has severely hampered progress,
especially for multidimensional flow. This ill-posedness reflects a real
instability, the tendency of the deformation in granular flow to localize into
shear bands. Fundamental issues surrounding the continuum description will be
addressed through inter-related projects that investigate: (i) the role of
discreteness and nonlinearity in regularizing the ill-posed continuum
description, (ii) the formulation from micromechanical considerations, based on
experiments and MD simulations, of a continuum model that accounts for
microscopic velocity fluctuations, (iii) mathematical predictions and
experimental tests of multidimensional steady-state hopper flows, and (iv) the
settling of powders, an industrially significant prototype two-phase flow
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program attacks different aspects of
a basic question: What behavior of slowly flowing granular material can be
understood by modeling the material as a continuum? This is particularly an
issue for industrial settings such as the flow of agricultural grains in a
converging hopper: When a silo is discharged, the granular material flows
somewhat like a continuous fluid, but the forces on the hopper walls are unlike
those exerted by a fluid due to the solid-like properties of the material and
its discreteness. Scientifically, we wish to understand these properties,
especially the role that the discreteness of the material plays in the models.
Among other contributions, this research is expected to improve predictive
capabilities in the materials- handling industry and thereby increase efficiency
in manufacturing. The group will create a research environment that integrates
research with the training of students and post-docs, through weekly group
meetings, participation in conferences and a new course on granular materials.
Collaboration across fields will be facilitated by the proximity of the
mathematics and physics departments at Duke University, and by the existing
collaborations between PIs at NC State and Duke
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;