* 0244463
* FRG:  Rational billiards and geometry and dynamics on Teichmuller Space
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Giovanni Forni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 187,248.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will work on two
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;projects in the field of geometric analysis. The
first&lt;br/&gt;project concerns the interrelated analytic study
of&lt;br/&gt;rational billiards, moduli spaces of
abelian&lt;br/&gt;differentials, and the dynamics of the
Teichmuller&lt;br/&gt;geodesic flow. A recent theme has been the
interplay&lt;br/&gt;between the dynamics on flows on homogeneous spaces on
the&lt;br/&gt;one hand, and the dynamics of flows on rational
billiards&lt;br/&gt;and flat surfaces on the other. This synergy has led
to&lt;br/&gt;recent breakthroughs in both subjects. Broadly speaking,
the&lt;br/&gt;principal investigators propose to apply the methods
and&lt;br/&gt;ideas developed in the case of homogeneous spaces to
study&lt;br/&gt;rational billiards and dynamics on Teichmuller space.
&lt;br/&gt;The second project is to give a combinatorial approach&lt;br/&gt;to
the study of Teichmuller Space and its geometry. One&lt;br/&gt;of the major
goals is to develop a complete analogue&lt;br/&gt;between this theory and the
classical theory of the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of the modular
curve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many natural phenomena are studied via the branch
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics known as dynamical systems. One
important&lt;br/&gt;example is planetary motion. Another centuries old
example&lt;br/&gt;is the theory of billiards, or the study of collisions
of&lt;br/&gt;molecules. Triangular billiards occur in the study
of&lt;br/&gt;elastic collisions of two masses in an interval.
The&lt;br/&gt;study of a dynamical system can take many forms.
One&lt;br/&gt;example is to study periodic orbits (or
repeating&lt;br/&gt;behavior); another is to study choatic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators plan to study a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems that occur in mathematics. One of
the&lt;br/&gt;prominent topics will be billiards in polygons in
the&lt;br/&gt;plane, and a generalization known as flat surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;These surfaces also fit together into a family known as
a&lt;br/&gt;moduli space, and the principal investigators plan
to&lt;br/&gt;study dynamics on moduli spaces. A major component of
the&lt;br/&gt;project will be educational. The principal
investigators&lt;br/&gt;plan to give workshops for students, both at
the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate levels, in order to
introduce&lt;br/&gt;them to these fields of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;