* 0244880
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Project UPWARD
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Marilyn Demorest, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy A. Rogers
* 02/28/2010
* USD 3,198,770.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
policies, climate, and culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) proposes to implement a five-year program to
remove barriers, transform the culture of the university, and expand
opportunities for women. This transformation will increase the representation
and advancement of women, and in particular underrepresented women, in academic
STEM careers, thereby contributing to the development of a more diverse science
and engineering workforce. Through changes in policies and practices that affect
the recruitment, selection, promotion, and transition of STEM women faculty to
leadership positions, UMBC seeks to ensure women will be represented in numbers
equal to or higher than parity with the pools from which they are selected.
Within five years, all policies, procedures, partnerships, and processes will be
in place and in motion to ensure this goal is achieved within ten years.
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: With a focus on all STEM departments, UMBC will work
collaboratively to develop and institutionalize new policies, practices, and
resources that will effectively encourage the recruitment, selection, and hiring
of women, and particularly minority women, to the faculty at all ranks.
&lt;br/&gt;UMBC will identify and develop networking opportunities from which to
recruit women graduate and post-doctoral students to the campus, create a new
program called Faculty Horizons, modeled on UMBC's successful Graduate Horizons
to recruit female faculty to the campus, and define challenging yet attainable
goals for each department to recruit, select, and hire a diverse group of women
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Establish a system of targeted programs to
create a clear and understandable pathway in support of women's efforts in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics to achieve tenure and
promotion, and transition to leadership positions at the
university.&lt;br/&gt;Planned programs include a formalized mentoring program,
structured leadership experiences, a new faculty track for lecturers who have
demonstrated excellence in applied education projects, and time for faculty to
balance family and medical needs with preparation for promotion, tenure, and
advancement without penalty to their careers. &lt;br/&gt; Objective 3: Develop
programs for constituency building, such that all levels of administration and
each department support all aspects of the project and create new partnerships
to connect UMBC to the broader community of research universities leading in the
development and advancement of STEM women faculty.&lt;br/&gt;Over five years,
UMBC will create and institutionalize the complex system of support needed for
sustainability, from the grass roots through the top administration. UMBC will
identify or hire an individual who will report directly to the president, work
collaboratively with STEM faculty, and provide the leadership needed to set the
course and maintain it. She/he will work to develop and implement an effective
model for gender awareness training that addresses the unique culture of STEM in
the academy and develop partnerships with other research institutions across the
country to both gather and disseminate effective and sustainable practices.
&lt;br/&gt;An extensive evaluation process has been formulated to guide the
transformation process through outcome assessment, feedback, and continual
program improvement. &lt;br/&gt;UMBC will chart new territory in supporting
women's career options and advancement and believes that these new opportunities
will benefit both men and women in STEM, across the campus, and across the
country. The ADVANCE team is supported by all levels of faculty, staff, and
administration under the leadership of the PI, the president of the university.
The full commitment of the university assures that adequate resources are
available to achieve the goal and objectives.&lt;br/&gt;UMBC is committed to
creating a diverse environment for all members of its community. At a minimum,
women faculty will be represented in proportion to the available pool of
candidates from which it draws. By increasing STEM faculty women's numbers and
involvement, the university will better support its female students who in turn
will play an important role in addressing the nation's critical workforce
shortages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;