* 0244074
* An REU Site Expansion of RISE:    Research Internships in Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Linda Schmidt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2006
* USD 273,750.00

0244074 Schmidt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a three-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Maryland College
Park for 10 students each year for a ten-week summer research experience. The
program will be structured to enable participants' flexibility in applying their
intellectual interests to a variety of different research topics. Students will
be a part of teams. A team will consist of four undergraduates conducting
research under the guidance of a faculty mentor, a graduate student, and an
advanced undergraduate student familiar with the faculty member's research. The
research conducted will be in the field of the faculty member's own area of
interest and expertise. The program is specifically design to improve the number
of female students choosing graduate study in preparation for a career in
research in a field of science or engineering. The program will recruit junior-
level and senior-level students majoring in the physical sciences or engineering
and build on a previously funded NSF Award (NSF Grant No. 0120786), "Research
Internships in Science and Engineering (RISE)" designed to create supportive
research teams of primarily female students to address the national need to
increase participation of students from population groups underrepresented in
research fields in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;