* 0244898
* Research on Quantum Field Fluctuations and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Lawrence Ford, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 138,000.00

This project involves theoretical research on several topics related to quantum
theory and gravitation. There will be special emphasis on phenomena related to
quantum fluctuations. Some of the topics to be investigated include negative
energy, fluctuations of the energy density,and the forces on atoms and
macroscopic bodies due to the vacuum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field.
The work on negative energy seeks to ascertain the limits placed by the aws of
physics upon negative energy density, which can be produced by quantum
effects.These limits in turn will help to understand better the types of
gravitational effects which quantum systems can produce.The study of energy
density fluctuations (stress tensor fluctuations) will help to elucidate how
quantum fluctuations of matter can give rise to quantum fluctuations of the
gravitational field.This may lead to a more precise description of the event
horizon of a black hole or the spacetime geometry in the early universe.The work
on the forces due to vacuum fluctuations (Casimir forces) will look for systems
in which these usually tiny forces can become enhanced. Particular attention
will be paid to systems where these enhanced effects might be experimentally
observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to integrate studies of the
quantum nature of the gravitational field with studies of fluctuating
electromagnetic forces. It is hoped that this type of investigation will lead to
a deeper understanding of both types of phenomena. This project is expected to
have a broader impact through possible benefits to other fields of science, to
education, and to technology. The insights and techniques of this work may be
useful outside of the specific subfields of physics being investigated. The
project will further education through the training of graduate students and by
the involvement of faculty at primarily teaching institutions. It should also
produce examples which can be used to explain some of the concepts of quantum
theory and relativity to students on a variety of educational evels. The work on
Casimir forces may eventually be useful in nanotechnology. A better knowledge of
Casimir forces is likely to become important for the construction of small scale
devices.