* 0244126
* NSF-Europe:  U.S. - Germany Research Collaboration: "Bridging Length Scales in Deforming Single and Textured Polycrystals of Structural Magnetic Shape Memory Alloys"
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2007
* USD 308,000.00

The grant explores fabrication of textured FeNiCoTi and CoNiAl magnetic shape
memory alloy (MSMA) polycrystals from powder precursors and single crystal
growth. A major objective is to characterize the microstructural, physical and
magneto-thermo-mechanical (MTM) behavior for better understanding of the
mechanisms responsible for magnetically, thermally and mechanically induced
strains in MSMAs. Along with the experimental studies, modeling effort will take
into account the external magnetic field and texturing. The powders will be
prepared by high-pressure gas atomization, oriented along the easy magnetization
axis by application of a magnetic field and consolidated by warm equal channel
angular extrusion (ECAE) and hot isostatic pressing. Along with mechanical
testing under stress, temperature as well as magnetic field, microstructural
characterization is planned with in-situ transmission electron microscopy and
orientation imaging microscopy, and physical characterization with calorimetry
and X-Ray diffraction. The consolidation of metallic powders and modeling of
SMAs will be performed at Texas A&amp;M University while thermomechanical
characterization will be performed in collaboration with the University of
Paderborn with extensive experience on such activities on active powders. The
innovative processing of the textured MSMA polycrystals are expected to lead to
high field-induced actuation force levels, desired microstructural morphology
for magnetic activation, and higher response frequencies compared to
conventional SMAs such as NiTi.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will help to foster local culture of fabricating and using SMAs and magnetic
materials for engineering. This will come about not only by educating graduate
and undergraduate students directly involved in this project in a collaborative
environment with German students and researchers but also by building
demonstrations and laboratory experiments into current classroom activities. The
investigators plan to use the proposed research to aid in the development of a
new graduate-level course on active materials. Other outreach and education
activities at Texas A&amp;M will be used to disseminate knowledge gained to
mathematics and science K-12 instructors and current high school students from
diverse backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of Materials Research
(Metals Research) and International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative
Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This
project is being carried out in collaboration with University of Paderborn in
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;