* 0244774
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Study of Sociopolitical Change in Siin (Senegal), AD 1000-1900
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Christopher Decorse, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 3,503.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Christopher DeCorse, Francois Richard will conduct
his doctoral research in the Siin, a historic province located in west-central
Senegal. Growing out of preliminary work begun in 2001 and 2002, the research
will collect archaeological materials to examine the formation and development
of political systems in the Siin during the past millennium. The AD 1000-1900
period was a time of considerable changes in Senegambia, as the region became
gradually immersed into the trans-Saharan economy, the Atlantic system, and the
French colonial empire. Despite its modest scale, Siin is depicted in oral
traditions and later historical documents as a vibrant cultural crossroads, a
haven for migrant populations, and an active player in regional politics. These
sources, however, shed little light on long-term social changes, and much
remains to be learned about the timing of population movements, the nature of
political organization, and the consequences of European expansion for local
societies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Archaeology is ideally suited to address these
questions, because the distribution of material vestiges in the landscape
provides very concrete traces of the transformations which past human societies
have experienced. In Siin, a number of target areas will be surveyed to locate
habitation sites and plot their geographic position. A preliminary ceramic
sequence, which documents time-sensitive shifts in pottery styles, will be used
to date surface deposits and place sites in a chronological framework. It is
then possible to create maps showing how settlement patterns and sociopolitical
organization evolved over time, and begin to question the historical forces
responsible for these developments. Limited excavations will help to fine-tune
the chronology and deepen understanding of regional history at a few selected
sites.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For many years, archaeologists and anthropologists
have portrayed Africa as a backwater, mostly because its societies did not
conform to 'accepted' canons of social evolution. In viewing political
development as a linear drive from 'simple' to 'complex,' however, traditional
evolutionary models were not only inaccurate, but largely failed to explain the
diversity of social courses which human societies worldwide have traveled.
Recent research has stressed the potential of African case studies to assist in
the development of new theories of social complexity that are mindful of human
creativity in adapting to changing conditions. Such work can also help rescue
Africa from its position at the margins of history, to document the complex
historical factors that have shaped the continent. The Siin provides an
excellent environment to pursue these goals, because of the wide array of
political systems it has nurtured over the past millennium. The research will
likely illustrate how Senegambian societies never lived in isolation but partook
at an early time in vast systems of exchange, involving people, goods, and
ideas. In addition to making a contribution to the comparative study of social
evolution, Mr. Richard's project will also further our understanding of the
effects of global developments (Saharan trade, the rise of the capitalist world-
system, colonial conquest) on Senegambian societies. Lastly, in collaboration
with local communities, the project will ensure the archaeological training of
several Senegalese students, while assisting in the professional growth of Mr.
Richard himself.&lt;br/&gt;