* 0244737
* Multidimensional Stochastic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Richard Bass, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 03/31/2007
* USD 324,190.00

0244737&lt;br/&gt;Bass&lt;br/&gt; The principal investigator will be working on
problems in two areas of probability. The first is concerned with Harnack
inequalities. A Harnack inequality asserts that nonnegative solutions to a
partial differential equation satisfy certain boundedness estimates at points,
and thus allow one to obtain pointwise estimates from global information. They
are used in partial differential equations to obtain estimates on heat kernels
and to prove regularity properties of solutions. They are used in probability to
obtain transition density estimates and regularity properties of certain
stochastic processes. The principal investigator will investigate when one can
obtain Harnack inequalities for functions related to non-local operators. The
operators in question have an integral term and correspond to processes with
jumps. The second area of research concerns uniqueness for the solutions of
stochastic differential equations arising from population models in mathematical
biology. These equations describe the limit of branching diffusion processes as
the number of particles increases, the mass of each particle decreases, and the
branching rate increases. The branching rate and the diffusion mechanism for a
particle are allowed to depend on all other particles in the system. Branching
diffusions are used as models of population dynamics for a large variety of
species. The equations that result are typically either infinite dimensional,
degenerate, or both. The principal investigator will continue his work on
proving uniqueness for these equations. &lt;br/&gt; It has been known for a long
time that many systems in the physical and biological sciences can be modeled by
stochastic processes. More recently it has been discovered that many financial
and economic systems can also be so modeled. To investigate more complex
systems, new types of random processes have arisen. To give an example, stock
prices are often viewed as depending on a continuous random process, Brownian
motion. Yet the fluctuations of stock prices often have sudden jumps, resulting
from wars, new discoveries, etc. Thus it is essential to also study stochastic
processes with jumps. When studying population models, one expects that the
behavior of the population will be qualitatively different depending on whether
the population is large or whether it is small. The research of the principal
investigator is primarily concerned with two types of stochastic processes, ones
with jumps, as in the stock market example, and ones concerning systems that can
degenerate, as in the population example. Some of the questions that are being
investigated are whether there is only one solution to the equation and whether
the solution has sufficient regularity to be useful in providing new information
for the model. &lt;br/&gt;