* 0244389
* Microscopic Nuclear Structure Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Bruce Barrett, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2007
* USD 363,001.00

Tremendous progress has been made in the last ten years in calculating the
properties of atomic&lt;br/&gt;nuclei microscopically starting with the free
nucleon-nucleon (NN) interaction. One of the most&lt;br/&gt;successful
theoretical approaches in this regard is the No Core Shell Model(NCSM).
Instead&lt;br/&gt;of invoking the standard shell-model assumption, that most of
the nucleons occupy an inert&lt;br/&gt;core, one treats all A nucleons as being
active. In this way one is able to formulate a systematic&lt;br/&gt;procedure to
derive e.ective interactions starting from realistic microscopic ones. This
procedure&lt;br/&gt;makes use of the similar structures that two- and three-body
clusters are expected to have in all&lt;br/&gt;nuclei. It was shown that these
e.ective interactions speed up convergence tremendously and&lt;br/&gt;make
converged solutions possible.&lt;br/&gt;It has now become apparent that present
theoretical techniques are able to accurately calculate&lt;br/&gt;the properties
of light nuclei using the NN interaction as input. Because the results
show&lt;br/&gt;a considerable underbinding, it is clear that some extra
ingredient is necessary, such as threenucleon&lt;br/&gt;interactions. Hence, the
NCSM will be expanded to include the three-body cluster (or&lt;br/&gt;e.ective
interaction) based not only on the two-body microscopic forces, but also on
realistic&lt;br/&gt;three-nucleon (3N) bare interactions. It is important do
this, because, for example, the spectra&lt;br/&gt;of light nuclei are expected
to be sensitive to the spin structure of the 3N interaction. With
these&lt;br/&gt;higher-body interactions one will also be able to perform NCSM
calculations for heavier nuclei&lt;br/&gt;in smaller basis spaces and obtain
better convergence and, hence, more accurate results. The&lt;br/&gt;development
of this three-body cluster approach is an major step forward, as it will enable
one&lt;br/&gt;to study the e.ects of current 3N interaction models and models
based on chiral perturbation&lt;br/&gt;theory on the spectra. Consequently, it
will become an important tool to probe these interactions.&lt;br/&gt;By
developing a technique for computing the three-body cluster exactly, one can
also&lt;br/&gt;investigate its structure, depending upon the number of nucleons
in the nuclide being studied&lt;br/&gt;and upon the size of the model
space.&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of all nuclear structure calculations is the
understanding of collective structures&lt;br/&gt;based on microscopic
calculations. The structure of 12C is an interesting example. The&lt;br/&gt;.rst
excited 0+ state is believed to have a 3a structure. Converged solutions for
this problem&lt;br/&gt;are a challenge, but are within the reach of NCSM
calculations. Once they can be obtained,&lt;br/&gt;one can study in detail the
di.erence between the ground state and excited state
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Another important aspect of the current investigations is
the extension of the NCSM methods to&lt;br/&gt;arbitary operators. The NCSM is
based on a unitary transformation of the cluster Hamiltonian.&lt;br/&gt;When one
is able to extend this transformation to transition or current operators, it
becomes&lt;br/&gt;possible to extract meaningful values for physical observables
from the NCSM wave functions.&lt;br/&gt;The prediction of electroweak properties
of light nuclei will be an important application of this&lt;br/&gt;new
technique.