* 0244179
* ASSURED - Agricultural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Education &amp; Development Project
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Danise Coon, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2005
* USD 149,086.00

The Agricultural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Education and Development
(ASSURED) Program will be held at New Mexico State University's (NMSU) Chile
Pepper Institute during an eight-week period throughout each summer. The Chile
Pepper Institute (CPI), which is housed in the Department of Agronomy and
Horticulture in NMSU's College of Agriculture and Home Economics, is directly
connected with both the College's capsicum teaching and research programs, and
includes over twenty-five faculty and thirty graduate students. To compliment
the research-rich collaborative atmosphere of this program, a handful of
minority education programs across campus and across local communities are
committed to assisting the ASSURED program with student recruitment,
instructional support, curricula development, weekend events, parental
involvement, and program follow-up. Ten students per year will experience
laboratory research and ownership of research projects, ethical conduct in the
research environment, development of defensible scientific methods, presentation
and poster development of research results, peer-mentor interactions with
international and national graduate students, collaborations with faculty,
exposure to research careers, college and career skill
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educators nationwide are concerned that ethnic
and language minorities and female students are not being served adequately by
existing science education programs. NMSU's Chile Pepper Institute is concerned
that for many migrant farm children who are 'settling in' to border communities,
very few know about the existence of, or access to, career opportunities in
agricultural sciences beyond field work. The program's goal is to work with
underrepresented first generation college students from immigrant farm labor
families to expand their appreciation of agricultural science in a university,
research-rich context. This two year pilot program is being designed in concert
with an NMSU institution-wide commitment to increase minority participation in
higher education. Targeting this audience provides academic and economic
alternatives and pathways toward the future stability and well-being of migrant
families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSURED Program REU will have two additional
features: 1) Provide students with an opportunity in learning while getting
compensated. 2) Provide students with campus housing and compensation for meals.
For more information contact Dr. Paul Bosland or Ms. Danise Coon at the Chile
Pepper Institute, (505)646-3028, hotchile@nmsu.edu, or Box 30003 MSC 3Q, Las
Cruces, NM 88003.&lt;br/&gt;