* 0244485
* Collaborative Research:  Stochastic and Multiscale Structure Associated with the Navier Stokes Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Rabindra Bhattacharya, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/2004
* USD 23,583.00

This project will develop the theory of the motion of fluids as embodied by the
Navier-Stokes equations using new probabilistic methods that exploit the power
of stochastic calculus and probabilistic limit theory. Although the Navier-
Stokes equations are essentially deterministic, the approach used in this work
will build on a representation of the equations as a functional of an underlying
branching random walk. This representation, which was recently discovered by
LeJan and Sznitman in France, is clearly intrinsic to the structure of the
Navier-Stokes equations. While this is not the first attempt to use stochastic
methods in connection with the flows associated with the Navier-Stokes
equations, it does represent an entirely new direction which has the potential
to transcend much of existing theory. Specific problems considered in this
proposal seek to provide a better understanding of the role of spatial
dimensions, boundary conditions, multi-scaling exponents and singularities,
viscosity, homogeneity, isotropy and rotational accelerations, stationary flows
and long-time evolution.&lt;br/&gt; The Navier-Stokes equations describe the
basic physics governing the motion of fluid in its various forms of air, water,
oil, etc. As such these equations play a fundamental role in science and
engineering through the modeling of all varieties of fluid flow, from
atmospheric and oceanic circulation to the flow of water beneath the earth's
surface. Improved understanding of these equations and their solutions is
essential to applications which range from tracking climate change and
dispersion of contaminants in the Earth's environment, to more stable aerospace
and sea vessel designs. The nonlinearity inherent in these equations makes
explicit solutions possible only for the simplest of flows. Consequently the
development of a more complete understanding of these equations at all physical
length scales ranks among the most important outstanding problems of
contemporary mathematical physics&lt;br/&gt;