* 0244816
* Studies of broken symmetries and fundamental constants with muons and pions
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Timothy Gorringe, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2007
* USD 530,956.00

This project is focused on two areas of nuclear physics&lt;br/&gt;research. The
first area is the realization of the basic&lt;br/&gt;symmetries of the strong
interaction in the low energy&lt;br/&gt;interactions of the nucleon. The second
topic is the&lt;br/&gt;determination of the Fermi coupling, a
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;constant in electroweak
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Encoded in quantum chromodynamics are various
symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;In general these internal symmetries yield conserved
currents&lt;br/&gt;that constrain the interactions of pions and
nucleons.&lt;br/&gt;Our experiments address the signatures of
chiral&lt;br/&gt;symmetry and isospin symmetry in low
energy&lt;br/&gt;processes. The manifestation of chiral symmetry
and&lt;br/&gt;isospin symmetry is rich and complex, and
involves&lt;br/&gt;spontaneous symmetry breaking and explicit
symmetry&lt;br/&gt;breaking. Further their realization is deeply connected
with&lt;br/&gt;the origins of hadron masses, the effects of quark
masses,&lt;br/&gt;and the special nature of the pion. Our proposed
experiments&lt;br/&gt;on muon--nucleon interactions and pion-nucleon
interactions&lt;br/&gt;will address two puzzles in our current
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of how both chiral symmetry and isospin symmetry are
realized&lt;br/&gt;in low-energy interactions of pions and
nucleons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electroweak theory is the fundamental
theory&lt;br/&gt;of electromagnetic interactions and weak
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;The theory is based on two local symmetries
which&lt;br/&gt;generate two gauge forces. Through the
interaction&lt;br/&gt;between these gauge fields and the Higg's field
the&lt;br/&gt;bosons mix and acquire mass, thus yielding the
massive&lt;br/&gt;W, Z bosons that mediate weak interactions, and
the&lt;br/&gt;massless photon the mediates electromagnetic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;The interactions are determined by three
parameters,&lt;br/&gt;which themselves are fixed by measurements of the
fine&lt;br/&gt;structure constant, the Z boson mass, and the Fermi
coupling&lt;br/&gt;constant. We are undertaking a new measurement of
the&lt;br/&gt;positive muon lifetime to obtain an improved
determination&lt;br/&gt;of the Fermi coupling constant. The Fermi coupling
constant&lt;br/&gt;is an input parameter in all electroweak
calculations,&lt;br/&gt;and combined with other quantities it
permits&lt;br/&gt;both important tests of the standard model and key
constraints&lt;br/&gt;on the physics beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
experimental research is conducted with beams&lt;br/&gt;of pions and muons at
the TRIUMF Laboratory in Vancouver,&lt;br/&gt;Canada, and the Paul Scherrer
Institute near Zurich, Switzerland.&lt;br/&gt;The relatively small-scale of our
experiments offers both broad&lt;br/&gt;opportunities and excellent training for
undergraduate students,&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;