* 0244146
* NSF-Europe:     Novel Method for Synthesis of Silicates Possessing Ordered Pore Structure and Containing Metal Particles of Nanometer Scale with Defined Crystal Phase
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Gabor Somorjai, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 300,967.00

This project utilizes solution methods to synthesize nanometer scale transition
metal particles that can then be incorporated into the pores of mesoporous oxide
silicates. It is a collaborative project involving UCB/LBNL and the Jozsef
Attila University in Szeged, Hungary. The goals of the project are to develop
and improve novel synthesis methods for the preparation of metal containing
catalysts that (1) contain the metal components in a definite crystal form, (2)
anchor the metal particles in the channel or cage system of micro- or meso-
porous materials, (3) with the metal particles being accessible to adsorbates
and reactant molecules that enter the pore system so that (4) the catalytic
activity of the system can be tested.

Success with this project will be of high interest to the academic and
industrial community since it will have a big payoff for catalysis research with
high potential technological impact. In addition, because of the significant
interdisciplinary challenges to achieving success on this project there will
also be unique opportunities for educational impact in that the postdoctoral
scholar who will be working on the project and traveling between University of
California at Berkeley / Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and the Jozsef
Attila University in Szeged in Hungary will need to be well interfaced with
graduate students participating in this project. As has been pointed out,
because this research is high-risk with very high technological payoff, it will
provide training skills that will make students very competitive in the job
market.

This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the
Divisioin of Materials Research (Solid State Chemistry), and the International
Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between
the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project involves a collaboration between
the University of California at Berkeley / Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory and the Jozsef Attila University in Szeged in Hungary.

