* 0244183
* NSF-Europe:  Computer-Based Discovery of Novel, Low-Temperature Structures in Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Gus Hart, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2006
* USD 180,000.00

This NSF-Europe award supports international collaborative research on
intermetallic compounds. The structure of many intermetallics is unknown
experimentally. The PI will use a Mixed-Basis Cluster Expansion in conjunction
with modern statistical mechanics ground state search techniques to predict
stable structures for intermetallics that have so far eluded experimental
determination. This will include: (a) structures of CuPd and CuMn with one- and
two-dimensional periodicities, (b) ordering of vacancies in early transition
metal nitrides and carbides - in these systems, the vacancies form peculiar
spatial arrangements, and (c) determination of the fundamental phase behavior of
Mo-Ta and Nb-W. The study of these material systems also requires development of
new methodologies: 1. Development of new kinetic-Monte Carlo codes to study
evolution of microstructures. 2. Development of a "genetic algorithm" approach
to determining ground states in alloy systems. 3. Development of mixed-basis
cluster expansion codes that handle BCC-based alloys.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project include: potential for advances in understanding
technologically important materials; developing tools for studying alloys that
will be freely available to other researchers; and providing undergraduate
students, especially those from under-represented groups in physics and
materials science, with research experience, training in computation, and one-
to-one faculty mentoring. The proposed collaboration involves a group in
Erlangen Germany, particularly noted for its interest in low-dimensional aspects
of materials. &lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of Materials Research, and the
International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135).&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF-Europe award supports international collaborative research on intermetallic
compounds. Crystal structure determines properties such as ductility, hardness,
and conductivity. Yet the structure of many intermetallics is unknown
experimentally. The PI will use a first principles methodology for predicting
stable crystal structures to study different intermetallic compounds at non-
ideal stoichiometries. The PI will also development additional methodologies and
codes to facilitate study such systems. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
project include: potential for advances in understanding technologically
important materials; developing tools for studying alloys that will be freely
available to other researchers; and providing undergraduate students, especially
those from under-represented groups in physics and materials science, with
research experience, training in computation, and one-to-one faculty mentoring.
The proposed collaboration involves a group in Erlangen Germany, particularly
noted for its interest in low-dimensional aspects of materials. &lt;br/&gt;This
NSF project is co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the
Division of Materials Research, and the International Office (Western Europe) as
a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF
02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with the Universitat
Erlangen-Numberg in Erlangen, Germany.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;