* 0244893
* Weak Decays of Oxygen-14 and Boron-8
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Lynn Knutson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2007
* USD 373,000.00

We plan to design and construct an electron spectrometer (a device for measuring
electron energies) and to use the spectrometer to carry out two new experiments.
The spectrometer will use superconducting magnet technology to generate
precisely controlled magnetic fields which deflect and focus electrons emitted
from a small radioactive source. This will permit us to measure the energy
distribution of the electrons produced in the radioactive decay. The specific
experiments to be performed involve studying the decays of the radioactive
isotopes oxygen-14 and boron-8. The oxygen-14 experiment is designed to test
what is referred to as the Conserved Vector Current (CVC) hypothesis, which is a
fundamental component of the Standard Model of Weak Interactions. The Standard
Model is the basis for understanding a wide variety of processes, including the
beta-decay of nuclei, the process which produces the electrons in our
experiments. The CVC hypothesis allows us to predict the electron energy
distribution, and the experiment will test whether that prediction is correct.
The purpose of the boron-8 experiment is to provide new information that will
help physicists understand the spectrum of neutrinos from the sun. Boron-8 plays
a critical role in solar neutrino studies. The neutrinos from decay of boron-8
in the sun are relatively high in energy, and most of the world's operating
solar neutrino detectors primarily see the boron-8 neutrinos. Since the electron
and the neutrino share the decay energy, we can obtain information about the
expected neutrino spectrum from a measurement of the electron energies.

