* 0244994
* Combinatorial Ergodic theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Bryna Kra, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/2004
* USD 98,693.00

Abstract: DMS-0244994: Byrna Kra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Penn State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kra proposes research in several
areas of ergodic theory and&lt;br/&gt;differentiable dynamics, with an emphasis
on applications of ergodic&lt;br/&gt;theory to number theory and combinatorics.
The major area of research is&lt;br/&gt;the study of ``non-conventional''
ergodic averages, studying ergodic&lt;br/&gt;theorems for averages of functions
where even if the system is ergodic,&lt;br/&gt;the limit need not be constant.
The investigator proposes studying&lt;br/&gt;polynomial averages, averages for
commuting transformations and averages&lt;br/&gt;along other sequences of
recurrence. Additional lines of research are&lt;br/&gt;based on her work on
circle maps, including connections between the&lt;br/&gt;differentiability of
the map, the arithmetic properties of its rotation&lt;br/&gt;number and the
dimension of its invariant limit set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies
the long term behavior of systems whose dynamics is&lt;br/&gt;too complicated or
too chaotic to be understood locally. Dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems are used to
model problems in natural and social sciences and&lt;br/&gt;their study leads to
an understanding of the evolution of the modeled&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The
educational portion of the project aims to contribute to&lt;br/&gt;the graduate
and undergraduate programs at Penn State University, with&lt;br/&gt;special
courses designed to inject research into the learning process at&lt;br/&gt;an
early stage. In fall 2003, the PI will develop and teach a course
on&lt;br/&gt;topological dynamics and Ramsey Theory in the MASS (Mathematics
Advanced&lt;br/&gt;Studies Semesters) program, a long-standing program aimed at
talented fourth-year undergraduates chosen in national competition. The outreach
portion aims to make the&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics Department at Penn State a more
attractive place for women to&lt;br/&gt;study and work, with the creation of a
focus group on women's issues and&lt;br/&gt;support of research projects for
undergraduate women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;