* 0244991
* Partial Differential Equations and Fourier Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Daniel Stroock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 355,000.00

PI: David S. Jerison, MIT DMS-0244991

ABSTRACT:

The main goal of this project is to understand smoothness (or nonsmoothness) and
other quantitative properties of level surfaces of solutions to nonlinear
elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations. The PI's will consider
semilinear equations that model flame fronts, free boundary problems that are
the singular limits of semilinear equations, and other models mentioned in the
next paragraph. The regularity for two-dimensional free boundaries in three-
space was only recently established. The PI's propose to show that such
regularity results extend to a broad class of equations in three space
dimensions, including as many physically motivated examples as possible. In view
of the strong analogy between the existence and regularity for free boundaries
and the corresponding questions about minimal surfaces, it is suspected that
regularity will break down in higher dimensions, where one expects to find
singular energy-minimizing solutions, analogous to the celebrated examples of
the Simons cone and of counterexamples to the Bernstein problem. Finally, the
PI's will examine global behavior of level sets. For example, consider a Neumann
eigenfunction corresponding to the smallest, nonzero eigenvalue in a convex
planar domain. J. Rauch conjectures that all its level curves touch the
boundary.

This project focuses on problems in nonlinear differential equations in which
the boundary is unknown and has to be determined: a so-called free boundary. The
classical Stefan problem of melting ice is an example. In the Stefan problem,
the question of interest is the location, as a function of time, of the
interface (``free boundary'') between water and ice. The particular problems to
which the methods of the present proposal apply also include flame fronts, the
interface between oil and water in a flow and the profile of the wake of a boat.
The PI's treat both equilibrium and evolution problems. Recently PI Jerison
established that certain equilibrium problems in three dimensions have well-
behaved solutions, where previously only the two-dimensional case was
understood. Because three is the dimension of physical space, this discovery
opens the door to other physically meaningful mathematical models, such as
models of compressible fluids and capillarity. Another kind of free boundary
problem, one which is not at all physical in origin but to which mathematical
free boundary theory applies, is the sort that arises in decision theory (PI
Stroock). For example, one wants to know when continuing a medical trial is
likely to cause more harm than good. Similarly, in a financial context, one
wants to know when interest rates and stock prices indicate that it would be
wise to buy or sell a stock option. Such questions arise when one is trying to
price an American option, that is, an option that can be exercised at any time
before it expires instead of at a fixed time.

