* 0244247
* LTER Cross-site:  Collaborative Research: Effects of Different-sized Grazers on Nitrogen Cycling across a Grassland Productivity Gradient.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Mark Ritchie, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2004
* USD 49,684.00

0087201&lt;br/&gt;Ritchie&lt;br/&gt;Herbivorous mammals can have profound
effects on the sustainability and productivity of grasslands through their
effects on nutrient cycling. Recent studies suggest that herbivores can
accelerate the cycling of nitrogen by returning mineral nitrogen in urine and
feces to the soil and favoring more nutrient-rich and decomposable plants.
Alternatively, they can slow down nutrient cycling by modifying the species
composition of plant communities, reducing litter quality, and slowing
decomposition. However, an important question remains: what controls which of
these effects herbivores will have?&lt;br/&gt; This LTER cross-site research
project addresses six major hypotheses about what controls mammalian herbivore
effects on nitrogen cycling in temperate grasslands. These hypotheses suggest
that herbivore effects may vary in response to productivity, the prevalence of
legumes in the plant community, and the susceptibility of soil to compaction. In
addition, the density of different sized herbivores and their migratory versus
seasonal use of grasslands may influence nitrogen cycling. Hypotheses will be
tested by measuring herbivore impacts on nitrogen cycling within an existing
cross-site study of the effects of different sized herbivores on grassland
biodiversity and ecosystem function. These sites encompass a wide range of
productivity, legume abundance, soil types, and patterns of seasonal use by
herbivores. &lt;br/&gt; By comparing particular pairs of sites to test specific
hypotheses and examining broad patterns in herbivore effects across all sites,
this study will provide unique insights that are not possible with studies at a
single site. The research will allow understanding of how different herbivore
species affect the sustainable production of grasslands at sites with different
productivity, plant species composition and soil types. Such information is
critical to evaluating the role of mammalian herbivores, including domestic
livestock, in the sustainable use and conservation of grasslands. &lt;br/&gt;