* 0244012
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates and Teachers at the University of Rochester: REU Site with RET Program
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Thomas Krugh, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 04/30/2007
* USD 466,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;PI: Krugh &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site integrated with a Research Experience for Teachers
(RET) program at the University of Rochester for the summers of 2003-2005.
Thomas R. Krugh is the site director. Eight students will carry out research
each summer over a ten-week period. Six high school teachers will also
participate in research at this site under the program, Research Experience for
Teachers. Recruitment will be targeted at undergraduate colleges and give
special emphasis to participation of women, underrepresented minorities and
lower division students. Secondary school teachers will be recruited from a
national pool. All participants will carry out research under the supervision of
faculty in the chemistry department. The faculty are involved in
interdisciplinary research which extends the intellectual scope of summer
research to fields such as optics, biology, medicine and dentistry, pharmacy,
engineering, physics and earth sciences. Research group seminars and REU/RET
group meetings during the summer will enhance training. A mini-course on
photoinduced charge transfer will be given. Panel discussions will be organized
to focus on career opportunities. Students will report on their work
subsequently at their colleges and at regional and national professional
meetings. The teachers remain in contact with the REU site through an STM
(scanning tunnel microscope) project which encourages them to borrow the
instrument for high school use. They also maintain web pages on a server in the
PIs lab. The REU/RET site is funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Affairs in the Mathematics and Physical Science
Directorate.