* 0244388
* Phase Behavior of Block and Graft Styrene Copolymers in Near Critical and Supercritical Solvents
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Maciej Radosz, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2007
* USD 382,481.00

Maciej Radosz University of Wyoming

"Phase Behavior of Block and Graft Styrene Copolymers in Near Critical and
Supercritical Solvents."

The overall goal of this research is to understand the phase behavior of block
and graft styrene copolymers in compressible fluids, such as near critical- and
supercritical solvents and monomers. Such understanding is needed not only to
improve existing manufacturing processes, but also to develop new polymeric
materials and new polymer processing approaches that are more efficient and more
environmentally acceptable.

This research is a synthesis of experiment and thermodynamic modeling. The
approach would be to: 1) synthesize novel graft and block copolymers, such as
polyisobutene-g-polystyrene (PIBg-PS), polybutadiene-g-polystyrene (PBD-g-PS),
and polybutadiene-b-polystyrene (PBDb-PS) from atom transfer radical
polymerization and living anionic polymerization followed by partial or complete
hydrogenation (for polymers containing polybutadiene); 2) characterize these
polymers upon microphase separation and bulk phase transitions (fluid-liquid and
fluid solid) in high-pressure experiments; and 3) develop equation-of-state-
based thermodynamic models that can explicitly account for and predict the phase
behavior of graft and block copolymers.

The research builds on a current NSF-funded project on fluid-solid equilibria in
solutions of crystallizable polymers, and on a series of preliminary but
promising seed experiments and computer simulations using recent versions of
Statistical Associating Fluid Theory (SAFT), such as SAFT1, and a recent
Lennard-Jones equation of state with self-consistent theoretical framework for
vapor, liquid, and solid phases.

This research could enhance our understanding of how the macromolecular
structure affects the phase behavior of copolymers with complex backbone
architecture. Such understanding could provide a basis for future research on
phase equilibria for other polymers with even more complex architecture, such as
triblock copolymers and graft copolymers with double branches (centipede), and
more predictive thermodynamic models. In addition to building a knowledge base
in this area, and seeding future research, the project could have a broader
impact on the existing and future commercial polymer technology. For example,
the theoretical model can be used to provide rapid predictions of cloud points,
micelle formation, crystallization, and melting of graft or block copolymers in
supercritical fluids. Such predictions are needed to control desirable and
undesirable phase transitions in production lines. The model itself can also be
used to optimize advanced polymerization schemes in supercritical fluids, such
as ATRP and living anionic polymerization. This may lead to unique products and
efficient, environmentally benign processes. Other examples of a broader social
impact include contributions to education (graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers) and to broadening participation of underrepresented groups.

