* 0244177
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Richard Poppele, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 191,112.00

The University of Minnesota sponsors the Life Sciences Summer Undergraduate
Research Program (LSSURP) through the College of Biological Sciences. This
program offers undergraduates an opportunity to gain research experience in
Neuroscience consisting of an intensive 3-week course in basic neurobiological
research principles and a 7-week mentored research experience. The 3-credit
course takes place at a remote biology field station attended by a diverse
collection of students and abundant faculty, offering opportunities for unique
scientific interactions. Following the course, students return to the Twin
Cities campus to begin their research experience with a faculty mentor. The
neuroscience students attend weekly research and information seminars specific
to their discipline and gather with all LSSURP participants (80-100) for a
program orientation weekend, weekly research presentations among peers,
interactive career and bioethics workshops and evening/weekend social
activities. The program culminates with a campus-wide research conference
including a poster session and farewell banquet. Students are encouraged to take
their research presentations to national meetings. The Neuroscience program
provides many opportunities for participant interaction with current graduate
students (~60), faculty (~90) and associated personnel. Funds are available for
the participation of 8 students. To enhance the experience of each participant,
recruiting efforts seek to include a broad spectrum of students across
geographic, ethnic, gender and college/university backgrounds. Students from
institutions with limited research opportunities are especially well served in
the LSSURP programs. Students receive a stipend, tuition for the Neurobiology
course, housing on the Medical school campus, travel accommodations and expenses
and insurance coverage for accidents and emergency illness. Neurobiology course
and summer program evaluations are completed by students to continually enhance
this fifteen year-old University of Minnesota program.