* 0244731
* Evaluation of the Cloud Particle Imager (CPI) and Microphysical Investigations of Wave, Cirrus and Anvil Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* R. Paul Lawson, SPEC, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 04/30/2007
* USD 378,632.00

This project is a continuation of the evaluation and application of the CPI
(Cloud Particle Imager), an airborne instrument that produces high-resolution
images of cloud particles down to a size of several micrometers, far exceeding
the capabilities of other instruments. The CPI is being improved by addition of
a dual 2D-stereo imaging probe funded by the Office of Naval Research. It will
be flown on a Learjet in wave and anvil clouds to investigate the sizes, crystal
habit, growth, and concentration of ice crystals in different environmental
conditions. Separate ground-based experiments will be carried out at the Storm
Peak Observatory in two winter seasons to compare CPI images of ice crystals
with images of the drops formed as they melt. This will provide a better
definition of the relation between the size and shape of ice crystals and their
mass, and will enable the CPI in airborne experiments to be used for estimating
the mass of ice per unit volume of cirrus clouds. The combination of laboratory
experiments, theoretical analysis, and ground-based and airborne experiments
will greatly increase the data available on ice crystals in natural clouds at
cold temperatures. The information is important for both cloud physics and for
predicting the effects of cirrus clouds on the transfer of solar and infrared
radiation.