* 0244323
* Collaborative Research FRG: Phase Transitions in Stochastics Dynamics and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Amir Dembo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2007
* USD 255,000.00

0244323&lt;br/&gt;Dembo&lt;br/&gt; Stochastic dynamics for spin systems have
been investigated for decades by physicists as a means for simulating Gibbs
measures. In the last decade, computer scientists and probabilists have brought
new perspectives and methods to this study and showed its applicability to
approximately uniform sampling, and approximate counting of combinatorial
structures. The key factor controlling the running time of such sampling schemes
is the mixing time of the dynamics, which can change dramatically when the
underlying stationary measure undergoes a phase transition. A central aim of
this FRG project is to explore systematically the connections between
information theory, large deviations, and mixing times for Markov chains.
Certain fundamental optimization and search problems (e.g., k-satisfiability
with random clauses) exhibit a radical change as the ratio between the input
size and the number of unknown parameters is tuned. Understanding these
thresholds quantitatively is another focus of the project.&lt;br/&gt; A system
undergoes a "phase transition" when a small change in its input has a profound,
qualitative effect on its behavior. Examples of phase transitions have been
studied for decades in physics; more recently, this notion has become important
in other areas, notably in connection with the performance of search and
optimization techniques. Further progress on the hard problems of the subject
requires long-term cooperation of researchers in probability and algorithms, as
well as consultation with experts in the adjoining areas of combinatorics and
statistical physics. The project is expected to have an impact on the design and
analysis of randomized algorithms and provide insight on key scheduling and
optimization problems. Significant effects on graduate training of students in
discrete probability and computer science are expected, as they learn the
language and tools of the different disciplines involved. &lt;br/&gt;