* 0244489
* Coulomb Drag between One-Dimensional Electron Systems: Probing the Luttinger Liquid State
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Richard Newrock, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 336,000.00

This individual investigator award supports an investigation of the behavior of
electrons confined in one-dimensional wires. The project consists of a
comprehensive experimental investigation of Coulomb drag between interacting
quantum wires in the ballistic transport regime. This relatively unexplored
phenomenon will be used as a tool to experimentally probe the Luttinger liquid
(LL) behavior of interacting, strongly correlated, one-dimensional electron
systems. The Coulomb drag resistance and the shot noise will be measured as a
function of a number of sample and environmental parameters, such as sample
length, inter-wire separation, Fermi energy, temperature, applied magnetic
field, etc. The dual-wire samples will be fabricated from high-mobility
AlGaAs/GaAs heterostructures and quantum wells using high-resolution, electron
beam lithography. The work is expected to lead to new and important results,
proving that the LL state exists in condensed matter and establishing the
applicability boundaries of the Fermi liquid theory. The project involves
training graduate students in nanoscience and nanotechnology. It includes the
participation of undergraduate students in the research. It brings together
researchers, educators, and students, leading to an integration of research,
learning, and training. In addition, a strong commitment to educational outreach
K-16 and teacher programs is integrated into the research agenda.

This individual investigator award supports an investigation of the behavior of
electrons confined to very narrow, essentially one-dimensional wires. The
project consists of a comprehensive experimental investigation, supported by
theoretical analysis, of the interaction forces between two closely spaced and
interacting one-dimensional wires in a regime where very little scattering of
the electrons occurs. These relatively unexplored interactions can be used as a
tool to probe the behavior of confined interacting electron systems. The
resistance and electronic noise will be measured as a function of a number of
sample and environmental parameters, such as sample length, inter-wire
separation, energy, temperature, applied magnetic field, etc. The behavior of
electron systems in one dimension is an important issue in condensed matter
physics. As the dimensions of technological interest become smaller, it becomes
more important to understand such systems. This research is expected to lead to
a better understanding of such small systems. This project involves the training
of graduate student researchers in nanoscience and nanotechnology as well as the
participation of undergraduate students in the research. It brings together
researchers, educators, and students, leading to an integration of research,
learning, and training. In addition, a strong commitment to educational outreach
K-16 and teacher programs is integrated into the research agenda.