* 0244736
* Ground-Based  Astrophysics with the STACEE and Pierre Auger Observatories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Corbin Covault, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

This proposal requests funds to support the Case Western Reserve University
(CWRU) group to work on two astrophysics experiments. STACEE is a new detector
for ground-based gamma-ray astronomy in the energy range 50 to 1000 GeV,
corresponding to an energy regime that has been inaccessible to previous ground-
based experiments. STACEE is located at the National Solar Thermal Test Facility
(NSTTF) in Albuquerque, NM at Sandia National Laboratories and uses large
heliostat mirrors at the NSTTF to collect Cherenkov light from gamma-ray air
showers. Construction of the STACEE experiment is now complete, but during
construction two major observing campaigns were conducted. In 1998, STACEE
detected the Crab nebula with a significance in excess of six standard
deviations. During the summer of 2001, STACEE detected the extra-galactic source
Markarian 421 during an outburst. Over the next three years, STACEE will observe
active galactic nuclei (AGN), gamma-ray bursters (GRB) and several other
galactic and extra-galactic objects. With a low energy threshold, many more
extra-galactic sources will be visible to STACEE that are unobservable at higher
energies due to intergalactic gamma-gamma absorption. STACEE is perhaps uniquely
capable of making extended observations of sources in the energy range from 50
to 250 GeV. Collaborators from CWRU have developed improved reconstruction
techniques and are responsible for maintaining the STACEE optical system.

The group at CWRU is also participating in a limited, but important, role in the
Pierre Auger Observatory, a major international experiment to detect the highest
energy cosmic rays. AUGER is a hybrid detector made of 1600 water-Cherenkov
ground stations and five associated fluorescence detectors. A critical component
of each ground station is the GPS clock used to time-tag the arrival of shower
particles on the ground. The CWRU group is responsible for calibrating each of
the 1600 GPS units that will be used in AUGER to timestamp events to within 20
ns absolute time.

This work has a potential broader impact on several areas outside of particle
astrophysics. These include (1) the use of heliostats to support remote sensing
by earth-viewing satellites, (2) the design and application of new types of non-
imaging optical systems, (3) the development of mirror measurement techniques
for solar energy applications, and (4) the development of software for high-
speed data acquisition.