* 0244805
* US-India Planning Visit:  Data Gaps and Needs for Assessing Productivity, N2 Fixation, and Elemental Cycling in the Indian Ocean
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Peter Edwards, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0244805&lt;br/&gt;Mulholland &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
planning visit for US PI Margaret Mulholland, and co-PIs Donat and Edwards from
Old Dominion University (ODU) to meet with counterparts at the National
Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Goa, India to finalize a collaboration on
nitrogen (N2) fixation and nitrogen (N) cycling in the Indian Ocean. They will
identify data gaps, evaluate existing data, and ascertain future research needs
on this important topic. In spite of the substantial marine resources in coastal
areas, this topic is not well understood due to the lack investigations at
coastal tropical sites. The nearshore waters along the west coast of India are
an ideal natural laboratory for studying marine nitrogen fixation and cycling.
Both the abundance of Trichodesmium blooms and the proximity to the National
Institute of Oceanography, India's premier oceanographic research institute,
make feasible the proposed process-oriented studies that are required for fully
understanding marine nitrogen fixation and cycling by Trichodesmium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US team will establish collaborations with NIO
investigators, leverage institutional support, access a superb laboratory
facility, and establish guidelines for future research efforts and data
exchange. Additionally, they will explore the logistics for a cooperative
educational program at ODU and NIO with courses team taught by the binational
investigator team. This will be a unique opportunity to train the next
generation of scientists at both institutions to work in interdisciplinary/
intercultural environments. This award is jointly supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Ocean Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;