* 0244732
* Control and Diagnosis of Discrete-event Systems with Temporal Logic Specifications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/16/2002,07/31/2006
* Ratnesh Kumar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 237,848.00

The proposal is motivated from a comprehensive and formal study of control and
diagnosis of discrete event systems with temporal logic specifications. The
supervisory control theory provides a formalism or synthesizing controllers for
event-driven systems in order to enforce desired qualitative specifications.
Such specifications are traditionally expressed as formal languages or
equivalently as state machines. It is more practical, however, to express
specifications in a language close to a natural spoken language. Temporal logic
is an attempt to bridge the gap between formal and natural languages. It is our
intent to develop techniques for control and diagnosis of discrete event systems
when the specifications are expressed in temporal logic. We choose the temporal
logics of CTL (computational tree logic) and LTL (linear time logic) proposed by
Clarke-Emerson-Sitsla for which automated techniques exist for verifying system
properties. The proposed research complements that work by developing automated
techniques for synthesizing controllers and diagnosers. Several problems in this
context have been proposed including, control under complete observation,
control under partial observation, modular control,&lt;br/&gt;failure modeling
and diagnosis, and computation using the symbolic method. Our initial work shows
that with the usage of temporal logic, there is no loss of computational
complexity, yet there is surely a gain of expressibility and user-
friendliness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;