* 0244175
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Paul Layer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2006
* USD 275,228.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site grant will support twelve
undergraduate researchers in Solid Earth Geophysics each summer. The program
will give undergraduates majoring in geology, geophysics, physics, chemistry and
other closely related disciplines, experience in the types of research conducted
at the Geophysical Institute. The program objective is to acquaint
undergraduates with the research opportunities in the various fields of
geophysics, concentrating on seismology, volcanology, geochronology,
geochemistry, paleomagnetics, geodesy, tectonics, glaciers and sea ice, and
remote sensing and encouraging them to go onto graduate school in these or other
scientific areas. Women and minorities will be particularly encouraged to apply.
In this program, students will work in one of three, 4-member project teams with
the following emphases. Team I will have an emphasis in Seismology and
Deformation in Alaska, team 2 will have an emphasis in Geochronology, Petrology
and Volcanology in Alaska, and team 3 will have an emphasis in Remote Sensing in
Alaska. The students will spend 10 weeks working full time on research projects
under the supervision of a team project mentor, in conjunction with other
individual investigators in the various fields. Through their contacts with
faculty, graduate students, and research staff, and by attending seminars and
thesis defenses, the students will obtain an accurate perspective of graduate
student life. This program will give undergraduate students, many from small
liberal arts colleges, the opportunity for in-depth exposure to the fields of
solid earth sciences before they make decisions regarding graduate school. As
part of the program, there will be an organized series of weekly lectures and
field trips to expose interns to other fields of research beyond the scope of
their own projects. At the end of the summer each team will be required to
submit a written report on their project, produce an AGU-style abstract, and
make an oral presentation to their peers. One student from each of the three
project teams will be selected to present the results of their team's work at a
national meeting.