* 0244280
* Midwest Photosynthesis Meeting--Photosynthesis Research in the Post Genomic World, 2002 at Turkey Run State Park, Marshall, IN
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Louis Sherman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

This award supports the Midwest Photosynthesis meeting on "Photosynthesis
Research in the Post Genomic World" that will be held at the Turkey Run State
Park, Marshall, IN from October 27-29, 2002. The intent of this meeting has been
to foster interaction and cooperation among laboratories in the midwest involved
with photosynthesis research and to provide a forum for oral and poster
presentations by graduate students and post-doctoral scholars. In this regard,
the annual meeting has been exquisitely successful and a large number of the
students and post docs have gone on to successful scientific careers. Many have
continued research in photosynthesis and have established laboratories around
the country. Traditionally this meeting has emphasized biochemistry, biophysics,
plant physiology and bioenergetics. This support will allow development of a
meeting around new technologies inherent in genomics and structural biology and
new approaches in systems biology. By bringing together photosynthetic
researchers from around the country who are utilizing high throughput
technologies and computational analyses for the study of photosynthesis or
related topics, this forward looking meeting that will expose the participants
to post-genomic systems biology. This support will broaden the range of
participants and provide travel and living expenses for undergraduate students
and will enhance the diversity of the participants.