* 0244288
* NSF-Europe: Nanoscale Ferroelectric and Piezoelectric Phenomena in Ultrathin Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Ramamoorthy Ramesh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2004
* USD 235,420.00

This is a collaborative project between researchers at the University of
Maryland and at Rheinisch-Westfalische Technische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen,
Germany. The project aims to create ferroelectric nanostructures and
characterize polarization dynamics in them. Earlier work has shown that
ferroelectric polarization is is well-behaved down to lateral sizes of 70 nm3.
When the ferroelectric volume shrinks to a few nanometers, there arises a
competition between thermal excitation (kT) and dipolar interactions that lead
to the existence of a polar state. Re-search activities are focused on two
areas: exploration of size scaling effects in these thin films; and
comprehensive understanding of nanoscale dynamical phenomena that impact the
functional-ity of these materials. A major challenge is to fabricate and
integrate functional oxides with other materials at nanometer dimensions, and to
determine and understand their properties. This pro-ject expects progress
through a combination of advanced materials processing and fabrication
approaches, incorporation of state-of-the-art nanolithography tools (such as
focused ion beam milling and e- beam lithography) to create nanostructures and
the use of a variety of nanoscale resolution probes to study and understand
dynamical physical phenomena at the nanoscale. Ac-tivities at Aachen will
emphasize advanced device processing, while scanned probe characteriza-tion will
be addressed at Maryland. In addition both institutions will participate in
computational and theoretical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues associated with electronic materials
having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the
strong emphasis on education, with emphasis on integration of research and
education, and an international collaboration pro-viding both scientific and
educational benefits. An important component of this interaction will be
exchange of students for extended periods of time. During summers, a student-
exchange pro-gram will allow graduate students from Maryland to conduct research
in Aachen, and vice versa. Additionally, senior members will present lectures at
the partner's location to further foster inter-actions. This NSF project is co-
funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of Materials
Research (Electronic Materials, and Ceramics Programs), and the International
Of-fice (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between
the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried out in
collaboration with Rheinisch-Westfalische Technische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen,
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;***