* 0244783
* Exploring the Nucleosynthesis of Core Collapse Supernovae in Multidimensions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Anthony Mezzacappa, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2007
* USD 206,598.00

In addition to being among the most energetic of astrophysical events, core
collapse&lt;br/&gt;supernovae are the most productive factories of the heavy
elements which are necessary for&lt;br/&gt;life. As a result, they are critical
players in the origin and evolution of the chemical&lt;br/&gt;elements, a
subject of study central to the Directorate of Mathematical \&amp;
Physical&lt;br/&gt;Sciences' Origins of the Universe theme. Supernovae have also
been, and continue to be,&lt;br/&gt;objects of great interest to a wide range of
NSF-funded astronomical, nuclear and particle&lt;br/&gt;physics experiments and
observatories, from radio and optical telescopes to
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;accelerators and neutrino and gravity wave detectors. The
theoretical study of core&lt;br/&gt;collapse supernovae has progressed greatly
in recent years, however compelling questions&lt;br/&gt;remain.&lt;br/&gt;In
this proposal, we advance a plan to improve our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the
nucleosynthesis which results when a core collapse supernovae explodes. This
proposal&lt;br/&gt;builds on our current efforts and is complimentary to DoE
funded research into the core&lt;br/&gt;collapse supernova mechanism at Oak
Ridge National Laboratory. While the theoretical&lt;br/&gt;study of core
collapse supernovae has progressed greatly in the past decade,
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;questions remain, including ''Can the neutrino reheating
mechanism, when calculated&lt;br/&gt;accurately in multidimensions, successfully
produce supernova explosions?'' Key to&lt;br/&gt;answering these questions is
the ability to compare the computed models with observations.&lt;br/&gt;Since
many of the important observations of supernovae highlight the
elemental&lt;br/&gt;composition, accurate calculation of the nucleosynthesis of
these multi-dimensional core&lt;br/&gt;collapse supernova simulations is needed.
In particular, we need to see how realistic&lt;br/&gt;nucleosynthesis,
calculated in a self-consistent multi-dimensional fashion, differs
from&lt;br/&gt;current parameterized one dimensional models. We therefore
propose to build on our&lt;br/&gt;world-leading neutrino radiation hydrodynamic
capability and investigate the&lt;br/&gt;nucleosynthesis of these models. Our
ultimate goal is self consistent nucleosynthesis,&lt;br/&gt;calculated in situ
within the neutrino radiation hydrodynamic models, but we will
also&lt;br/&gt;discuss interim steps that will give us some nucleosynthesis
information more immediately.&lt;br/&gt;The realization that "we are star
stuff", that the chemical elements that compose our&lt;br/&gt;bodies and our
world originate in stars, has penetrated deep into the public
awareness,&lt;br/&gt;reaching as far as pop culture and philosophy. Thus, the
study of Cosmic Origins is&lt;br/&gt;science with broad societal impact and
interest. In response to this public curiosity,&lt;br/&gt;Hix and Mezzacappa
have given several public lectures on this topic in recent years
and&lt;br/&gt;expect to continue to do so as part of this proposed effort. This
proposal would further&lt;br/&gt;the interdisciplinary collaboration between
nuclear physics and astrophysics. This&lt;br/&gt;proposal would also further
educational and professional development on several fronts.&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal would fund the involvement of a graduate student in supernova
research&lt;br/&gt;efforts at ORNL, providing educational access to a world
class scientific environment. We&lt;br/&gt;also anticipate the involvement in
this research of summer undergraduate students, as we&lt;br/&gt;have in the
past, through the Science Alliance funded by the state of Tennessee.
Finally&lt;br/&gt;this proposal would allow Hix to develop his independent
research agenda, furthering his&lt;br/&gt;development as a scientist.