* 0244063
* REU Site: Summer Research in Molecular Biophysics
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2006
* USD 122,444.00

Undergraduate research training in the field of molecular biophysics is
available at Princeton University under the NSF REU Site program, Summer
Research in Molecular Biophysics. The field of molecular biophysics can be
characterized by its focus on the application of research methods and
intellectual approaches drawn from the mathematical and physical sciences aimed
at advancing molecular-level understanding of biological systems. The need for
scientific personnel trained in this area has been widely acknowledged, both to
serve practical national needs and to advance scholarship in the field. The
program aims to attract students majoring in physical and mathematical sciences
who wish to work on problems of biology. A goal of this program is to expose
students to contemporary problems for which our state of knowledge is being
significantly advanced by cross-disciplinary approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site program builds on a summer minority research
program with a track record of successful recruitment through active contacts in
science and math departments at many historically-minority undergraduate
institutions. Thus, the program aims to draw applicants from the qualified
minority pool mainly from schools without graduate programs. As well, an
international arrangement for exchange of undergraduate students in biophysical
sciences with Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden offers an optional summer
research abroad opportunity for students who successfully complete a summer
research program at Princeton in the previous year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central feature of the on-campus program is nine weeks of summer research with
individual faculty selected for their experience in and dedication to effective
mentoring. Faculty mentors are drawn from the participating departments of
applied and computational mathematics, chemistry, chemical engineering, computer
science, molecular biology, and physics. In addition, biophysics students
participate in summer activities on campus aimed at promoting careers in
scholarship. Training in scientific ethics is offered, as well as basic
education in the application of the scientific method, the nature of scientific
inquiry, and the development of knowledge, and training in the use of web-based
informatics and structure analysis tools. Students who successfully complete a
summer in the program and their undergraduate degree requirements can request to
be reviewed for early admission into the relevant departmental graduate program
at Princeton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is open to students completing
the sophomore or junior year. The closing date for applications is March 1st
each year. Electronic applications are available on the program's website:
http://www.princeton.edu/~chemdept/mbp/sumprog.html. The point-of-contact for
student recruitment is Kirsten Erwin, Undergraduate Administrator, Chemistry
Department (609) 258-5015; kirsten@princeton.edu. &lt;br/&gt;