* 0244097
* Holocene and Modern Climate Change in the High Arctic:  Establishing an REU site on Svalbard, Norway
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Steven Roof, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 04/30/2009
* USD 521,526.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Werner&lt;br/&gt;OPP-
0244097&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Natural Sciences Program and
Paleoclimate Program in the Division of Atmospheric Sciences are jointly funding
this three-year project. Mount Holyoke College is the host institution in
collaboration with Principal Investigators at the Universities of Massachusetts
and Northern Illinois, Bates College, Hampshire College, and the Norwegian
University system (UNIS) and the Norwegian Polar Institute. The Arctic is
particularly sensitive to climate change and because climatically-induced
environmental changes in this region can instigate further changes of global
consequences. Svalbard has warmed considerably during the last 90 years and
climate proxies indicate even greater Holocene climate change. Despite this,
little is known of sub-century climate change and virtually nothing is known of
decadal scale variability in this region. Undergraduate students will do
research on glacial-lacustrine and glacio-marine systems in order to establish
linkages between climate, glacier mass balance, sediment transport, and lake and
fjord sedimentation. Selected undergraduate students will: 1) quantify the
response of the glacial, fluvial, lacustrine, and fjord systems to measured
weather fluctuations; and 2) use these relationships to calibrate and interpret
sediment records from lakes and fjords to reconstruct Holocene climatic changes.
Students, working closely with student colleagues and faculty mentors, will
design their own research questions, collect field data, and formulate
hypotheses and conclusions. They will spend five weeks on Svalbard which will
include orientation, safety training, and fieldwork. They will complete their
research at their home institutions during the following academic year and will
be invited the following spring semester to participate in a project symposium.
The objective of this REU Site program is to expose students to the challenges
and rewards of polar research. Six research positions will available in summer,
2004 for highly motivated undergraduate students having a strong interest in
polar science and climate change research. Underrepresented groups and students
without research opportunities at their home institutions will be actively
recruited. Research results from this project will be incorporated into
undergraduate courses at all of the institutions, will be made available to the
broader scientific community, and will be used in presentations on arctic
climate change for public audiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;