* 0245461
* Terahertz Photonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 04/30/2007
* USD 238,546.00

0245461 Kersting

Current communications technologies make use of either electronics operating in
the low frequency region of the electro-magnetic spectrum or of photonic
techniques in the optical spectrum. Between these regions, the terahertz (THz)
frequency band extends from 100 GHz to 100 THz. Above few hundred GHz, no
technology for signal processing is available, although many semiconductor-based
THz emitters and detectors have been developed during the past decade. The PI
proposes to develop photonic semiconductor heterostructure devices that will
allow the manipulation of THz signals as well as logical processing of ultrafast
THz pulses. The goals of this project are to deduce fundamental properties of
THz intersubband devices and to demonstrate a proof of concept for photonic
signal processing at THz frequencies.

The strategic approach of the proposed work is to fabricate semiconductor
heterostructure devices and to demonstrate their operation at THz frequencies.
The devices will consist of modulation n-doped GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures,
which have intersubband resonances at THz frequencies. The devices will be
characterized by THz techniques, which directly show the device performance in
time-domain. In the first step the PI will investigate the linear properties of
THz devices and will characterize them with respect to modulation frequency,
efficiency, and operation temperature. Fundamental logical operations will be
demonstrated in free-space geometry. In the second step we will focus on the
nonlinear regime. Absorption saturation and negative differential behavior will
be demonstrated. Finally, device integration will be investigated. Results on
the required device dimensions will give insight into future integration
densities.

Terahertz photonics with semiconductor heterostructures is a novel concept for
ultrafast signal processing and may allow switching rates beyond 1 THz. The
expected results may impact optical fiber communications and high speed
interconnects between chips. Besides the expected speed, two technological
arguments make THz photonics attractive: The compatibility of THz photonics with
standard semiconductor device fabrication technologies and the reduced heat
dissipation due to low switching energies.

Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in the proposed research.
All students will gain a multidisciplinary education, which covers semiconductor
device technology, THz technology, and photonics.

