* 0245588
* Virtual Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Louis Kauffman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2007
* USD 159,182.00

DMS-0245588 &lt;br/&gt;Louis Kauffman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a
broad approach to virtual knot theory. Knot theory&lt;br/&gt;studies the
embeddings of curves in three-dimensional space. Equivalently&lt;br/&gt;knot
theory studies the embeddings of curves in a&lt;br/&gt;thickened two dimensional
sphere. Virtual knot theory studies the&lt;br/&gt;embeddings of curves in
thickened surfaces of arbitrary genus,&lt;br/&gt;up to the addition and removal
of empty handles from the surface. From the&lt;br/&gt;point of view of classical
knot theory a virtual knot&lt;br/&gt;will appear as the trajectory of a particle
that sometimes abruptly&lt;br/&gt;disappears from three dimensional space and
reappears later&lt;br/&gt;at another point in space. An example of such a
trajectory would be a&lt;br/&gt;superstring moving in three dimensional space,
but&lt;br/&gt;occasionally taking a detour into higher dimensions. Virtual knots
have a&lt;br/&gt;special diagrammatic theory that makes handling
them&lt;br/&gt;very similar to the handling of classical knot diagrams. With
this&lt;br/&gt;approach, one can generalize many structures in classical
knot&lt;br/&gt;theory to the virtual domain, and use the virtual knots to test
the limits&lt;br/&gt;of classical problems such as the question
whether&lt;br/&gt;the Jones polynomial detects knots and the classical Poincare
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;Counterexamples to these conjectures exist in
the&lt;br/&gt;virtual domain, and it is an open problem whether any of
these&lt;br/&gt;counterexamples are equivalent (by addition and subtraction
of&lt;br/&gt;empty handles) to classical knots and links. Virtual knot theory is
an&lt;br/&gt;important domain to be investigated for its own sake and for a
deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of classical knot
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator hopes that the above
analog relationship with string theory&lt;br/&gt;will bear fruit. Virtual braids
are being used by the principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator to establish
relationships among quantum computing, quantum&lt;br/&gt;entanglement and
topological entanglement. It is a long-standing goal of&lt;br/&gt;this project
to work with knots, physics and&lt;br/&gt;other natural sciences such as
molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;Generalizations such as the virtual knot theory
have&lt;br/&gt;potential for use in a wide variety of applications where there
is a&lt;br/&gt;combination of topology, and combinatorially modeled
physicality.&lt;br/&gt;In such applications, the topology is only part of the
picture. One is&lt;br/&gt;dealing with systems that can be modeled in a discrete
way so&lt;br/&gt;that certain specified changes are allowed in the forms of the
models. The&lt;br/&gt;question that a topologist asks is: What is invariant
under the changes?&lt;br/&gt;This question is significant in applications
because it corresponds to the&lt;br/&gt;stable properties of molecular
structures and to conserved quantities in&lt;br/&gt;the physics. The approaches
used in combinatorial topology can be&lt;br/&gt;generalized for use in a wide
variety of contexts. A good example of this&lt;br/&gt;is seen in the use of knot
theory in molecular biology where the allowed&lt;br/&gt;changes are a
combination of what the topologist regards as continuous&lt;br/&gt;deformations
coupled with discontinous changes corresponding to enzymatic&lt;br/&gt;action
and recombination. This has led to a vigorous interplay between&lt;br/&gt;knot
theory and molecular biology. By asking these questions
about&lt;br/&gt;topological relationship and the nature of knot theory, new
insights and&lt;br/&gt;applications in molecular biology, physics and quantum
computing are&lt;br/&gt;coming forth.&lt;br/&gt;