* 0245238
* U.S.-Croatia Mathematics Research on the Theory of Reproducing Function Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Edward Wilson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2008
* USD 57,660.00

The goal of this U.S.-Croatian cooperative research project between Guido Weiss
and Edward Wilson of Washington University and Hrvoje Sikic of the University of
Zagreb is to strengthen the theoretical foundation required for reproducing
function systems of square integrable functions. This will be accomplished by
bringing together a team of senior and junior U.S. and Croatian mathematicians
with complementary expertise to first reexamine the shift invariant spaces
approach from an algebraic perspective and second, incorporate the idea of a
filter. Thirdly, they will examine various applications of a recently developed
unified approach for characterizing those functions of finite families of
foundations for which an appropriate set of translations, dilations and
modulations produce an analyzing and/or synthesizing
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results are expected to refine the theoretical
framework for the field of wavelets and reproducing function systems thereby
allowing systems of great generality to be studied simultaneously. Success would
enhance our ability to conduct highly accurate signal analyses and information
transfer, with implications for statistical analysis and likely applications in
communication networks, coding systems, information storage and retrieval, and
analysis of satellite and medical imaging data. &lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;This
mathematics project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and South Central Europe to
combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence.