* 0245422
* Mathematical Model to Formalize Tolerance Specifications and Enable Full 3D Tolerance Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Joseph Davidson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 06/30/2007
* USD 371,999.00

Tolerances specify the ranges of permissible imperfections so a manufactured
part will be acceptable for assembly and use. Standards exist to define classes
of tolerances and to ensure proper communication among engineers. The purpose of
this research is to continue creating a mathematical model of geometric
tolerances. The results from our earlier work show that the proposed math model
is compatible with the standards, and that it provides three-dimensional
relations for assemblies. At the local level, the method of the new model is to
represent each tolerance-zone for a plane or a line as a hypothetical point-
space, or map, and to combine these for assemblies of parts. At the global
level, the model inter-relates all reference frames of an assembly using degrees
of freedom. The project includes the implementation of a tolerance analysis
system for comparison of the new model with existing software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing methods for analysing tolerances today are based
strongly on ad-hoc conventions from engineering practice and less on
mathematical principles. Consequently, full three-dimensional analysis of
tolerances in assemblies is not done today, and contemporary design software is
only partially compatible with existing standards. The outcome of this project
will provide the tools to complete full three-dimensional statistical analyses
of tolerances, and, thereby, it will improve quality and lower cost. This
project will result in new teaching materials, which should make the subject
easier to include in undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula. Based on
our model, we are proposing to the American Standards Committee a new set of
professional development classes and certification exams that are directed at
engineers for tolerance analysis in the digital age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;