* 0245428
* Study of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Belz, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 08/31/2006
* USD 160,000.00

This proposal is a request for the continued NSF support of a particle
astrophysics research program at the University of Montana. The focus of this
proposal is on undergraduate research and outreach in conjunction with the High-
Resolution Fly's Eye (HiRes), an air-fluorescence cosmic ray observatory and the
leading active experiment in particle astrophysics today. In addition, a related
new project, FLASH, will perform direct measurements of air fluorescence to
better constrain HiRes systematic uncertainties. Cosmic rays have been known for
a decade to strike the earth with energies exceeding 1020 electron-volts. The
origins of these ultra-high-energy (UHE) particles, however, remain unclear. No
single acceleration mechanism can explain all the features in the energy
spectrum; the events appear to arrive with energies in excess of the Greisen-
Zatsepin-Kuz'min (GZK) cutoff imposed by interactions with the cosmic microwave
background; and no evidence for anisotropic behavior has yet been found in
studies of UHE cosmic ray arrival directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HiRes
experiment in western Utah is an ongoing and expanding project, which uses the
nitrogen fluorescence technique to study UHE cosmic rays. HiRes aims to
determine the energy spectrum, chemical composition, and arrival directions of
these extraterrestrial particles, and thus provide data crucial to the
development of modern astrophysical models. The FLASH (FLuorescence in Air from
Showers) experiment at SLAC supports the aims of HiRes by seeking to perform a
precise measurement of the fluorescence yield of charged particles in air. By
reducing a potential source of systematic uncertainty in the HiRes measurement,
FLASH will shed light on the apparent differences between spectra reported by
HiRes and the previous-generation experiment, AGASA. FLASH will also provide
data on airshower-induced fluorescence for future UHE cosmic ray
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the education/outreach area, the University
of Montana is an undergraduate institution in physics. Therefore this proposal
is centered on undergraduate activity in experimental cosmic ray and elementary
particle physics. The broader impact is significant; unique educational,
research, and outreach opportunities in an underdeveloped region of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;