* 0245320
* Noncommutative Geometry and Rings of Differential Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* J. Tobias Stafford, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 230,049.00

Principal Investigator: J. Tobias Stafford &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0245320&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONCOMMUTATIVE GEOMETRY AND RINGS OF
DIFFERENTIAL OPERATORS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; PROJECT
ABSTRACT: There are two main themes to Professor Stafford's research project.
The first concerns the theory of "noncommutative projective geometry", or the
application of projective algebraic geometry to the study of noncommutative
graded rings. The underlying project is to appropriately classify noncommutative
surfaces (equivalently, noncommutative graded algebras of Gelfand-Kirillov
dimension 3), thereby extending the classification, by Professors Artin and
Stafford, of noncommutative curves (graded algebras of Gelfand-Kirillov
dimension 2). In particular Professor Stafford intends to study noncommutative
analogues of blowing up and down. Jointly with Professors Keeler and Rogalski,
Professor Stafford has used projective algebraic geometry to create noetherian
connected graded algebras that are not strongly noetherian. The algebraic
geometrical perspective may lead to further insights regarding such algebras.
Professor Stafford will also work on classifying moduli spaces of vector bundles
and modules over various noncommutative algebras. The second main theme, the
study of rings of differential operators and their invariants, includes
applications to the representation theory of Lie algebras. The techniques
developed in this project should be useful for understanding the rational
Cherednik algebras and their spherical subalgebras, as introduced by Professors
Etingof and Ginzburg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of mathematics is inherently
noncommutative; perhaps the most famous example is Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle: Measuring the position and then measuring the momentum of a particle
gives a different answer than first measuring the momentum of the particle and
then the position. This noncommutativity naturally leads to the study of
noncommutative algebras. Much of Professor Stafford's research and of the
present project is in the area of noncommutative geometry, a theory that uses
the techniques and intuition of algebraic geometry to study such algebras. This
theory has led to a classification of noncommutative analogues of curves, and
the motivating question behind the present project is to extend those results to
provide a deeper understanding of noncommutative analogues of
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;