* 0245674
* Self-diffusion and spatially heterogeneous dynamics in supercooled liquids near Tg
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* joyce guest
* 04/30/2006
* USD 314,000.00

Mark Ediger of the University of Wisconsin Madison is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to carry out experiments that will
measure fundamental aspects of translational motion in low molecular weight
supercooled liquids. In experiments using thermally programmed desorption and
forward recoil spectrometry, the self-diffusion coefficients of four supercooled
liquids of varying fragility will be measured very near the glass transition
temperature, a range in which there are currently very few experimental results.
The systems selected for study are glycerol, salol, ortho-terphenyl, and
decalin, ranging from one of the least fragile to one of the most fragile single
component organic glass formers identified in the literature. Self-diffusion
outcomes on these systems will be combined with the PI's recent data for tris-
naphthylbenzene (TNB). For TNB, neutron reflectivity will be used to determine
the distance over which molecules must move before translational motion becomes
diffusive. The technique of small angle neutron scattering will be used to
directly detect regions of heterogeneous dynamics and to determine their size.
As well, neutron reflectivity will be used to determine the influence of nearby
interfaces on dynamics near the glass transition temperature. All of these
experiments will be performed using vapor deposition to prepare thin bilayers of
normal and deuterated glass formers. Experimental outcomes will place strong
constraints on models of molecular motion near the glass transition temperature,
and will be used to test these models. The results will also increase
understanding of the origin of spatial heterogeneities in dynamics.

Understanding transport properties near the glass transition temperature is
important for polymers and other technologically important materials that are
disordered, or amorphous. Outcomes are expected to advance the ability to
manipulate properties of polymers and metallic glasses, to provide fundamental
insights into the collapse of small polymer structures prepared by lithography,
and to be essential for the development of practical nanoscale structures and
devices involving amorphous materials. As well, proteins, foams, and granular
materials all exhibit glassy dynamics whose understanding will be enhanced by
these studies on supercooled liquids.