* 0245414
* Inverse Boundary Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 562,641.00

PI: Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0245414&lt;br/&gt;--
-----------------------------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&g
t; ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer will address several fundamental
inverse problems arising in medical imaging, geophysics, and optical imaging.
The systems of equations modeling the physical situation at hand are the
conductivity equation, a class of Hamiltonian equations in phase space, the
system of elastodynamics and Maxwell's equations. The inverse problems consist
in determining the interior conductivity, the Hamiltonian system, the elastic
and electromagnetic parameters, respectively, in the interior of a body or
object by making measurements at the boundary. We propose four major topics of
research. The first one is Electric Impedance Tomography. In this inverse method
one attempts to determine the conductivity of a medium by making voltage and
current measurements at the boundary. The second topic is the determination of a
Riemannian metric (anisotropic sound speed) in the interior of a domain from the
lengths of geodesics joining&lt;br/&gt;points of the boundary (travel times).
The third topic is seismic imaging. We plan to use the methods of microlocal
analysis to generate wave-equation solutions that will help to image the
heterogeneity and anisotropy of the Earth's upper crust. The last topic is
Electromagnetic&lt;br/&gt;Systems and Maxwell's equations. In particular we
propose to utilize the fact that electromagnetic fields can be polarized to
determine electromagnetic parameters like chirality, which measures the
asymmetry in the molecular makeup of a
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse problems arise in all fields
of sciences and applications where causes for a desired or observed effect are
to be determined. We know about the interior structure of the Earth by solving
inverse acoustic problems, the structure of DNA from solving inverse X-ray
diffraction&lt;br/&gt;problems, and the structure of the atom and its
constituents from studying the scattering when materials are bombarded with
particles. There are numerous other examples of inverse problems of practical
importance. Material science provides one class of examples. One important task
is to&lt;br/&gt;figure out what is inside a material without destroying it in
the process. Medical diagnosis provides another area where inverse problems are
of vital importance. X-ray tomography and CAT scans, which are used in everyday
life as diagnostic tools, are particularly familiar examples of inverse methods.
In X-ray tomography high frequency X-rays are sent through the body and then the
density is determined from the recorded information. The mathematics needed to
recover the density was developed by Radon in the early part of the century. The
goal of the proposal on inverse boundary problems is to develop mathematical
reconstruction formulas for several inverse problems arising in geophysics,
medical imaging and optical imaging, analog to the one developed by Radon for
the case of X-ray tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;