* 0245123
* CAREER: Analysis of Multi-dimensional Coordination Problems in Service Parts Logistics Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,04/30/2009
* Erhan Kutanoglu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 04/30/2009
* USD 387,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding for the
development of models and algorithms for coordination problems in Service Parts
Logistics (SPL) systems. The challenge in SPL systems is to coordinate decisions
across business units, time horizons, and geographical locations at the same
time towards high-quality system-wide solutions. The research first will develop
a unified framework for integrated logistics network design and inventory
management and explore decomposition-based solution methodologies for the
associated problems formulated as mathematical models. The logistics network
design submodel involves multiple echelons, multiple products and time-based
service coverage restrictions. The inventory submodel involves inventory sharing
across multiple facilities and response-time based service levels. Motivated by
the scale of the problems existing in real SPL systems, the research will also
investigate different levels of granularity of the models, and identify the
trade-off between computation and solution accuracy. The research will finally
address the mechanism design and incentive issues that inherently exist in
coordination problems: How does one make sure that the decision entities have
the necessary incentives to coordinate their decisions? The closely related
educational plan of the award involves the development of a teaching case on
modern SPL systems, and the development of a course on mathematical modeling of
supply chain coordination problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to the solution of problems in SPL, both in
size and scope, commonly faced by industry, the government and the military. The
models and their results will be validated and verified with partners in SPL.
The investigations should contribute in finding scalable solution methodologies
for large-scale mathematical models with special structure and their application
to real problems. The results will also provide insights in aligning the
individual decision entities' goals with the system-wide goals. Analyzing these
issues simultaneously in a unified framework will improve the understanding of
how these factors (different levels of coordination and incentive issues) affect
each other in distributed logistics systems. Another contribution will be to
undercover the relationship between coordination mechanisms and decomposition-
based optimization techniques. The educational component should enhance teaching
in applied operations research, supply chain management, and logistics courses.