* 0245426
* High-Performance 1300-1600 nanometer InP-Based VCSELs
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Larry Coldren, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 04/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

0245426 Coldren

The intent of this program is to demonstrate the highest performance 1550 nm
VCSELs ever, using a very robust, manufacturable, InP-based technology. It is
also intended to demonstrate WDM array technology using this approach as well as
operability in the range between 1300 and 1550 nm. This technology is based on a
recently patented VCSEL design philosophy[1] that has already demonstrated
record-level performance using high-index-contrast As-Sb DBR mirrors together
with InP conductive layers for low resistance electrical contacts and heat
extraction, all lattice-matched and grown in a single epitaxial step on an InP
substrate[2-4]. However, in this program it is proposed to incorporate several
new and novel concepts that promise significant performance breakthroughs on top
of the prior milestones. These concepts include the incorporation of novel 1)
dielectric apertures for low-loss lateral optical and current confinement, 2)
electron barriers for reduced vertical carrier leakage, and 3) quantum-well
intermixing around the circumference of the device for lateral carrier
confinement. These elements will lead to significant improvements in output
power, maximum operating temperature, wall-plug efficiency, and available
wavelength range, as desired for future low-cost optical networks.

Prior work funded by NSF and DARPA has been successful in demonstrating the huge
promise of the general approach. Most recently, experiments on this InP platform
demonstrated the best overall 1550nm VCSEL results[2-4] as compared to all of
the various monolithic approaches. These results illustrate the first ever 1550
nm VCSEL to have a sub-milliamp threshold current with over a milliwatt of light
out at room temperature. And even with a non-optimal active region design and
some excess optical loss in this case, it provided 0.2 mW of output at 70C.
Moreover, because several limitations that were present in these early devices
are now understood, the proposed improvements have been identified, and
preliminary experiments and modeling suggest the 'significant performance
breakthroughs' indicated above.

The intellectual merit of this work derives from its originality, contribution
to knowledge, and experience and infrastructure of the PI. Eleven inventions
related to the proposed technology have been filed as patents. The proposed
novel VCSEL designs include the use of new dielectric-aperturing techniques for
both lateral current and optical confinement, an electron barrier layer for
improved high-temperature performance, and optionally, a novel implant and
anneal procedure to selectively intermix quantum wells on the periphery for
lateral carrier confinement. Previously, new approaches for creating WDM arrays
of such VCSELs were proposed[5]; a reproducible MBE growth procedure was
developed to create low optical loss, high-index contrast DBR mirrors using
compounds of AlGaAsSb lattice-matched to InP; high-conductivity InP layers for
low thermal and electrical impedance were included; and very low-voltage-drop
tunnel junctions (TJs) incorporating InP and AlGaInAs were developed to enable
VCSELs with only n-doped contact layers for low optical loss and electrical
resistance[6].

The broader impacts of this activity include its potential for having a major
impact on reducing the cost of sources for the optical communications industry.
Current long wavelength VCSELs do not provide the required output power, and
their temperature range of operation is limited. Higher-power, higher-
efficiency, and higher operating temperatures in a low-cost technology for the
1300 - 1550 nm range will be offered by the results of this research, and this
will be very enabling to the optical communications industry in its attempts to
recover from its current slump. The project will provide an excellent teaching
vehicle for the graduate student involved, who will need to learn various
aspects of OE device physics, materials growth and processing, and device
characterization.