* 0245643
* GOALI: Demand Driven Fleet Management Analysis, Models, and Algorithms for the Airline Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Ebru Bish, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 347,803.00

This research project proposes to focus on an essential aspect of airline supply
management, namely, the fleet assignment decision, and its effective
coordination with demand under conditions of uncertainty. The intent is to
develop and implement general models and algorithms in concert with our
industrial partner: United Airlines, in order to ensure the transfer of
technology to the airline industry. The current airline practice is to assign
aircraft capacity to scheduled flights well in advance of departures. This is
due to the dependency between the fleet assignment decision and other airline
processes. At such an early stage, however, the high uncertainty of demand poses
a major impediment for airlines to best match aircraft capacities with the final
demand. On the other hand, the accuracy of demand forecasts improves markedly
over time. Thus, it becomes advantageous to postpone irrevocable fleeting
decisions to as great a future extent as possible, and to inject sufficient
flexibility in the prescribed decisions so as to facilitate the ability to make
future revisions within the operational constraints. To accomplish this, we
propose a three-stage dynamic supply management framework that coordinates the
initial fleet assignment model with a pair of downstream demand driven re-
fleeting and swapping models in a manner designed to exploit the flexibility in
the system, while incorporating progressively more accurate demand forecasts
obtained as departures approach. The intent is to provide sufficient flexibility
in the initial fleet assignment decisions to permit effective subsequent re-
fleeting decisions so as to promote a better matching of demand with
supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the impact of our proposed research
contributions will be: (1) to promote improved&lt;br/&gt;supply management
decisions in the airline industry, while considering the interactions
between&lt;br/&gt;the initial fleeting, later re-fleeting, and swapping models
within this framework; and (2) to&lt;br/&gt;prescribe effective solution
approaches for the various models at each stage of this process,
which&lt;br/&gt;can be extended to other similar manufacturing and service
industrial environments. In&lt;br/&gt;conducting this study, we propose to
investigate several model enhancements to improve&lt;br/&gt;representability in
practice by incorporating various features such as path-level and fare-
class&lt;br/&gt;based demands, recapture of spilled passengers, day-of-week
demand variations, and&lt;br/&gt;maintenance considerations. We hope thereby to
help eliminate several critical weaknesses&lt;br/&gt;associated with the
traditional fleet assignment process, lend insights into improving
operations,&lt;br/&gt;and achieve a demonstrable advance in the state-of-the-art
in practice.&lt;br/&gt;