* 0245279
* Travel Support:    Variational Analysis and Geometric Methods in Optimal Control (Special Session of IEEE Conference on Decision and Control); Las Vegas, Nevada
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Hector Sussmann, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2004
* USD 8,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0245279&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Variational
Analysis and Geometric Methods in Optimal
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0245279
Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control theory has numerous applications in
various fields of science and engineering, and has stimulated the development of
many new ideas and methods. In the past thirty years, two important lines of
research in the study of optimal control and nonlinear control problems have
been the so-called "differential-geometric" and "variational" approaches. During
the last decade, these two approaches have been brought together in work by many
researchers dealing with stabilization and optimal control. This award supports
travel for participants in a special cluster of sessions devoted to work on
these techniques within the setting offered by the 41st Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC) of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
(IEEE). The sessions will bring together American and foreign researchers
working in this growing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lectures will deal with
geometric methods, variational methods, and diverse applications in the areas of
aerodynamics, biomedical systems, semi-definite optimization, multi-objective
optimal control, semi-conductor design, and approximations. The discussions will
facilitate the exchange of ideas and collaborative research and will help
identify research directions with significant potential applications in industry
and other related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;