* 0245132
* Tunable High Dielectric Constant Materials Based Phase Locked Loops
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* T Kalkur, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 06/30/2007
* USD 203,984.00

0245132&lt;br/&gt;Kalkur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase Locked Loops are one of the
most important building blocks used in a wide variety circuits in communication
systems as well as systems as well as clock recovery circuits. Voltage
controlled oscillators (VCOs) are one of the most sensitive components in PLLs.
LC (inductance-capacitance) type VCOs are used at high frequencies because of
their low phase noise and stable oscillation frequency which is determined by
the natural frequency of the LC circuit. The most widely used tunable elements
in these oscillators are varactor diodes. As the frequency of operation
increases, the capacitance and inductance decreases. The diodes fabricated on
silicon substrates have significant parasitic capacitance. This results in
reduced variation of total capacitance (including self capacitance of the
inductor) with voltage and poor tunability for reverse biased diodes. For
forward biased diodes the tunable voltage is limited to a few tenths of a volt
and it should not exceed the barrier height of the p-n junction. Since the
diodes are fabricated within the silicon substrate, the substrate noise changes
its capacitance which results in jitter in the VCO
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Now is the time to investigate if there are other
tunable elements that can be integrated in to VLSI&lt;br/&gt;technology (CMOS
and BiCMOS) with better characteristics than diodes. The PI proposes to use high
dielectric constant (K) ferroelectric material capacitors like BST (barium
strontium titanium oxide) and the newly discovered BCTZ (barium titanium
zirconium oxide) as a tunable element. These elements can be isolated from
silicon substrates and therefore have lower parasitics and do not have a
significant substrate noise problem. The proposed research involves fabrication
of high K based capacitors using BST and BCTZ and optimizing their properties to
obtain maximum tunability and figure of merit. He proposes to develop a circuit
model for these tunable elements and extract the model parameters by electrical
characterization. The VCOs, loop filters, phase frequency detectors (PFD) and
buffers will be designed and fabricated using standard&lt;br/&gt;CMOS technology
through MOSIS. In order to reduce cost, he will attach the high-K tunable
elements to CMOS chip by flip-chip technology. These modules will be tested to
verify tunability, the jitter of VCOs and characterize the performance of PLLs
in terms of jitter versus frequency lock range, lock range versus power supply
and lock range versus temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Developing a tunable element will require significant research on the
fabrication and modeling of their electrical characteristics. The optimization
of tunability and figure of merit requires understanding of variation of
composition, thickness and grain size in thin high-K thin films with process
parameters. The development of circuit model parameters is also complex because
the elements of the equivalent circuit are themselves functions of applied
voltage and frequency. The integration of these tunable elements with a CMOS
circuit and the testing of subsystems at high frequencies are also challenging
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This proposal addresses all of the
NSF evaluation criteria relating to broader impacts. Graduate students will be
involved in the basic research and under graduate students will be sought to
perform senior design projects. The knowledge learned in this project will be
imparted to students in their related classes. The research will result in a
novel tunable element for present and future VLSI technology. The research
results will be published in world wide web, journals and conferences.
Preference will be given for the recruitment of minority students.&lt;br/&gt;