* 0245210
* From Localization to Extended States in Anderson-type Models
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Gunter Stolz, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2007
* USD 125,000.00

The PI will investigate several aspects of the localization-delocalization
transition in Anderson-type random Schr\"odinger operators. One goal is the
development of new methods to characterize energy regimes with localized wave
functions. The main focus will be on the fractional moment (or Aizenman-
Molchanov) method, which has recently been shown to apply to continuum
disordered systems. The PI and his collaborators will further increase the
applicability of this method and use it to study several open problems such as
the localization properties of continuum surface models and the Anderson model
on continuum strips. Another objective is to study mathematical mechanisms which
show existence of extended states in disordered media. For example, this will be
studied through one-dimensional random polymers, where an extended state at a
single energy can lead to significant electron transport. The PI and
collaborators will also develop perturbation theoretic methods to study the high
energy spectrum of multi-dimensional Schr\"odinger operators with quasi-periodic
potentials, and, in particular, establish the existence of extended states for
this model.

The Anderson model is used to describe the conductivity properties of disordered
media. This includes crystals with imbedded or substitutional impurities,
alloys, amorphous media, the effects of lattice fluctuations at high
temperature, and quasi crystals. The central goal is to understand the effects
of disorder on electron transport and therefore to distinguish between
conductors and insulators. The phenomena which are observed are not restricted
to quantum mechanical waves, but extend to the propagation of acoustic, electro-
magnetic and elastic waves in disordered media. Applications in engineering
include the study of random imperfections in quantum wave guides, photonic
crystals, and anomalous transport in quasi crystals. The PI's research is aimed
at finding mathematically rigorous justifications of the Anderson transition,
stipulating that disordered media can undergo a phase transition from insulator
to conductor at sufficiently high energy.