* 0245682
* Atomic Level Surface Studies of Carbon Nanotube Field Emission Cathodes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Paul Schwoebel, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2007
* USD 239,514.00

Carbon nanotubes have the potential to contribute substantially to many aspects
of nanoscience including the enabling of new technologies such as molecular
electronics, miniaturized sensors, and unique materials. Carbon nanotube (CNT)
field emission electron sources are of particular interest because of their
unique physical, electrical, and chemical properties. The stability and
reliability of these sources is governed by the chemical composition and
morphology of their surface. This research project will correlate the field
emission characteristics of carbon nanotubes with the chemical composition and
morphology of the nanotube surface. The chemical and morphological composition
will be investigated at the atomic level using the Imaging Atom-Probe, a
technique that provides atomic resolution, morphological imaging, and the
chemical identification of surface and near surface species. The resulting
information will provide, for the first time, a correlation between fundamental
CNT emission processes and details of surface morphology and chemical
composition.

The program will impact the way CNT characterization is performed in the future
and facilitate the incorporation of CNT sources into practical devices thereby
impacting nanoelectronics, vacuum microelectronics, and molecular electronics.
The program also presents a unique opportunity for blending the educational
experience of minority students at the University of New Mexico with nanoscience
and technology by acquainting a culturally diverse student population with a
scientific program that complements on going research at Sandia and Los Alamos
National Laboratories.

