* 0245349
* Research in the Foundations of Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Harvey Friedman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2009
* USD 216,001.00

Award: DMS-0245349 Principal Investigator: Harvey M. Friedman

Friedman proposes to continue his efforts into extending the scope of the
incompleteness phenomena. Under prior NSF support, Friedman has discovered a new
mathematical theory which seeks to analyze the Boolean relations that hold
between sets and their images under functions of several variables. This new
Boolean relation theory seeks to analyze statements of the form "for all
functions of a certain kind, there exist sets of a certain kind, such that a
given Boolean relation holds among the sets and their images under the
functions". Under prior NSF support, Friedman discovered a "singular" statement
of a particularly simple form in Boolean relation theory that can be proved only
by going beyond the usual axioms for mathematics. Friedman has considered all
6561 statements of the same simple form and showed that all can be proved or
refuted using weak axioms, with the sole exception (up to symmetry) of the
"singular" statement. Friedman proposes to develop Boolean relation theory in
several directions, including expanding the set of 6561 statements, and shifting
to many diverse mathematical contexts.

By the early part of the 20th century, the standard axioms and rules of
mathematics had been established - the so called Zermelo Frankel axioms of set
theory (ZFC). In the 1930's, Kurt Godel stunned the mathematical world with his
incompleteness theorems that showed that any systematization such as ZFC is
incomplete. I.e., there will always remain sentences that can neither be proved
nor refuted within that systematization. This is normally referred to as the
incompleteness phenomenom. Godel's original examples of statements of unprovable
and unrefutable in ZFC were very far removed from the usual considerations of
mathematicians. Through a series of developments, starting with later work of
Godel and Cohen, various specialists in set theory, work of Friedman recognized
by the NSF Alan T. Waterman Award in 1984, and more recent work of Friedman, a
body of such examples has been built up that are of increasing relevance to
normal mathematical considerations. Recent work of Friedman along these lines
gives new reasons for rethinking and extending the usual ZFC axioms for
mathematics. To test the broader impact of the research, Friedman actively seeks
and obtains regular feedback on the "naturalness" and "normality" of the various
examples from the wider mathematical community. Friedman seeks to widen this
broader impact.