* 0245457
* Studying and Modeling the Solar Cycle Variations of Topside Electron Temperature and Ion Composition
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Dieter Bilitza, Raytheon Technical Services Company
* Standard Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 07/31/2006
* USD 31,003.00

The investigators will establish an international research collaboration to
assemble a data record of electron temperatures and ion composition in the
topside ionosphere covering three solar. They will use this database to develop
an improved specification of solar cycle variations of these parameters for the
International Reference Ionosphere (IRI). IRI is a widely used international
standard for ionospheric parameters. The researchers will combine in situ
measurements from US, Czech/Russian and Japanese satellites and thus establish a
database that covers the time period 1964 to 1993. The final data sets as well
as models will be made publicly available from NASA's National Space Science
Data Center. The topside electron temperature and the upper transition height
are important parameters for the understanding of the flux of particles and
energy in the critical transition region between ionosphere and
plasmasphere/magnetosphere. An accurate specification of the electron
temperature and ion composition will benefit the many applications of IRI in
science, engineering, and education, and will provide the basis for more
accurate predictions and forecast of space weather conditions in the topside
ionosphere. It will establish an empirical baseline against which output from
theoretical models can be compared and against which disturbed behavior can be
scaled and identified. This activity will establish a collaborative science
project between institutions in the US, the Czech Republic, and Japan. The
activity will involve participation of graduate students and summer students at
the three research locations. The result of the proposed study will be a
publicly available ionospheric database and model. The data and model will be a
valuable resource for classroom activities and course work. IRI is already a
widely used tool for educational purposes.