* 0245094
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  The University of Montana Partnership for Comprehensive Equity
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Penelope Kukuk, University of Montana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,500,000.00

The University of Montana Partnership for Comprehensive Equity (UM PACE) is an
alliance of central administrators, deans, department heads/chairs and faculty
has been formed to bring about lasting change in the following: Institutional
policy, the number of tenure-line women on the faculty, the empowerment of
faculty, and the creation of a statewide network of women scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of these goals will be reached through a coordinated
series of activities. The efficacy of these activities will provide a national
level model for change in universities located in small, rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Policy change will result from three major initiatives:
&lt;br/&gt;* The PI of this proposal will be appointed as Special Assistant to
the Provost for Comprehensive Equity. Provost Lois Muir will oversee and support
this project. &lt;br/&gt;* A campus-wide policy committee of representatives
from all components of our alliance, with legal advice, will tackle hard issues
such as spousal hires and adjustments in the tenure clock to develop a
consistent and clear policy. &lt;br/&gt;* Each science department will undertake
a self-evaluation with the assistance of the UM PACE staff. This evaluation will
provide detailed information to be used in development of department-level
diversity enhancement plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These two committees will
also serve an all-important training function as faculty members learn
experientially, and through materials provided by the staff, about the place of
women in science at UM and nationally. &lt;br/&gt;UM PACE will create three new
tenure-line faculty positions to increase the number of tenure-line women
scientists at UM. These positions will be filled opportunistically at the
request of departments and deans for new expansion hires that increase the
number of women scientists on the UM campus. In addition, there will be a
partnership with expansion programs now in place at UM. UM PACE will work
proactively with recruitment issues through training of faculty and preparation
of .best practices. guidelines for recruiting both junior and senior
&lt;br/&gt;women. UM PACE will provide information and networking for the
partners/spouses of all candidates interviewed for science positions.
Accommodation of spouses is a central issue for UM which is located in a small,
rural community. Increasing the total number of women faculty in the sciences
also requires retention. Faculty will be empowered through a carefully developed
mentoring component for women scientists. A keystone, annual, three-day workshop
will cement the gains made through on-campus activities. Leadership training
will be emphasized. Retention will also be enhanced through training of deans,
department heads, and key faculty. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UM PACE will create a
statewide network of women scientists through outreach to Montana.s seven tribal
colleges (nearly 1/4 of the nation.s total). Through visits to tribal colleges,
visits of tribal college faculty to UM, involvement in the summer workshop, and
internet communication, faculty from these institutions will become involved.
The place of women scientists at UM parallels the place of women at the national
level. The higher education system in Montana is directly comparable to that of
14 other rural states. In addition, UM can also be compared to public
institutions of moderate size located outside of urban centers in more populous
states. Universities in small communities have unique problems in recruiting and
retaining diverse faculty. UM PACE will provide a national level model for
change in such universities. &lt;br/&gt;