* 0245550
* Novel Control of Doubly-Fed Induction Generators for Wind Energy Systems Connected to Weak Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Ned Mohan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 03/31/2008
* USD 159,888.00

Wind energy is the fastest growing renewable resource, much of it located in
remote areas with weak transmission grids, where wind turbines are disconnected
from the grid for their own protection, for example, beyond an unbalance of six
percent in phase-phase voltages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop a robust controller for wind generation systems capable of
operating reliably on weak electric grids by riding through voltage
abnormalities in a wide range. Doubly-fed induction generators allow an
excellent opportunity to minimize torque pulsations due to voltage unbalances,
and reactive power control for under/over voltage conditions by an integrated
control over the currents injected by the rotor-side converter, and on the
currents drawn by the line-side converter. This will be demonstrated by a
hardware laboratory prototype. Wind measuring equipment will be installed at
tribal colleges and data would be collected on the grid conditions. Yearly
seminars will disseminate information regarding wind resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of this project are the novel control
of doubly-fed induction generators that integrates minimization of torque
pulsations and compensation of reactive power, and new discoveries are entirely
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the proposed
research will directly benefit other applications, such as in utility-scale
inertial energy storage systems. This will be the PhD research of a graduate
student interested in a teaching career. A strong component is to establish ties
with tribal colleges to promote collaboration and dissemination of information,
helping tribal communities regard wind as a significant economic resource.
&lt;br/&gt;