* 0245014
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Earth Institute of Columbia University
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Mark Cane, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 05/31/2011
* USD 3,499,899.00

The Earth Institute at Columbia University's ADVANCE program is based both on a
study of the status of women at Columbia and research on the progression of
women in science elsewhere. The five major targets of the Columbia ADVANCE
program are to (1) change the demographics of the faulty through intelligent
hiring practices, (2) provide support to women scientists through difficult life
transitions including elder care and adoption or birth of a child, (3) enhance
mentoring and networking opportunities, (4) implement transparent promotion
procedures and policies, and (5) institutional self study. The impact of these
efforts will be determined by an evaluation team lead by Peter Messeri and Mary
Clare Lennon of the School of Public Health. The Earth Institute ADVANCE program
addresses issues that tend to manifest themselves in the earth and environmental
fields, such as extended field programs, which lay the foundation for leadership
positions, but which may be difficult for young faculty. The strategy is to use
the Earth Institute as a test bed for institutional climate change, and then
expand the successful programs to other Columbia Science and Engineering
Departments, as appropriate. Columbia's administration is committed to changing
policies and supporting successful programs beyond the completion of the NSF
grant. Earth Institute ADVANCE programs include (a) a self study including a
climate survey modeled after the 1999 MIT study, (b) a senior faculty working
group that will facilitate recruitment and retention by providing support for
searches, faculty development, and retention, (c) internal funding competitions
designed to recruit and retain women scientists and engineers, and (d) focused
workshops and conferences. The ADVANCE program will establish offices both on
the Morningside and Lamont campuses. With these and other interventions, the
Earth Institute seeks to create a scientific community within the Earth
Institute that at each scientific level is comprised of at least 30% women. The
overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women
in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased representation
and advancement of women in academic science and engineering careers. Despite
increases in the number of doctorates earned by women in science and engineering
over several decades, women scientists and engineers continue to be
significantly underrepresented in some science and engineering fields and
proportionately under-advanced in science and engineering in general in the
Nation's colleges and universities. There is increasing recognition that the
lack of women's full participation at the senior level of academe is often a
systemic consequence of academic culture.

This institutional transformation project contributes to the development of a
national science and engineering academic workforce by supporting the full
participation of women in all levels of faculty and academic administration,
particularly at the senior academic ranks, through the transformation of
institutional practices, policies, climate and culture. This project involves
the implementation of a coordinated campus effort to achieve needed
institutional transformation in order to increase the participation and
advancement to senior and leadership positions of women faculty in the science,
mathematics and engineering disciplines within the Awardee Institution. During
and at the completion of this project, new knowledge will be made available,
assessed and disseminated to inform the academic community of the fundamental
institutional issues inhibiting the advancement of women faculty and of
effective approaches academic institutions can implement to address such issues.