* 0245638
* Workshop:  Modernizing The National Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 11/30/2003
* USD 28,000.00

This proposal will organize a national workshop entitled: Modernizing the
National Power Grid. The practical and fundamental problems associated with
operating the existing grid are widely known while there are still strong needs
to identify an adequate research agenda that will address the solutions. This
workshop will address some of the most critical areas where future research may
bring some fundamental breakthroughs reflecting in a more secure, efficient and
reliable power grid operation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The stakeholders in
addressing the grid modernization issue are the public, government,
&lt;br/&gt;academia, various research organizations and industry. The workshop
attendees will include researchers from academia, policy makers, research
managers, and industry representatives. Special invitation will be extended to
DOE, FERC, NERC and EPRI to address the background issues related to the grid
modernization. Representatives from some foreign countries (Canada, Europe and
Africa) will be invited to share their experiences in modernizing the grid. The
workshop will result in a discussion of the strategic approaches to pursuing the
grid modernization. The research needs and directions will be identified as a
result. The following grand challenges are selected as the &lt;br/&gt;focus of
the workshop: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;o Improving Planning and Reliability
&lt;br/&gt;o Enhancing Security and Vulnerability &lt;br/&gt;o Developing New
Tools (Engineering and Market) and Technology &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modernizing
the national power grid is of interest to every citizen of this country. The
organizer will make sure that the attendance diversity, proper dissemination of
the results to the other researchers and public at large, and the economic
impacts of the workshop discussions on the well being of each member of our
society are kept as a focus. The quality of our lives is profoundly affected by
the energy supply. The security, efficiency and reliability of the national
power grid are the issues of concern not only to the professionals closely
related to the subject matter but also to the public at large. This workshop
will have much broader impact than just serving, as a vehicle for identifying
the research needs; it will also serve as a vehicle for enhancing public
awareness and confidence regarding the electric energy supply. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;