* 0245526
* Research on Enumerative and Probabilistic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Huafei C Yan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 124,933.00

Abstract for Yan DMS-0245526&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project focuses on a series of interrelated problems in enumerative and
probabilistic combinatorics. In recent years deep and unexpected connections
have been seen between algebraic combinatorics and probability theory, in
particular, stochastic processes. It is the primary objective of the
investigator to explore such connections and to develop new methods and
techniques based on algebraic-combinatorial principles, as well as analytic
methods of probability and random processes. The project focuses on four main
areas. The first is to apply the theory of branching processes and stochastic
analysis to the enumeration of combinatorial objects, and to analyze the
distributive asymptotics for families of random structures, including random
trees, random forests, random sequences, and various random walks. The second is
to investigate the enumeration of statistics with an Airy type oflimit
distribution. The third is to study the algebraic properties and the
applications of sequences of polynomials in enumerative combinatorics, which
would extend the classical theory of binomial enumeration. Finally, several
problems on geometric random graphs and various combinatorial games will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is in the general area of
combinatorics. One of the goals of combinatorics is to find efficient methods
for arranging, enumerating, and manipulating discrete collections of
objects.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses these goals with a combined
algebraic and probabilistic approach. There are far-reaching applicationsto
other areas of pure mathematics, including algebra, analysis, number theory,
statistics, and topology, as well as to areas of applied sciences such as
computer science, electrical engineering, and management science. Continuing
research in combinatorics and its applications will contribute advances in
bioinfomatics, internet traffic routing, network communications, and operations
research, which would bring significant benefits to industry and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;