* 0245603
* Collaborative Research:  Scheduling Multiple Product Types on Parallel Resources
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Michael Pinedo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 05/31/2006
* USD 59,985.00

This collaborative research grant provides funding for the development of a new
scheduling model that generalizes various classical scheduling models by
assuming that a job consists of multiple operations which may be processed
simultaneously in parallel. There are a number of machines in parallel but each
machine is only capable of producing a specific subset of the product types. If
two products of different types are processed on a machine one after another,
then a setup may be required. An order coming in at a production facility
usually asks for specific quantities of various different product types with the
expectation that all the items ordered are delivered at the same due date. The
objectives of this project are three-fold. The first goal is to study the
theoretical properties of this class of problems. This includes searching for
polynomial time algorithms for the easier versions of these problems,
establishing NP-hardness results for the more general versions, and establishing
dominance results or elimination criteria. A second goal involves the
development and evaluation of heuristics. The heuristics will be based on
decomposition, local search, as well as hybrid approaches. A third goal is to
collaborate with several companies that have expressed interest in the project
regarding the development and evaluation of heuristics. These companies will
provide real-life data to validate the performance of the heuristics. These
companies include software development companies that have ongoing projects with
larger manufacturing companies as well as large manufacturing companies
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research are expected to
lead to improvements in production scheduling in a number of manufacturing
settings, leading to lower cost and higher profitability for the companies
involved.