* 0245513
* Hyperbolic Conservation Laws with Application to Blood Flow Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Suncica Canic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 111,921.00

The focus of the proposal is on mathematical study of the &lt;br/&gt;equations
known as hyperbolic conservation laws. They describe the basic physical
principles such as conservation of mass, momentum and energy, and as such arise
in many applied sciences such as biomedicine (e.g., study of blood flow) and
aerospace engineering (e.g., study of stability of supersonic flow around a wing
of a space shuttle). The main goals of this proposal are to understand the
structure of solutions of conservation laws that model&lt;br/&gt; (1) blood flow
through compliant arteries, and&lt;br/&gt; (2) supersonic and transonic flow
problems in more than one space &lt;br/&gt;dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
The proposer's research on one-dimensional hyperbolic conservation laws modeling
blood flow in compliant arteries stems from the study of blood flow through the
abdominal aorta after endovascular repair of abdominal aneurysm using inserted
prostheses called ``stents''. The proposer has begun an investigation of the
dynamics of the abdominal aorta and of the stents, subject to the pressure
induced by the pulsatile blood flow. The plan is to work on two problems which
are essential in understanding fluid-structure interaction between blood flow
and vessel wall: (a) mathematically rigorous derivation of the new, improved
one-dimensional models that would account for both the longitudinal and the
radial displacements of the vessel wall and and of the stent, and (b)
mathematical analysis of the reduced models&lt;br/&gt;which have discontinuous
coefficients to account for the fact that the aorta and the prostheses have
different elastic properties.&lt;br/&gt;(2) The research on supersonic and
transonic flow problems in more than one space dimension has been motivated by
the fact that in spite of the importance of the applications, the theory for
transonic flow problems in more than one space dimension is still
underdeveloped. This is primarily due to the fact that &lt;br/&gt;new
singularities appear in the solutions which cannot be analyzed by one-
dimensional techniques. The main objective in this proposal is to study
singularities and global structure of self-similar solutions in &lt;br/&gt;two-
dimensional hyperbolic conservation laws by using and by developing the
techniques for free-boundary problems that describe transonic shocks, and by
using and developing the analysis of mixed (hyperbolic-elliptic) systems arising
in the subsonic part of the flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of this proposal has
been motivated by the work on vascular prostheses (stents) initiated by the
proposer through a multi-disciplinary collaboration with cardiologist Dr. Z.
Krajcer (Texas Heart Institute), molecular biologist Dr. Doreen Rosenstrauch
(Texas Heart Institute) and material scientist Dr. K. Ravi-Chandar (UT-Austin).
The main goal is to advance knowledge of this&lt;br/&gt;fundamental area of
mathematics while at the same time guide research in applications related to
biomedical research and to transonic flow. The results of this research will be
important not only in the development of new mathematical theories, but also in
the design of reliable numerical schemes for high-performance computing of blood
flow in human arteries and in the optimal design of vascular prostheses for
certain cardiovascular interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;