* 0245401
* Problems in harmonic analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Steven Hofmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 300,616.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S. Hofmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Missouri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS 245401&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this project, I shall consider problems in
harmonic analysis &lt;br/&gt;arising in geometric analysis and geometric measure
theory, and in &lt;br/&gt;the theory of elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations&lt;br/&gt;and operators. These questions are interesting
because of their&lt;br/&gt;applicability to real world phenomena (see below),
but also because &lt;br/&gt;of the deep connections among them. The main
directions of the &lt;br/&gt;proposed research include the following:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1. To develop and apply ``T1/Tb" (i.e., Carleson measure)
&lt;br/&gt;criteria for the solvability of boundary problems for
&lt;br/&gt;divergence form elliptic equations and systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;2. To treat various problems in the theory of uniformly
&lt;br/&gt;rectifiable sets, in the applications of this theory to
&lt;br/&gt;elliptic and parabolic PDE, and in the theory of
&lt;br/&gt;quasiconformal mappings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. To obtain sharp
average decay estimates for Fourier transforms, and &lt;br/&gt;to apply these to
concrete problems including lattice point problems and&lt;br/&gt;the Falconer
distance problem.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; As mentioned above, I propose to work
on problems in the area &lt;br/&gt;of harmonic analysis and its application to,
and interaction with, &lt;br/&gt;geometric measure theory and the theory of
elliptic and parabolic&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations. Roughly
speaking, in &lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis one investigates properties
of&lt;br/&gt;functions and ``operators" (i.e., mappings which transform one
function&lt;br/&gt;into another) by decomposing them into smaller, constituent
pieces,&lt;br/&gt;which are easier to understand, and then reassembling the
pieces. The&lt;br/&gt;name itself arose by analogy to the decomposition of a
musical sound&lt;br/&gt;into its various frequency components, or
``harmonics".&lt;br/&gt;geometric measure theory involves the study of the
relationship between&lt;br/&gt;geometric properties of sets, and their
``measures" (the latter are&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of the notions of length,
area, and volume). Partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations of elliptic and of
parabolic type describe a &lt;br/&gt;wide variety of phenoma in the real world,
including electrostatics, &lt;br/&gt;certain fluid flows and elastic
deformations, and various diffusion&lt;br/&gt;processes&lt;br/&gt;such as the
conduction of heat, the flow of ground water, certain&lt;br/&gt;phenomena
arising in the mathematical theory of population biology, and the
&lt;br/&gt;pricing of options in financial markets. In the last decade the
interplay &lt;br/&gt;between these different subfields of mathematics has turned
out to be a&lt;br/&gt;fertile ground &lt;br/&gt;for investigation, with much
exciting work remaining to be done.&lt;br/&gt;