* 0245578
* Dynamics of Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Grozdena Todorova, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2007
* USD 72,795.00

PI: Grozdena Todorova, University of Tennessee, Knoxville DMS-0245578

The proposed project intends to investigate current issues in nonlinear wave
equations involving the topics of asymptotic behavior of solutions, development
of singularities, and instability. We intend to study problems that deal with
the dynamics in the vicinity of the least energy standing waves, investigate the
question of stability and instability of bound states and bound states standing
waves for fundamental equations of Mathematical Physics: Nonlinear Klein-Gordon
(NLKG), Nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS), Nonlinear Damped Wave (NLDW).

The interaction between the variational structure of stationary equations
associated with hyperbolic problems and the evolutionary nature of the process
makes this type of problems a very interesting area in nonlinear analysis. We
also intend to study the stability/instability of the trivial equilibrium, i.e.,
the behavior of the small amplitude solutions of various important hyperbolic
equations, with the purpose to derive sharp criteria for blow--up and global
existence.

Further questions of interest are: the asymptotically parabolic structure of the
hyperbolic equations due to the presence of damping terms; the influence of
damping on the principal support of solutions; the influence of damping on the
decay rate of the energy; and the asymptotic behavior of solutions in external
domains where the delicate interaction between the geometrical condition on the
boundary and the dissipation has to be taken into account.

In all of the proposed problems, the underlying balance between different kinds
of forces, which affect the solution, will be considered. It is important to add
that the solution of many of the problems in the proposal requires the
development of new techniques as well as the refinement of more classical
methods.

Nonlinear Klein-Gordon, Nonlinear Damped Wave and Nonlinear Schroedinger
equations arise in fluid dynamics, classical mechanics, quantum mechanics,
plasma physics and nonlinear optics. In particular nonlinear optics is a main
tool in telecommunication technology, mainly based on the large use of fiber
optics. There is no need here to emphasize the relevance of the fiber optics in
large capacity connection nets, which are crucial in high-speed Internet
applications. Since the Nonlinear Schroedinger equation is a useful design tool
for realistic fiber communication systems, it is important to understand the
stability/instability phenomena of its solutions.

The solutions of the problems outlined in the proposal will develop our
understanding of the physical phenomena related with the above fundamental
equations. Given the crucial role of these equations in many areas of
technology, understanding the principles governing them is of basic importance
for a society built on technology.