* 0245511
* Studies in Classical and Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Lawrence Thomas, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2007
* USD 27,729.00

PI: Lawrence Thomas, University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0245511
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will work
primarily in two areas of mathematical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Models
in Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics. A typical model consists of a chain of
coupled anharmonic oscillators (or a non-linear field) coupled to two linear
fields. The linear fields are given Gaussian distributed random initial
conditions with, in general, different covariances corresponding to different
temperatures. Depending on the couplings, the resulting equations for the
oscillators or wave equations for the non-linear field are stochastic ordinary
or partial differential equations. The goals of the research include showing the
existence of invariant measures for the system of equations and elucidating the
steady state thermodynamics of these measures, e.g., that there is heat-flow and
entropy production. An ultimate goal is to understand the thermodynamic limit of
such measures.&lt;br/&gt;2) Dynamics of an Elastica and Related Models as
Problems in Wave-Maps. An example of a dynamical elastica is a curve (e.g., a
thin but massive inextensible wire), moving in space, having both a non-
relativistic kinetic energy and an internal potential energy given by the
integral of the curvature squared over the curve. The Euler-Lagrange equations
governing the elastica include a wave equation, 4th order in the spatial
variable, and an auxiliary equation for the curve tension. The elastica
equations are closely related to those for wave-maps such as the Landau-Lifshitz
equations of ferromagnetism, and their respective analyses share commonalities
such as use of the Hasimoto transformation. In previous work with a
collaborator, the investigator has shown local existence for the elastica for
initial data in suitable Sobolev spaces. His immediate research goal is to
resolve the question of whether there is global existence or whether in some
circumstances the elastica actually tears itself apart in a finite
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General description: &lt;br/&gt; 1) Models in Non-
Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics. Non-equilibrium but steady state phenomena
are familiar and ubiquitous in nature. Good examples are steady heat flow
through a material body with fixed thermostated temperatures over its surface,
and an electrical current through a wire with different fixed voltages at its
ends. Surprisingly, there is no satisfactory mathematical theory or formalism
for describing these phenomena, at least none starting from&lt;br/&gt;the level
of particles and fields making up the material body. By contrast, equilibrium
phenomena, for example the specific heat and the magnetic susceptibility of a
material and their dependence on temperature and pressure, are well understood
from the microscopic point of view. The investigator will consider specific
models described by differential equations, the goals being to provide formalism
for non-equilibrium phenomena and to develop the mathematical tools necessary to
apply it.&lt;br/&gt; 2) The Dynamics of an Elastica and Related Models as
Problems in Wave-Maps. A dynamical elastica can be thought of as a thin
inextensible wire (a curve) which is massive and which can flex in space. The
differential equations of motion for the elastica are closely related to those
for wave-maps, which describe, for example, the dynamics of ferromagnetic
materials or more exotic sigma-models from particle physics. The investigator is
studying the long-time behavior of the elastica with the objective of
determining whether it vibrates indefinitely or can in fact tear itself apart in
a finite time. A better understanding of the elastica behavior and related
problems would be useful in applied settings including continuum mechanics and
even the mechanics of large biological molecules. &lt;br/&gt;