* 0245071
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:   An Initiative for Transforming Climate and Opportunities to Foster Academic Diversity
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Evelyn Posey, University of Texas at El Paso
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kelly M. Mack
* 02/28/2010
* USD 3,461,000.00

The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) proposes to implement an Initiative
for Institutional Change with the goal to serve as a model for other
institutions that desire to increase the representation and advancement of
women, including underrepresented minorities, in academic science and
engineering careers. Because of its talented faculty and Hispanic-majority
student population, UTEP is the ideal setting to create, implement, and document
interrelated processes for diversifying the academic workforce and contributing
to the national goal of creating positive and sustainable change in academic
climates. &lt;br/&gt;To increase the total number of female faculty, in
particular those from underrepresented groups, in tenure-track and tenured
positions, UTEP will establish an Initiative with three integrated and mutually
supportive components: 1) a policy and recruitment process that formulates
faculty support and retention policies, supports recruitment efforts, and
provides research support; 2) a faculty development process that expands an
existing faculty mentoring program for women, introduces a seminar series to
help faculty develop plans for career success, and fosters synergy between
tenured and tenure-track faculty; 3) a collaborative leadership process that
works with departments to remove barriers to recruitment, retention, and
advancement of women faculty by assessing departmental climates and sharing best
practices that encourage diversity and promote leadership. &lt;br/&gt;To sustain
the components and provide for continuous refinement of processes, an
Institutional Action Board will initiate and define change policies and offer
advice on grant initiatives. A multi-faceted evaluation process will include
both formative and summative self-assessments and review by an external Advisory
Board. This innovative structure weaves together processes, relationships, and
multiple lines of communication among all ranks of faculty and
administration.&lt;br/&gt;The five co-PIs bring broad leadership and coalition-
building experience to the Initiative: Dr. Evelyn Posey is Associate Vice
President for Academic Affairs, Dr. Elizabeth Anthony is the past President of
the Faculty Senate, Dr. Tine Reimers is Co-Director of the Center for Effective
Teaching and Learning, Dr. Ann Gates is Associate Chair of the Computer Science
Department and Chair of the President's Advisory Committee on Diversity, and Dr.
Patricia Witherspoon is Chair of the Department of Communication and Director of
the Sam Donaldson Center for Communication Studies. &lt;br/&gt; Through
implementation, documentation, and on-going assessment of the Initiative, UTEP
will contribute to a better understanding of how to create collaborative
climates that result in greater diversity. The intellectual merit of the
Initiative is the breadth of its integrative structure, involving university
administration as well as coalitions of change agents at the individual,
departmental, college, and institutional levels. In this process, decision
makers at the "grass roots" drive institutional change. The Initiative is
designed to promote a holistic view of faculty life, address the different
stages of faculty careers from entrance into the academe to advancement to
leadership positions, and to develop faculty for each of these
stages.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Initiative is designed for broad impact. It is
a series of processes that includes involvement of all ranks of faculty as well
as participation by individuals at the highest level of the institution. It is
built with knowledge of universities' structures and interrelated processes that
can be easily adapted to universities throughout the UT System and those around
the country.&lt;br/&gt;