* 0245387
* L-values, Galois Representations, and Modular Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Christopher Skinner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 226,502.00

DMS-0245387&lt;br/&gt;Skinner,
Christopher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
investigates connections between L-functions and&lt;br/&gt;Galois
representations. More precisely, the investigator connects&lt;br/&gt;special
values of L-functions of varieties or motives to the orders
of&lt;br/&gt;associated Selmer groups. In joint work with E. Urban the
investigator&lt;br/&gt;showed that if the L-function of a modular form of weight
1 vanishes to&lt;br/&gt;odd order at its central critical point then the rank of
the corresponding&lt;br/&gt;Selmer group is infinite. The investigator is
exploring extensions to&lt;br/&gt;representations of higher dimension and to
pursuing a ``mod p''&lt;br/&gt;version of this result relating the p-adic order
of the L-value (if&lt;br/&gt;finite) to that of its Selmer group. Additionally,
the investigator is&lt;br/&gt;completing work in collaboration with M. Harris
and J.-S. Li that&lt;br/&gt;constructs p-adic anti-cyclotomic L-function for
automorphic&lt;br/&gt;representations on unitary groups U(n) and which makes
progress towards&lt;br/&gt;anti-cyclotomic ``main conjectures'' for these
groups. Doing so involves&lt;br/&gt;relating these L-functions to congruences
between endoscopic and stable&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms on U(n). The
investigator is also pursuing an approach&lt;br/&gt;to the ``main conjecture''
for modular forms on GL(2) by studying the&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic of certain
Eisenstein series on U(2,2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number theory is
often divided into two branches: analytic and algebraic.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator is studying the connection between many
seemingly&lt;br/&gt;unrelated objects from these two branches. The primary focus
of the first&lt;br/&gt;branch is the study of L-functions - complex functions
built of&lt;br/&gt;number-theoretically interesting data (such as the Riemann
zeta function&lt;br/&gt;which is built out of the prime numbers). The other
branch focuses on&lt;br/&gt;algebraic objects such as class groups. But it is
now expected that these&lt;br/&gt;are not unrelated: values of certain
L-functions at special points&lt;br/&gt;(generally integers) should be the
orders - the sizes - of certain of the&lt;br/&gt;algebraic objects. Such
connections are generally very signifigant.&lt;br/&gt;One instance was a crucial
ingredient in Andrew Wiles' proof of Fermat's&lt;br/&gt;Last Theorem, for
example. Drawing from the theory of automorphic forms,&lt;br/&gt;the
investigator's work establishes new instances of these
conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;This work is motivated by the fact that special values of
L-functions&lt;br/&gt;appear in the fourier coefficients of modular
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;