
* 0002790
* Spatial Modeling, Analysis and Prediction of Nonstationary Environmental Processes
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 09/01/2000,09/03/2003
* Montserrat Fuentes,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 08/31/2004
* USD 149,754.00

Abstract:

SPATIAL MODELING, ANALYSIS AND PREDICTION OF NONSTATIONARY ENVIRONMENTAL
PROCESSES

Montserrat Fuentes, North Carolina State University

Richard L. Smith, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill

Spatial statistics is one of the major methodologies of environmental
statistics; its applications include producing spatially smoothed or
interpolated representations of air pollution fields, calculating regional
average means or regional average trends based on data at a finite number of
monitoring stations, and performing regression analyses with spatially
correlated errors to assess the agreement between observed data and the
predictions of some numerical model. However, the most commonly used spatial
statistics methodology, also known as geostatistics or kriging, is essentially
based on the assumption of stationary and isotropic random fields. Such
assumptions cannot be expected to hold in large heterogeneous fields. The
research described here concentrates on nonstationary spatial models. Some new
models are introduced, as well as new fitting methods based on spectral
analysis. The applications include three real data sets: (i) monitoring data for
nitrate fields compared with Models-3 output as part of the process for
assessing compliance with the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990; (ii) modeling
the spatial distribution of particulate matter fields, as one of the components
needed for an improved risk assessment of human health effects of particulate
matter; (iii) developing statistical models for spatial temperature fields and
applying them to the attribution of various "signals" produced by climate models
- in particular, this methodology will permit improved assessment of the extent
to which observed global climate change may be attributed to anthropogenic
influences.

In more detail, the new statistical methodology concentrates on two approaches
to nonstationary models: a spatial deformation approach due to Guttorp and
Sampson, and an approach where the field is represented locally as a stationary
isotropic random field, but the parameters of the stationary random field are
allowed to vary continuously across space. Kernel functions are used to ensure
that the field is well-defined but also continuous. Some combination of the two
approaches may be needed for fields with are neither stationary nor isotropic.
New fitting algorithms are developed, using both space domain and spectral
approaches; in cases where the data are distributed exactly or approximately on
a lattice, it is argued that spectral approaches have potentially enormous
computational benefits compared with maximum likelihood. The methods are
extended to prediction/interpolation questions using approximate Bayesian
approaches to account for parameter uncertainty. We develop applications to
obtaining the total loading of pollutant concentrations and fluxes over
different geo-political boundaries, to risk assessment for particulate matter
random fields, and to the attribution of an observed climate record to various
components produced by numerical climatic model, the latter forming a new
approach to the fingerprint estimation technique developed by climatologists.
This program is being jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities from the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.


