
* 0004131
* Bayesian Modeling in the Wavelet Domain with Applications in Atmospheric Turbulence
* DMS,STATISTICS, PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
* 09/15/2000,09/21/2000
* Brani Vidakovic,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 107,397.00

This proposal builds on a previous NSF sponsored project DMS-9626159, awarded to
Duke University. It involves development of statistical concepts, theories and
methods for multiresolution models and analyses of measurements and structures
in atmospheric turbulence. It draws on recent developments in Bayesian
multiscale modeling to understand the time-scale aspects of turbulence where the
notions of scale and hierarchy are intrinsic. Multiresolution statistical
modeling approaches are applied to vast geophysical measurements arising from
air quality field experiments and simulations in order to identify key
structural properties of atmospheric turbulence responsible for the transport of
scalars, such as ozone. To achieve these objectives a team of researchers with
expertise in statistical modeling and multiscale methods (M. Pensky and B.
Vidakovic) and measurement and modeling of atmospheric turbulence (G. Katul) is
assembled.

The aplicability of this project is improved fundamental understanding of
atmospheric transport via novel statistical techniques. Atmospheric transport,
key to describing air-quality, is a complex phenomena involving modeling of
turbulence which is responsible for the dispersion of polutants. The
applicability of the proposed methodology will be directly tested on high
frequency velocity, temperature, and ozone concentration measurements collected
at Duke Forest, Durham, North Carolina.

Partial support for this award is provided by the Physical Meterology Program in
the Division of Atmospheric Sciences.
