
* 0004173
* Statistical Modeling in Wavelet Domain with Application in Turbulence
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2000,09/21/2000
* Marianna Pensky,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 60,000.00

This collaborative proposal involves development of statistical concepts,
theories and methods for multiresolution models and analyses of measurements and
structures in atmospheric turbulence. It draws on recent developments in
Bayesian multiscale modeling to understand the time-scale aspects of turbulence
where the notions of scale and hierarchy are intrinsic. Multiresolution
statistical modeling approaches are applied to vast geophysical measurements
arising from air quality field experiments and simulations in order to identify
key structural properties of atmospheric turbulence responsible for the
transport of scalars, such as ozone. To achieve these objectives a team of
researchers with expertise in statistical modeling and multiscale methods (M.
Pensky and B. Vidakovic) and measurement and modeling of atmospheric turbulence
(G. Katul) are jointly collaborating together.

The aplicability of this project is improved fundamental understanding of
atmospheric transport via novel statistical techniques. Atmospheric transport,
key to describing air-quality, is a complex phenomena involving modeling of
turbulence which is responsible for the dispersion of polutants. The
applicability of the proposed methodology will be directly tested on high
frequency velocity, temperature, and ozone concentration measurements collected
at Duke Forest, Durham, North Carolina.

Partial support for this award is provided by the Physical Meteorology Program
in the Division of Atmospheric Sciences.
