
* 0071438
* Fractional Factorial Designs: Minimum Aberration and Related Topics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2000,05/28/2002
* Ching-Shui Cheng,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

Cheng, Ching-Shui DMS-0071438 Abstract

Minimum aberration has been a well accepted criterion for choosing good
fractional factorial designs. This research studies variants of the minimum
aberration criterion in several different settings including block designs in
which the experimental units are grouped into more homogeneous blocks to improve
the precision, and split-plot designs in which some factors are held constant
within each block. Split plots arise when some factors require larger
experimental units than others, or when the effects of certain factors are not
of major interest, but they are included in the experiment to study their
interactions with other factors. The latter has a very important application to
robust parameter designs in quality improvement. These settings have their own
special features that call for different optimality criteria. Existing work did
not address the issue that there are two different errors in split-plot
structures. The ultimate goal of this research is to obtain general results on
the structures of optimal designs in various settings, and to develop useful
algorithms for constructing designs which can incorporate user-supplied prior
knowledge and requirements. For the former, the Principal Investigator uses
tools from coding theory and finite projective geometry. Finally, nonregular
designs, including supersaturated designs, are studied under a newly introduced
criterion of generalized minimum aberration.

Experimental design is used extensively in a wide range of scientific and
industrial investigations. In industrial experiments, often a large number of
factors have to be studied, but the experiments are expensive to conduct. In
this case, the so called fractional factorial designs, in which only a small
fraction of all the possible combinations are observed, are particularly useful.
In recent years, factorial designs have received considerable attention, mainly
due to the success in applying them to conduct experiments for improving quality
and productivity in industrial manufacturing. This research is to study the
construction of efficient designs to extract more information, especially when
systematic sources of variation (such as heterogeneity of experimental material
or day-to-day environmental variations) need to be eliminated to improve the
precision.
