
* 0071681
* Statistical Methodology in Astronomy
* DMS,STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC, STATISTICS
* 09/01/2000,06/25/2002
* John Rice,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 250,166.00

ABSTRACT

Professor Rice proposes research on statistical problems arising in two large
astronomical projects: the variable star database of the MACHO project (a search
for dark matter in the halo of our galaxy) and Taiwanese American Occultation
Survey (TAOS), a search for comets in the Kuiper belt. The first involves
statistical characterization and modeling of tens of thousands of light curves
from variable stars. He proposes to approach these problems from the viewpoint
of functional data analysis, further developing and extending the methodology of
this rapidly growing area of statistical research. The TAOS project will monitor
star fields for occultations by objects in the Kuiper belt, using dedicated
telescopes in the interior mountains of Taiwan. The primary statistical problems
center around designing image processing and signal detection procedures that
will operate in real time at high sampling rates to detect rare and faint
signals. Both projects are anticipated to make valuable contributions to both
advancement of knowledge in astronomy and to the development of statistical
methodology.

This is an interdisciplinary proposal involving mathematical statistics and
astronomy, centering around two projects in astronomy: (1) The analysis of a
large database of variable stars. These are stars whose light is not constant,
but changes in a periodic fashion. Better understanding of this population of
stars is important for models of stellar evolution and also for determining
distances to remote objects in the universe. (2) The TAOS project will probe our
solar system in the remote region beyond the orbit of Neptune. It is thought
that there may well be hundreds of millions of objects such as comets there, but
because of their relatively small size and remoteness, they are very difficult
to detect. Computationally intensive statistical methodology will play a key
role in detecting these objects. Partial funding for this project was provided
by the Stellar Astronomy and Astrophysics (SAA) Program.


