
* 0071920
* Collaborative Research on Graphical Markov Models and Related Topics in Multivariate Statistical Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2000,08/10/2000
* Steen Andersson,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 80,000.00

Perlman 0071818 Andersson 0071920

Abstract

Statistical models based on acyclic directed graphs (ADGs) (also called directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs), Bayesian networks, or influence diagrams) are
particularly well behaved, easily interpretable, and computationally convenient.
In the late 1980s, ADG models were generalized to adicyclic graphs or chain
graphs, which include both directed and undirected edges, hence can
simultaneously represent dependences some of which are directional and some
associative. The investigators will study the Markov and statistical properties
of a new class of chain graph models that retains many of the desirable
properties of ADG models. Problems to be investigated include the completeness
and faithfulness of these new models, determination of their local Markov
property, and characterization of their Markov equivalence classes by means of
an appropriate essential graph. The investigators will also study a very general
class of Wishart distributions on homogeneous cones, in which transitive acyclic
directed graphs (TADGs) play a central role. E. B. Vinberg's classical
characterization of homogeneous cones has been found to reveal a fundamental
relationship between normal models satisfying TADG Markov conditions and this
general class of Wishart distributions. This class includes all Wishart
distributions previously known in multivariate statistical analysis, including
the hyper-Wishart distributions and Wishart distributions associated with normal
lattice conditional independence (LCI) models, as well as a great many new ones.
Additional topics to be investigated include the limitations of the Neyman-
Pearson, likelihood ratio, and maximum likelihood criteria for multiparameter
hypothesis-testing and estimation problems, and the efficacy of the likelihood
ratio test for testing order-restricted and multivariate one-sided alternatives.

One of the most central ideas of statistical science is the assessment of
dependences among a set of stochastic variables. The familiar concepts of
correlation, regression, and prediction are manifestations of this idea, and
many aspects of causal relationships ultimately rest on representations of
multivariate dependence. Graphical Markov models (GMM) use graphs i.e. networks,
either undirected, directed, or mixed, to represent multivariate dependencies in
a visual and computationally efficient manner. A GMM is usually constructed by
specifying local dependences for each variable, i.e. node of the graph, in terms
of its immediate neighbors, parents, or both, yet can represent a highly varied
and complex system of multivariate dependences by means of the global structure
of the graph. The local specification permits efficiencies in modeling,
inference, and probabilistic calculations. Among their many applications, GMMs
have become prevalent in statistical science for the analysis of categorical
data in contingency tables, for the modeling of spatially-dependent processes
such as the spread of epidemics in human and animal populations, and for the
development of early warning systems for severe weather conditions; in computer
science (as Bayesian networks) for information processing and retrieval, for
robotics, computer vision, and pattern recognition, for the debugging of complex
programs (such as Windows 98), and for the representation of expert systems for
medical diagnosis; and in decision science (as influence diagrams) as models for
information flow and control and for combining the opinions of many decision-
makers. A crucial feature of these models is that they are designed for fast
computational implementation, thereby facilitating the development of software
that can "reason" about real world problems.
