
* 0071930
* Statistical Analysis of Linkage/Association on Family-Based Studies in Human Genetics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2000,05/28/2002
* Shaw-Hwa Lo,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 07/31/2004
* USD 260,468.00

The allelic association between disease genes and marker alleles allows
predicting which marker allele is in coupling with the disease. There are novel
statistical testing procedures proposed recently. For example, the Transmission/
Disequilibrium Testing ( TDT ) has been both a popular and powerful method to
evaluate the linkage/ association between the candidate genes with disease and
the markers. This approach combines the information of association and linkage
to yield greater power than conventional tests for detecting linkage when the
association is present. It also has great potential to play a major role in
future gene mapping of human disorder, by carrying out genomewide TDT screens.
Recent literature has seen an increasing trend in the number of studies that
have applied TDT or its generalizations to a variety of complex family-based
data, but these methods are ad hoc. There is a great need for a systematic and
sensible optimal analysis of these methods. This work sets up a general
statistical framework that can incorporate all procedures, different data sets
and other related knowledge such as disease information, sampling designs and
population information. We develop a general statistical theory, useful as a
guideline for future investigators, who can design and develop their own
statistical procedures (following the framework) to meet their needs in
incorporating different environments.

The research provides a likelihood-based approach by introducing a useful 3x2
table which applies to each nuclear family. It is natural to adopt the
conditionality principle to derive and to evaluate a variety of TDT type
procedures and linkage tests, using "Locally Most Powerful Testing" (LMPT ) as a
central optimality criteria. This research outlines the likelihood approach and
demonstrates how the method works in some special cases. The research provides
the derivations and findings from the examples,which should shed light on a
better understanding of the more challenging and broader problems arising from
these data sets. In training doctoral students working on this increasingly
important area, the research provides the basis to develop a new research level
course. The proposed research intends to lead ultimately to routine guidelines
for future investigators and to offer a theoretical basis for family-based
studies.
