
* 0071976
* Finite Sample Performance of Multivariate Location and Scatter Estimators
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2000,04/12/2001
* Yijun Zuo,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 04/30/2003
* USD 54,270.00

TITLE:

Finite Sample Performance of Multivariate Location and Scatter Estimators

ABSTRACT:

This research develops new methodology and theory in the performance evaluation
of multivariate location and scatter estimators. The research is to propose
finite sample performance criteria of multivariate location and scatter
estimators based on their ``tail behavior'', to investigate and assess the
performance of existing and new multivariate location and scatter estimators
with respect to the proposed criteria, and to provide guides to statistical
practices in applications. Given an estimator of some unknown parameter, a
natural question is -- how good is the estimator? or how should one measure its
performance? These questions are fundamental in statistical estimation and
inference. To answer these questions, various performance criteria have been
proposed and studied. Among the existing performance criteria, asymptotic
approaches including Fisher consistency and large sample normality are the most
prevalent ones. These approaches have been based on the behavior of the
estimator as the sample size approaches infinity. This, however, raises some
serious concern about the relevancy of the asymptotic results in practice, where
the sample size is always fixed and finite. The study of the finite sample
performance of multivariate location and scatter estimators thus is not only
practically significant but also theoretically interesting. In sharp contrast
with the asymptotic approaches, in this research the performance of multivariate
location and scatter estimators is studied for fixed and finite sample size.

The research develops new methodology and valuable insights into the comparison
of estimator performance particularly from robustness standpoint. Inherent
connections of our finite sample performance measures with two most crucial and
promising notions in the robust and nonparametric statistical analysis and
inference, the finite sample breakdown point and the data depth (especially
Tukey-Donoho halfspace depth), are to be explored and illuminated. It is to be
shown that the estimators with high breakdown point or halfspace depth possess
remarkable finite sample tail performance. Findings like this in the research
offer new insights into and deepen our understanding of the notions of breakdown
point and halfspace depth, and establish the important role of the finite sample
tail behavior as a quantitative assessment of robustness of estimators. The
research has profound impact on statistical applications in various disciplines
of sciences such as social, behavior and life sciences, environmental and
biology sciences, industry, and economics. The research suggests, for example,
that location estimators with appealing tail performance (e.g. depth-based
multivariate medians) should be preferred in practice to traditional least-
squares estimators (e.g. the multivariate mean) for robustness against the
influence of extremities of observations in multivariate data analysis. The
research also benefits education through the training of graduate students and
the incorporation of the developed methodology in statistics courses.
