
* 0071726
* Generalized Linear Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2000,06/13/2002
* Peter McCullagh,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2003
* USD 225,000.00

Peter McCullagh will investigate a number of issues, all bearing directly or
indirectly on generalized linear models. The main theme of the proposal is the
development of a framework for constructing logically consistent statistical
models, whose hallmark is extendability or scope. Every sensible linear model
for a two-way layout with 4 treatments and 7 blocks must ordinarily be one
element, or vector space, in a sequence of logically related vector spaces, one
such subspace for each layout. Logical consistency demands that the restriction
of one subspace to a subset of the blocks or treatments must coincide with the
subspace associated with this subset. In mathematical terms, not only must the
model be invariant under permutation of treatments and permutation of blocks,
but the sequence of vector spaces must be closed under restriction to subsets.
In algebraic terminology, such a sequence of vector spaces constitutes a
representation of the category of injective maps on finite sets. The standard
factorial models (hierarchical interaction models) coincide precisely with the
regular sub-representations of the product category. The PI has developed this
notion of extendability for designs, common in genetic studies of plant and
animal breeding, in which two or more factors have the same set of levels. In
order to accommodate these new models, it is found necessary to extend the
factorial model formulae by the inclusion of several new operators that are
relevant only for homologous factors. The aim is to develop a succinct way of
specifying category-invariant subspaces, i.e.~models, in a way that is
unambiguous and can be understood by the computer.

This proposal aims to study statistical models from the viewpoint of their
logical structure, and to develop new models where appropriate. In each new area
of application, whether it be genetics, biology or social science, new
considerations relevant to the application emerge. For example, in experiments
connected with plant breeding, the same set of plants may occur as males
contributing pollen and as females contributing ova. Likewise, in citation
studies, a given journal may occur as a citing journal or as a cited journal.
Homologous factors of this sort rarely arise in agricultural field trials where
factorial models were first developed. As a result, standard statistical models
are not well suited to such applications. It is the aim of this proposal to
study such structures from a logical viewpoint and to develop new statistical
models where needed.
