
* 0071757
* Multivariate Analysis, Ranks, and Multivariate Ranks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2000,05/22/2002
* John Marden,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 74,903.00

The project explores two areas that utilize ranked data. The first aims to
develop statistical procedures that are robust to violations of assumptions
while still working close to optimally when the assumption holds. There is a
long history of such robust procedures based on ranking the data, that is,
replacing the observed values in the data with the values' ranks. This process
helps to ameliorate the effects of unusually wild observations that can ruin an
analysis. A number of multivariate situations in which there has previously been
little work using rank procedures will be the main focus of this project. These
include certain structural models defining the relationship of variables,
testing for runs in multivariate data observed over time, estimating variances
and covariances, and testing whether certain variables are conditionally
independent given some other variables. A proposed method for defining
multivariate ranks ("iterated ranks") so that their distribution is independent
of the distribution of the underlying observations will be explored.

The second area looks at modeling rank data directly, where the data arise from
judges ranking particular objects based on their preferences. One popular model
posits that judges and objects can be arrayed along a line, where a judge is
located nearest the judge's most preferred object, next closest to the second
most preferred object, etc. A new model that also allows judges to locate
themselves nearest the objects they prefer least will be considered. An
extension of these models in which there is provision for a small percentage of
judges to act not at all according to the model will also be considered.


