
* 0072174
* Efficient Estimation in Semiparametric Time Series Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2000,04/17/2002
* Anton Schick,NY,SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Xuming He
* 09/30/2003
* USD 84,000.00

Semiparametric models play a major role in many fields and have been extensively
studied over the last two decades. Great emphasis has been placed on models with
independent (and identically) distributed observations and quite some progress
has been made in this case. Models with dependent observations, however, been
mainly neglected up to now from an efficiency point of view. The proposed
research will tackle open issues in the construction of efficient estimates and
tests in semiparametric models with an emphasis on models with dependent
observations. Such models include stationary and ergodic Markov chains and other
time series models which are plentiful in many fields such as econometrics and
financial mathematics. Efficient estimation of the finite-dimensional component
as well as aspects of the infinite-dimensional component will be addressed. The
latter include innovation distributions in time series models, invariant
distributions of ergodic Markov chains, and stationary distributions of several
consecutive observations.

The main emphasis of the proposed research will be to develop a methodology for
the construction of efficient estimates in semiparametric models with dependent
observations. In the process the proposed research will have to develop methods
that deal with the difficulties associated with an efficient score function that
cannot be calculated explicitly, a problem that is also of great interest for
models with independent observations. Finally, the proposed research will
continue the work of the principal investigator in semiparametric regression
models with an emphasis on improving existing methods of constructing root-n
consistent and efficient estimates.


