
* 0072523
* Detection, Estimation and Optimization Problems in Stochastic Systems, Genetics and Economics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2000,02/28/2002
* Tze Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 06/30/2003
* USD 450,714.00

Abstract: Statistical Problems in Quality control, Stochastic Systems and
Genetic Analysis

This project will address a number of related statistical problems having
applications in (i) industrial quality control and complex engineering systems,
(ii) in molecular biology and genetics, and (iii) in financial economics. (i)
One objective of the proposed research is to develop a unified methodology of
sequential change-point detection in industrial quality control and of automated
fault detection in complex engineering systems. Relatively simple algorithms
that are not too demanding in computational and memory requirements for on-line
implementation and yet are nearly optimal from a statistical viewpoint will be
developed for a variety of practical applications. This methodology will not
only address the recognized discrepancies between the assumptions underlying
conventional control charts and today's industrial processes, but it will also
provide methodological advances for on-line detection and diagnosis of faults
and potential failures of automated engineering systems. In this connection,
estimation and forecasting problems in time series models and stochastic
dynamical systems having parameters that may change with time will also be
investigated. Although in practice abrupt parameter changes usually occur
infrequently, the unknown times of their occurrence have led to detection
algorithms of prohibitive complexity. By using parallel recursive algorithms and
combining new ideas in change-point detection with empirical Bayes methodology,
it is anticipated that asymptotically efficient estimation and prediction
schemes of manageable complexity will be developed. (ii) Another direction of
research involves fixed sample change-point problems and their applications to
biomolecular sequence analysis and other problems of signal detection. A
comprehensive statistical methodology will be developed for genome scanning to
map anonymous genes using data based on crosses of pure strains in experimental
genetics or based on regions of identity by descent of related individuals in
human genetics. Related mathematical problems in boundary crossing probabilities
of random fields will be investigated. (iii) A third direction of research is
financial time series and stochastic control problems of financial economics.
New statistical models, computational algorithms, and methods for data analysis
and forecasting will be developed to address a variety of sequential decision,
portfolio selection, and pricing problems in investments and financial markets.

The interdisciplinary research in financial economics and molecular biology not
only leads to the development of new stochastic models and statistical methods,
but it also provides valuable research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students in these rapidly developing fields.
