
* 0072400
* Nonparametric Modeling for Nonlinear Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2000,08/25/2000
* Zongwu Cai,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 07/31/2004
* USD 49,999.00

This project covers a variety of methodological developments and foundational
research. In particular, the object of this research is to develop some new
nonparametric model building and identication procedures for high-dimensional
nonlinear time series data. The investiga- tor studies both the varying-
coefficient regression models and nonlinear additive regression models for
nonlinear time series data and makes the models practically applicable. The
first objectiveis to develop nonparametric estimation procedures for nonlinear
time series. In particular, for varying-coefficient regression models, local
polynomial regression techniques are used to estimate the coefficient functions
and the asymptotic properties of the resulting estimators are studied. This
procedure differs from the classical local linear regression for curve fitting
where the response surface is of interest. Here, of interest is to estimate the
coefficient functions. For nonlinear additive regression models, the
investigator uses partial residual method to estimate unknown additive functions
coupled with projection method and local polynomial fitting. The approach is
divided into two steps. In the first step, the initial estimated values for all
components are obtained by using the projection method. In the second step, a
local polynomial technique is employed to estimate any one of compo- nents by
using the initial estimated values of the rest of components. The second
objective of this research is concerned with the model identification. For both
models, a new goodness- of-fit test technique is proposed, based on the
comparison of the residual sum of squares under the null and alternative models,
to detect whether certain coefficient functions in the varying-coefficient
models are constant or whether certain components in the additive mod- els are
linear or whether any covariates are significant in the models. The null
distribution of the test is estimated by a nonparametric bootstrap method. Also,
the investigator studies the practical implementation of the methods,
particularly the automatic bandwidth selection method based on a modified
generalized cross-validation. A nonparametric version of Akaike information
criterion is proposed for choosing the smoothing variable in varying-coefficient
models and determining an appropriate model for given data. This research is
concerned with model estimation and identification procedures in non- linear
time series analysis. A time series is a set of data observed over a period of
time. For example, daily ozone and pollutant levels from environmental study,
quarterly earnings for a company or daily currency exchange rate from economical
study, wild animals' popula- tion observed over years from ecological study,
number of in uenza cases observed over time from epidemiology, and noisy
telecommunication signals. The investigator has been active in this research
area. Furthermore, the investigator has conducted preliminary work on the
described problem area which has led to encouraging results. There are
sufficient reasons to believe that by pursuing the topics outlined in this
proposal, the results of this research should have significant contributions in
nonlinear time series analysis, which has many impor- tant applications in the
fields of economics, social science, medicine, epidemiology, biology,
environment, physical sciences, engineering, and many others.
