
* 0072445
* Statistical Numerics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2000,07/23/2002
* Art Owen,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 08/31/2003
* USD 209,952.00

Owen 0072445 Abstract

The focus of this project is the application of statistical ideas to high
dimensional numerical problems, such as approximation and noisy or nonsmooth
optimization. This work follows on earlier successes in integration. Standard
Monte Carlo sampling integrates with a slowly decreasing error. Deterministic
quasi-Monte Carlo sampling can achieve a much more accurate answer, but without
a practical error estimate. Re-injecting some randomness allows one to estimate
the error, and gave rise to a surprising further large improvement in the
quality of the answer. The first problem is to use integration methods on
approximation problems. One expands the function in a basis (polynomials,
Fourier functions, or wavelets), and finds that the coefficients are high
dimensional integrals. Estimates of these coefficients, with statistical
uncertainty attached, can be used to give approximations with error estimates.
It is also possible to address qualitative issues such as: effective dimension
of the function, smoothness of the function, number of important inputs, and so
on. The second problem is to optimize the expected value of a function over some
variables in the face of randomness in some others. An example is how to design
an experiment for a nonlinear model. The third problem is to predict binary
functions learned from data. An example is whether to hold or exercise an
American type option.

Computer codes that depend on a great many inputs are becoming ubiquitous. They
are used in the design of semiconductors, airplanes and automobiles, in climate
models, and in financial risk management. On any given task, it can be a great
challenge to extract the relevant knowledge buried within this software. It is
also necessary to attach uncertainty estimates to the findings. For even a few
dozen input factors, it becomes necessary to employ statistical methods, of the
type being researched in this project. This project also considers functions
that depend on one million or more input factors. Advances in computer power
will bring more attention to such functions, and new methods, such as those
investigated in this project, will be required.
