
* 0072489
* Design and Analysis of Experiments for Screening, Optimization and Robustness
* DMS,STATISTICS, PRODUCTION SYSTEMS, MANFG ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
* 09/01/2000,06/23/2003
* C. F. Jeff Wu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 04/30/2004
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract:

The goal of this proposal is to study three important aspects of
experimentation: screening, optimization and robustness. Section I proposes a
novel approach to factor screening and response surface exploration by using a
single design and experiment to achieve both objectives. This differs from the
standard response surface methodology, which employs separate designs for factor
screening and for response surface exploration. New concepts, theory and
analysis are proposed, which include a two-stage analysis and a projection-
efficiency criterion. Four problems are to be studied: (i) a theory for eligible
projections in regular designs, (ii) combinatorial and algorithmic construction
of optimal nonregular designs, (iii) connection with the maximum estimation
capacity criterion, (iv) sensitivity of response surface exploration to errors
in factor screening and a Bayesian alternative to the two-stage analysis.
Section II addresses a fundamental and practically important issue of optimal
assignment of factors to columns of a design matrix. Existing work can only be
applied to regular fractional factorial designs and nonregular designs with two-
level factors. By defining a B-contamination criterion and employing the
Kronecker calculus, we propose an approach that can handle very general designs.
Three problems are to be studied: (i) Finding expressions for the contamination
terms, (ii) characterization in terms of complementary designs, (iii) extensions
to blocked designs. Section III addresses the issue of optimal selection of
experimental plans for robust parameter design. When the experimental cost is
proportional to the total run size, the cross array format can be quite costly
and the single array format becomes an attractive option. An important question
is how to select single arrays optimally and according to what criteria? By
using an effect ordering principle, we propose to define new criteria and use
them to select optimal single arrays.

Statistical design and analysis of experiments is an effective and commonly used
tool in scientific and engineering investigation. It has made significant impact
in many areas of research and development such as manufacturing, electronics,
materials, agriculture and energy. It will continue to make important
contributions by innovation in methodological and theoretical development and
applications in new areas such as biotechnology, drug discovery, and information
technology. Potential gains from using the proposed new methods include savings
in experimental runs, experimentation time, and discovery of new/better
engineering designs and products. The results on factor assignment will provide
clear guidelines on the assignment of factors and a substantial improvement over
the prevailing practice of making arbitrary and often suboptimal assignment.
Parameter design has become a major tool for variation reduction and product and
process improvement. The proposed work will develop new and more economical and
efficient techniques for conducting such experiments.


