
* 0072162
* Asymptotic Equivalence of Statistical Experiments
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 06/01/2000,04/05/2002
* Michael Nussbaum,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 05/31/2003
* USD 94,731.00

NSF proposal DMS 0072162 Abstract Asymptotic Equivalence of Statistical
Experiments

Principal Investigator: M. Nussbaum, Department of Mathematics, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY

The concept of asymptotic equivalence of experiments serves to compare
properties of statistical models. An experiment is a family of probability
measures; a distance is defined between these objects such that the
informational content of experiments with respect to the parameter is similar if
this distance is small. This basic deficiency pseudodistance (or Delta-distance)
has been introduced by L. Le Cam, generalizing the concept of sufficiency. If
experiments are equivalent via sufficiency then their Delta-distance is 0; here
equivalence via sufficiency means that one experiment results from application
of a sufficient statistic to the data of the other.

Based on the idea of the Delta-distance, a theory of local asymptotic normality
(LAN-theory) of experiments has been developed which has found widespread
application in statistics. The idea of data reduction which is at the heart of
the sufficiency concept could thus be combined with limit theorems of
probability, resulting in approximation of general statistical models by
Gaussian shift families. These Gaussian shift or translation families allow
explicit expression for risk bounds in many instances, and these risk bound then
become valid in an asymptotic sense in the approximated models.

The limitation of the LAN-theory consists in its restriction to a local setting,
in which the rate of localization is tied to the normalization rate in the
central limit theorem (the classical root-n in most cases). This setting
precludes application of the resulting risk bounds to the class of ill-posed
function estimation problems. The emphasis of the current project is on the
treatment of this problem class (which includes nonparametric density
estimation) by methods involving the Delta-distance.

The restriction to a local setting (or alternatively, a finite dimensional
setting) which is inherent in the LAN-theory has been overcome in recent years,
by efforts of Brown and Low (1996) and by various results of the P.I. and
collaborators, starting also in 1996 (asymptotic equivalence of density
estimation and Gaussian white noise). The main tool has been approximation of
general likelihood processes by Gaussian ones, using coupling methodology. The
present project focuses on elaboration and extension of these results, with two
main directions:

(i) constructive realization of equivalence in nonparametric models, enabling
explicit equivalence mappings (direct transfer of decision functions)

(ii) equivalences in nonparametric models for dependent data (time series and
diffusion process models).


