
* 0072661
* New Statistical Challenges Posed by Multiscale and Adaptive Representations
* DMS,STATISTICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2000,06/16/2004
* Iain Johnstone,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rong Chen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 850,000.00

NEW STATISTICAL CHALLENGES POSED BY MULTISCALE AND ADAPTIVE REPRESENTATIONS D.L.
Donoho & I.M. Johnstone, PI's. Project period: 07/01/00 -- 06/30/05

The project will address the following specific topics: 1. Estimation in
tomography: the curvelet tight frame of representation seems, according to
preliminary calculations, to achieve faster rates of convergence than
traditional tomographic methods. 2. Estimation and testing in time-frequency
analysis: a new tight frame of chirplets has been built by deploying curvelets
in the time-frequency plane. The new representation has promise for detection
and estimation of chirps in the presence of noise. 3. Recent work in
computational vision asks ``what is the best basis for representing natural
images?'' It is proposed that many empirical results in the rapidly growing
literature on this topic might be explained and improved using analytically-
constructed representations: ridgelets and curvelets. 4. Geometry-driven
diffusions are popular in applied image processing -- but their quantitative
performance is not well-understood. It is proposed to develop a quantitative
statistical theory using recent tools such as multiscale ridgelets. 5.
Extensions of Sparsity-Based ideas. Problems of finding `edgels in white noise'
and `subspaces in white noise' offer challenging and timely directions in which
to generalize existing sparsity ideas. 6. Testing Sparse Means. An adaptive
approach is suggested for testing if the mean of a random vector is nonzero,
when the vector might exhibit an unknown degree of sparsity. 7. Asymptotics of
top eigenvalues of large covariance matrices. A program is set out to develop
statistical theory for principal components of large data matrices based on
recent progress in random matrix theory. Consistent with the principle of
``reproducible research'', software and figures from this project will be made
available in future releases of the public domain WaveLab system.

In recent years, research in wavelets and time-frequency methods has broadened
to construct new systems of representation, including systems custom-tailored
for specific phenomena. Examples include wavelet packets and cosine packets, and
very recently, systems like edgelets, ridgelets, chirplets, warplets, and
curvelets. In parallel, research in statistical analysis and cognate fields
allows data themselves to dictate the design of their own optimal systems of
representation. Principal components (i.e. Karhunen-Loeve decomposition) is the
oldest example of such data-adaptive representation; many newer ideas have been
proposed recently, such as independent components analysis. The proposers have
been active in both domains, creating new image and signal representations and
developing statistical theory to underpin adaptive signal representations. The
current project will (a) pursue two opportunities arising from the recent
introduction of curvelets, (b) address two active applied research areas,
computational vision and geometry driven diffusions, and (c) attack some issues
which are argued to be at the core of new developments in statistical decision
theory. Topic (a) may have implications for applied work in tomography, image
and signal processing, and (c) may impact applied uses of principal components
in domains such as climate and global change studies.


