
* 0072510
* Statistical Information in Genetic Studies: Theory and Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2000,09/27/2002
* Dan Nicolae,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 160,000.00

This proposal is a comprehensive research plan for establishing a general
framework for measuring available statistical information in gene mapping
studies. The key methodological challenge is to find a measure that (1) is a
reliable index of the relative information specific to the purpose of a study,
(2) conditions on particular data sets, (3) is robust in the sense of general
applicability, including to small data sets, (4) is easy to compute, and (5) is
subject to sensible combination axioms. Dealing with all these criteria
simultaneously requires a careful combination of Bayesian and frequentist
methods, especially for small samples. The PIs propose to investigate a large-
sample framework involving likelihood functions only, and a small-sample
framework from a robust Bayesian perspective. The robust Bayesian approach takes
full advantage of the Bayesian formulation in deriving information measures with
desirable coherence properties, and at the same time it seeks measures that are
robust to various specifications and thus are more generally applicable. The PIs
also propose to investigate several specific measures at two levels. At the more
general level, the PIs will study and compare these measures in terms of their
general behaviors and applicability, which are not restricted to the genetic
setting. At the more specific level, the PIs plan to evaluate and apply these
measures in specific genetic applications, including allele-sharing methods,
methods for fine-scale genetic mapping (e.g., haplotype-sharing methods), map
comparisons (e.g., SNPs verses microsatellites), gene-gene interaction and gene-
environmental interaction studies.

Due to the huge potential benefit to the public health, geneticists and
analytical researchers, including statisticians, have focused their efforts on
finding genes affecting susceptibility to common, complex disorders such as
diabetes, asthma, hypertension, cardiovascular and psychiatric diseases. The
transmission of these disorders is complex, the etiologic complexity being
increased by the action and interaction of multiple genes and environmental
factors. There are other complications such as sporadic cases, incomplete
penetrance (i.e., genetically predisposed individuals might not exhibit the
disorder) and late age of onset. All these factors increase the difficulty of
identifying the genetic components of the trait of interest. Genetic linkage
studies are often the first step in finding and cloning a disease gene. Their
goal is to locate and, if possible, shorten regions on the genome that are very
likely to contain disease susceptibility genes. In many studies, difficulty
arises because most genetic data sets are incomplete and investigators want to
know how much information in the data is available for the study relative to the
amount of information that would have been available if the data were complete.
This relative information directly guides the investigator's follow-up
strategies (e.g., using more genetic markers with existing DNA samples versus
collecting DNA samples from more families), and a misleading measure can lead to
a serious waste of human and financial resources as well as a delay in the
progress of the underlying genetic studies. The goal of this proposal is to
provide reliable measures of such relative information by using the current
start-of-the-art statistical techniques.
