
* 0072578
* Block Thresholding Methods for Adaptive Wavelet Function Estimation: Theory and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2000,08/07/2000
* T. Tony Cai,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 03/31/2002
* USD 81,063.00

This research studies two interrelated function estimation problems,
nonparametric regression and linear inverse problems, using wavelet methods via
the approach of block thresholding and ideal adaptation with oracle. The goals
are to build a bridge between the traditional multivariate normal decision
theory and the adaptive wavelet function estimation, and to develop a family of
estimators that achieve simultaneously three objectives: adaptivity, spatial
adaptivity, and computational efficiency. A major innovation and a consistent
theme throughout the research is the use of block shrinkage methods which
include the standard term-by-term thresholding as a special case. Block
thresholding is studied via the approach of ideal adaptation with oracle. It
will be demonstrated that block thresholding serves as a bridge between the
classical normal decision theory and adaptive wavelet function estimation. This
leads to a systematic way of developing a coherent set of rate-optimal
estimators with good empirical performance, all of which may be useful in
different estimation problems.

To fully understand why block thresholding works ``better'' than the standard
term-by-term thresholding, and more generally, separable rules, I will explore
the connection between adaptability and information-pooling in general
orthogonal series estimation, of which wavelets are a special case. Preliminary
results show that separable rules lack adaptability; they are necessarily not
fully rate-adaptive. A key to adaptively achieve the exact minimax rate is
information-pooling. I will further carry out research in this topic and will
derive a lower bound on the amount of information-pooling required for achieving
full global adaptivity. These results together will offer a deeper understanding
of the benefit of information-pooling in nonparametric function estimation, and
also serve as a guide for the construction of fully adaptive estimators. Besides
theoretical investigation, I am also interested in applications of the wavelet
methods. I am collaborating with colleagues on using wavelet methods for
archiving and retrieval of medical images from tomographic databases.


