
* 0072207
* Methods for Reliability Theory and Applications of Order-Restricted Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2000,07/01/2002
* Henry Block,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 171,000.00

The question is addressed of when the bathtub shape of a failure rate function
is preserved by various functions used to describe optimal behavior. A second
issue is when do mixtures have specified shapes such as a bathtub shape. A third
topic introduces isotonic logistic discrimination, which is developed as a
nonparametric generalization of linear logistic discrimination taking into
account order restrictions. The fourth question addresses finding simultaneous
confidence bands for isotonic response surfaces and the fifth topic develops an
ordinal extension of the Pearson chi-squared for testing 2(k ordered tables. A
new metric on permutations is proposed and developed as the sixth topic.

Failure rates are a method used to describe the propensity of a system, either
engineering or biological, to fail. They are a function of time and typically at
an early age they are high (more likely to fail), at middle age they are low,
and then at an old age they tend to increase (called wearout). This gives rise
to the bathtub shaped failure rate. For mechanical or electrical systems, which
have a bathtub failure rate, there are many early failures. Consequently, a
product should not be released until this period of early failures is past. A
method of insuring this is called burn-in. Typically this means testing such
products for a length of time until this critical period is over. An important
consideration is how to optimally determine such a period and this is one
question studied by the researchers. Another research area deals with a common
phenomenon in many scientific problems where the experimental responses tend to
get larger as various underlying experimental parameters are increased. For
example, an individual's likelihood of heart attacks within a five-year period
will increases as baseline systolic blood pressure increases and as cholesterol
levels increase. In order to properly analyze the data arising from such
phenomena, new and more general statistical methods need to be developed. The
researchers are considering several major new statistical methods to model and
analyze such data.
