
* 0084378
* Nonstationary Spatial Modeling for Multiple Point Sources, with Applications to Enviromnental Data
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 10/01/2000,09/20/2000
* Jacqueline Hughes-Oliver,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 09/30/2004
* USD 200,000.00

This research develops, assesses, and provides convenient tools for implementing
parametric modeling of processes that are driven by point sources. The project
uses a hierarchical Bayesian approach to an extension of a process decomposition
model that was recently introduced in the context of modeling the effect of
point sources. The process decomposition model decomposes the observed process
into a trend surface, a baseline error process, and additional error processes
(one for each point source) that may be viewed as shocks to the baseline. This
approach allows flexibility and autonomy to modeling the individual sources. The
Bayesian approach properly accounts for uncertainty in parameter estimates when
evaluating prediction uncertainty, easily incorporates prior information, and is
more flexible for assigning ranks according to the impact of several point
sources. A Markov random field or conditional autoregressive model based on a
distance-to-source neighborhood structure is used for the error processes. A
multivariate distribution of weights describes the relative ranks of the
sources. Because all models are parametric, significance testing is easily
accomplished. The project accomplishes the following technical goals: A. test
the impact of several point sources, where exact locations of the point sources
are known; B. rank several point sources according to impact; C. provide models
that are useful for determining appropriate corrective action for altering an
observed process or for optimizing a designed process; D. provide predictions,
and appropriate measures of prediction uncertainties, at unsampled sites by
accounting for the effects of point sources. The educational component of the
project involves teaching high school students the rudiments of the methodology
developed and its relevance to major issues such as environmental equity.

The Clean Air Act of 1970 and its 1977 and 1990 amendments defined a pollution
source as "any place or object from which pollutants are released. A source can
be a power plant, factory, dry cleaning business, gas station or farm. Cars,
trucks and other motor vehicles are sources, and consumer products and machines
used in industry can be sources too." The effects of these sources on human
health are well-documented, as is the importance of modeling these effects. This
project responds to this need by developing, assessing, and providing convenient
tools for modeling processes that are driven by point sources. The resulting
methodology is applied to address a public health and welfare concern of the
Environmental Protection Agency, namely to determine which nitrogen oxide (NOx)
and sulfur dioxide (SO2) emission sites are most responsible for site-specific
ambient concentrations far from the emission sites. These site-specific ranks
will help determine which emission sites require stricter regulations for
controlling their impact at different spatial locations. More generally, project
results may impact the regulation of point sources, the assignment of equitable
consequences to several point sources within the vicinity of an ecological or
environmental disaster, and help in determining appropriate corrective actions.
Furthermore, the creation of teaching modules aimed at high school students will
improve the readiness of these students for studies in the mathematical,
physical, and biological sciences.

This project is jointly supported by the Statistics Program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS.
