
* 0090166
* Computational Inference, Monte Carlo, and Scientific Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2001,05/13/2003
* Wing Hung Wong,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 12/31/2004
* USD 514,464.00

Title: Computational inference, Monte Carlo methods, and scientific applications

With the advent of automated, high-throughput experimental protocols and data
collection techniques, research and discoveries in many areas of science and
technology have become increasingly data driven and computation intensive. The
applications motivating the research in this project arise from molecular
biology, biotechnology and neural science. The rapid accumaulation of
experimental data in these areas have outstriped scientists' ability to analyze
them, and advanced statistical methods are needed to automate the analysis
process and to exploit the complex data structure and extensive scientific
knowledge underlying such studies. Computational inference refers to statistical
modeling and inference procedures that rely on intensive computation to extract
information from large scale data and knowledge-based models. The board, long
term goal of this project is to advance the methodologies of computational
inference and apply them towards the solution of several important problems in
the aforementioned scientific areas.

A critical step in almost all large scale computational inference procedure is
the study of the posterior density through Monte Carlo sampling (or the related
problem of studying the likelihood function). Successful sampling leads
immediately to the inference of any parameter or prediction of interest to the
investigator. Thus the first specific goal of this project is to develop Monte
Carlo simulation methods that are effective in sampling complex, multimodal
distributions. Advances in this core computational problem will not only
facilitate effective computational inference, but will also be of interest to
other scientific tasks such as simulation of molecular structures and
combinatorial optimization. Three approaches will be investigated: a) an
evolutionary Monte Carlo approach where a population of structures are evolved
and individual structures, including recombinant ones, are continuously
competing for survival in the population, b) further development of sequential
importance sampling and dynamic importance sampling through better methods to
handle skewed weight distributions, c) multi-level computational models. Hybrid
algorithms combining the above approaches will also be investigated. Some of
these methods will be used to investigate the grand-challenge problem of
understanding the energy landscape of protein conformation.

The second specific goal of this project is the development of computational
inference tools for two further scientifc problems: i) multiple alignment and
clustering of DNA and protein sequences based on hidden Markov models, and the
use of these in the analysis of human genome coding regions, ii) the development
of hierarchical computational models for low-level vision task such as texture
recognition and primal sketching.

If successful, the methods developed in this project will enable the wider
application of computational inference and will also result in direct
contributions to three problems of considerable importance in the current
scientific frontier.
