
* 0094613
* Collaborative Research: Sequential Monte Carlo Methods and Their Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2000,06/11/2002
* Jun Liu,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 335,393.00

Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methodology recently emerged in statistics and
engineering fields promises to solve a wide class of nonlinear filtering and
optimization problems, opening up new frontiers for cross-fertilization between
statistics and many areas of applications. A distinctive feature of SMC is its
ability to adapt to the dynamics of the underlying stochastic systems via
recursive simulation of the variables involved. Although special forms of SMC
date back to 1950s, the general use of the method appeared only recently and its
many key properties have yet been well understood. This research group will
focus on three major theoretical issues regarding the design of effective SMC-
based computational tools and three important application areas, namely,
wireless communications, computational biology, and business data analysis. In
the theory part, they will study approaches of generating better Monte Carlo
samples for tracking system dynamics; investigate roles of resampling which is
critical to the effectiveness of SMC; and propose system reconfiguration
strategies for more efficient SMC algorithms. In the application part, they plan
to design novel signal processing and network control algorithms for wireless
multimedia communications; develop better multiple sequence alignment models and
SMC-based optimization method for protein structures; and build SMC-based
modeling and analysis tools for business data. It is anticipated that the
proposed research will culminate in the formulation of novel SMC methodologies
and will bring the promise of the SMC paradigm into the practical arena of many
emerging applications.

Stochastic dynamic systems are routinely used in many application fields such as
automatic control, engineering, and finance. The statistical analyses of these
systems are crucial. However, except for a few special cases, quantitative
analyses of these systems still present major challenges to researchers.
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) technique recently emerged in the field of
statistics and engineering shows a great promise on solving a wide class of
nonlinear filtering, prediction, and optimization problems, providing us with
many exciting new research opportunities. The name "Monte Carlo" was coined in
1940s by scientists involved in designing atomic bombs and it refers to a
technique in which computer is used to simulate and study a complex stochastic
system. The technique was named after the famed gambling resort because its
procedures incorporate the element of chance. A distinctive feature of SMC is
its ability to sequentially simulate the system by considering one variable at a
time. The general use of SMC appeared recently and its invasion into many fields
of science and engineering has just begun. Researchers including people in this
research group have demonstrated that SMC can be successfully adapted to solve
chemistry, engineering, and statistical problems. Understanding its theoretical
properties and extending the use of SMC to other fields are the main focuses of
this project. More specifically, this research group will focuse on three major
theoretical issues regarding the design of effective SMC-based computational
tools and three important application areas including wireless communications,
computational biology, and business data analysis. These applications are not
only important by their own merits, but also essential as the test ground for
the new theories being developed and as the sources of stimulation for new
research directions for SMC. It is anticipated that this research will culminate
in the formulation of novel SMC methodologies and will bring the promise of the
SMC paradigm into the practical arena of many emerging applications. In
particular, this research will bear fruits in the following areas: novel designs
of signal processing and network control algorithms for wireless multimedia
communications; developments of better algorithms analyzing biological sequence
and structure data; and a SMC-based tool for business data analysis and
prediction.
