
* 0102268
* Limit Theorems and Statistical Inference for Ergodic Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2001,05/06/2003
* Michael Woodroofe,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 239,958.00

Abstract 0102268 Limit Theorems and Statistical Inference for Ergodic Processes

A major goal of the project is to develop a new approach to the change point
problem in which the abrupt change of the latter is replaced by an arbitrary
monotonic change. The new procedure uses a penalized likelihood ratio statistic
for testing equality of means against a non-decreasing trend, derived for
independent normal observation errors. The properties of the test can be studied
in the more general context of dependent, but stationary and ergodic errors.
Applications of such procedures should be evident in the analysis of climate
changes results from cataclysmic events or legal intervention, such as the
required reduction on vehicle emissions.

Current work by the principal investigator and students has determined the
asymptotic null distribution of the test statistic for stationary ergodic errors
under modest conditions, thus allowing application to historical data sets, like
weather data. Remaining questions include developing a sequential analogue for
applications to quality control, alternative penalizations, and estimating a
variance parameter after an isotonic regression. A second major goal of the
project is to develop asymptotic distribution theory in a context that is
applicable to the first. The central limit theorem will be studied for additive
functionals of a Markov chain with special attention to chains in which the
current state is a function of the previous state and an independent variable.
Many linear and non-linear time series models are of this form. Conditions for
the existence of a stationary distribution have been widely studied for such
processes, but there is much less work on central limit theory for their
additive functionals. The principal investigator plans to develop central limit
theory in this context. Previous work has shown that additive functionals can be
written as a martingale plus a remainder term of smaller order in many cases,
and then asymptotic normality can be deduced from the martingale central limit
theorem. This approach does not require Harris recurrence or other strong forms
of asymptotic independence. It will be developed, and statistical applications
explored, especially applications to the modified change point problem. Other
statistical applications include setting approximate confidence intervals. In
some cases, approximate confidence intervals may be obtained from a multivariate
central limit theorem. For others, it is necessary to develop tightness of
empirical processes, and this question will be studied. In highly structured
models, it is possible to go beyond asymptotic normality to (Edgeworth like)
asymptotic expansions from which corrected confidence intervals can be formed,
intervals whose actual coverage probability converges to the nominal value at a
fast rate. A third major objective of project is to develop such expansions.
Previous work by the principal investigator, co-workers, and students has
developed expansions of this nature for adaptively designed linear models and
auto regressive processes. This work will be extended to processes whose finite
dimensional distributions form exponential families, a large class of processes
that includes Markov Chains and many semi-Markov processes.
