
* 0102961
* Symposium on Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics - VI
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2001,07/05/2001
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 06/30/2002
* USD 15,000.00

A symposium entitled "Bayesian Statistics in Science and Technology: Case
Studies VI" will be held at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, on Friday September 28 and Saturday September 29, 2001. The
symposium will include two extended presentations of applications of Bayesian
methods in problems in which the statistician was an integral member of the
research team, and one case study of statistical methods analyzed by a panel of
three experts. Two contributed poster sessions will also be held. The objectives
of the symposium are to (i) Highlight the close interplay of statistical theory
and applications in the context of substantive scientific research, (ii)
Contribute to the development of Bayesian statistics, by identifying problems
without standard solution, and encouraging the extension of the theory and its
implementation so that possible approaches to analyses may be found. (iii) Bring
to the fore the topic of reporting of Bayesian statistical analyses to the
scientific community, and discuss effective and relevant means of communicating
both the methods used in, and the conclusions drawn from quantitative analyses.
(iv) Provide a small meeting atmosphere for young researchers and graduate
students to present their work and to interact with senior colleagues, and to
learn about the recent advances in implementation of Bayesian method in
substantive problems. (v) Encourage the collaboration between statisticians and
researchers in subject mater disciplines, by emphasizing the many challenging
statistical problems that arise in the course of scientific research. (vi)
Disseminate the results of the research presented at the workshop by publishing
a volume containing well-documented and peer-reviewed case studies and data
sets, and other selected workshop presentations.

As increasingly much background information becomes available to scientists
undertaking an investigation, it is important to utilize previous knowledge
effectively in designing studies and analyzing data. Bayesian statistical
methods are tailored to this purpose. There have been many recent advances in
Bayesian statistical theory and computation, but scientific meetings rarely
spend substantial time discussing applications. The purpose of this symposium is
to concentrate attention solely on applications of Bayesian statistics. The goal
is to elucidate the interplay between theory and practice and thereby identify
successful methods and indicate important directions for future research.
