
* 0102511
* Statistical Methods in the Frequency Domain
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2001,05/07/2003
* David Stoffer,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Xuming He
* 06/30/2004
* USD 269,999.00

Abstract DMS-0102511 Stoffer & Ombao

In this proposal, we concentrate on topics relating, in general, to statistical
methods in the frequency domain. First, we propose to extend the spectral
envelope methodology for stationary time series to the notion of evolutionary
spectral envelope for nonstationary series. In another project, we will direct
our attention to analyzing nonstationary multiple time series and their
principal components using transforms based on smooth localized complex
exponentials (SLEX). In a third project, we will consider spectral analysis of
time series collected in experimental designs with covariates. The spectral
envelope was first proposed as a method to analyze stationary categorical-valued
time series in the frequency domain. The motivation for that research was the
analysis of DNA sequences. A common problem in analyzing long DNA sequence data
is in identifying coding sequences that are dispersed throughout the sequence
and separated by regions of noncoding. It is well known that DNA sequences are
heterogeneous, and even within short subsequences of DNA, one encounters local
behavior. In this project, we are interested in extending the spectral envelope
methodology to capture the local behavior of such sequences. To address this
problem of local behavior in categorical-valued time series, we will explore
using the spectral envelope in conjunction with a dyadic tree-based adaptive
segmentation (TBAS) method for analyzing locally stationary processes. Our hope
is that this methodology will help emphasize any harmonic feature that exists in
a categorical sequence of virtually any length in a quick and automated fashion.
Projects such as the human genome project have produced large amounts of data.
We believe our methods will prove to be useful as a data mining technique for
help in the analysis of the vast quantities of data being produced by various
genome projects.

While the first project focuses on Fourier based methods, the second project
concentrates on other techniques that will give spatial (or time) and frequency
localization. Our goal, as always, is to develop computationally efficient
algorithms for the analysis of large data sets. In our initial investigations,
we will focus on the SLEX transform for analyzing categorical-valued
nonstationary time series, but our goal is eventually to apply the technique to
multiple time series (and their principal components) in general. The SLEX
transform has special properties that make it ideal for analysis of
nonstationary time series. The SLEX transform is based on the SLEX basis
functions which are localized in both the time and frequency domains. The SLEX
transform yields a decomposition in both time and frequency and allows a choice
among many orthogonal transforms. Orthogonality leads to computationally
efficient procedures for automatic segmentation of nonstationary time series and
will hopefully facilitate in our investigation of the theoretical elements of
our proposed methodology. An orthogonal representation allows one to store the
coefficients and later process them by methods such as nonlinear thresholding.
Our feeling is that if the data can be reduced to a relatively small number of
meaningful coefficients then these coefficients might be useful in some type of
secondary statistical analysis. In our collaborations with other scientists and
physicians, we frequently encounter settings where time series, and covariates,
are recorded for several subjects in an experimental design. There is an absence
of a core of statistical procedures for analyzing such data, and we typically
run across techniques that are cooked up in an ad hoc manner by researchers who
have little technical skill or knowledge for analyzing correlated data and
estimating (spectral) functions. Our goal in this project is to develop a
general, user friendly, statistical methodology that will incorporate the
relevant information obtained from time series data sets recorded from several
units from many groups, and where covariates may also be measured. Our initial
approach will be to exploit the relationship between spectral density estimation
and generalized linear models.


