
* 0102505
* Variable Selection in High-Dimensional Modeling and Its Oracle Properties
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2001,06/08/2001
* Runze Li,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2005
* USD 96,769.00

High-dimensional data, such as, biotech and genetic data, financial data,
satellite imagery and hyper-spectral imagery, are commonplace in our daily life.
Indeed, high-dimensional data analysis has become an important research topic in
statistics. Variable selection is fundamental to high-dimensional statistical
modeling. Many approaches currently in use are stepwise selection procedures,
which are expensive in computation and ignore stochastic errors in the stage of
selection process. This research involves a variety of data-analytic techniques
for developing a unified effective variable selection procedure in high-
dimensional statistical modeling. The goal of this project is to significantly
enhance the availability of tools for analyzing complicated high-dimensional
data.

In this project, penalized least squares and a penalized likelihood approach are
proposed to select significant variables for various models used in high-
dimensional data analysis. The proposed approach is distinguished from others
since it deletes insignificant covariates by estimating their coefficients to be
zero. In the other words, it simultaneously selects significant variables and
estimates their regression coefficients, and thereby enables one to construct
confidence intervals for the estimated parameters. An algorithm is proposed for
finding solutions to optimization problems involved in the penalized least
squares and penalized likelihood. The rates of convergence and the sampling
properties of the resulting estimators are investigated and presented.
