
* 0103926
* Approximate and Exact Inference Via Computer-Intensive Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2001,08/03/2001
* Joseph Romano,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 186,000.00

The investigator will continue the development of inferential methods that do
not rely on unrealistic or unverifiable model assumptions. Standard inferential
methods rest upon strong assumptions, especially in the analysis of time series,
random fields, or whenever complex dependencies must be taken into account. In
contrast, resampling, subsampling, and other computer-intensive methods offer
viable approaches to obtaining valid distributional approximations while
assuming very little about the stochastic mechanism generating the data. In part
1 of this proposal, the investigator will address several important problems so
that these bootstrap and subsampling methods can serve as good approximate
methods in statistical practice. The main issues we wish to tackle include the
following: further relaxing of conditions (such as slower mixing rate for long
memory data and allowing for nonstationarity); more theory for irregularly
spaced data; studying delicate problems where the rate of convergence depends on
unknown parameters, such as in the notoriously difficult problem of
autoregressive type processes with unit roots; improve the accuracy of
distribution estimation by techniques such as Richardson extrapolation, and by
optimal choice of block size; and pursue the development of goodness-of-fit
tests in the dependent data case. These methods are especially useful in
modelling of economic time series, due to the inherent difficulties caused by
nonlinearity and nonstationarity. In part 2 of the proposal, the investigator
will pursue the development of methods that have exact finite sample validity,
such as the construction of conservative confidence regions, without the expense
of losing efficiency, at least in large samples. Typical nonparametric methods
are based on approximations or limit theorems, so that finite sample behavior is
always an issue, and is often typically addressed by small scale simulations. In
contrast, the goal here is to construct nonparametric procedures with guaranteed
finite sample behavior and good efficiency.

The statistical analysis of data is vital in many diverse scientific
disciplines: physics, engineering, acoustics, geostatistics, medicine,
econometrics, seismology, law, ecology, and others. The scope of modern
statistical analysis is continually expanding, as is the need for inferential
methods that are valid without imposing strong model assumptions. The
investigator will continue the pursuit of the development of statistical methods
that can be applied safely in practice, keeping in mind the many applications
toward which such methods can fruitfully be applied. The philosophical approach
of the investigator is to develop practical methods that have a robustness of
validity so that they may be applied in increasingly complex situations. The
impact of this work is potentially quite large because strong inferential
statements can be made without imposing strong assumptions.
