
* 0103513
* Semiparametric Models for Correlated Data: The Quadratic Inference Function Approach
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 07/15/2001,07/09/2001
* Annie Qu,OR,Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 06/30/2004
* USD 79,141.00

This research focuses on a new statistical method for the analysis of correlated
data, the quadratic inference function (QIF) approach (Qu, Lindsay & Li 2000).
The QIF is built on a semiparametric framework defined by a set of mean zero
estimating functions, but differs from the standard estimating function approach
in that there are more equations than the number of unknown parameters. The QIF
has advantages compared to the estimating function approach, such as not
requiring the specification of the likelihood function. It also overcomes
limitations of the estimating function approach such as a lack of objective
functions and likelihood functions for testing. One of the main goals of the
proposed project is to explore the QIF for robustness with respect to the
consistency of estimators when mean zero assumptions are not satisfied. A second
goal focuses on the missing data problem, which occurs often in longitudinal
data. Testing whether missing data are ignorable is still a challenging problem
in general. The goodness-of-fit test for the QIF appears to be a valid test for
nonignorable missing data. The third goal is to test order restricted
alternative hypotheses for correlated data using the QIF. Current existing
testing tools are not satisfactory and are mainly based on the likelihood
function for parametric models, and therefore are not applicable for correlated
data where the likelihood function is difficult to formulate. The QIF is related
to the empirical likelihood (Owen, 1988) which is popular for nonparametric
models. The proposed project also illustrates the Edgeworth expansion of QIF and
explores how to apply the bootstrap strategy to improve testing accuracy for
small samples of correlated data.

This research will have a significant impact and many applications in
biostatistics, econometrics, and the environmental and social sciences where
correlated data arise often. In particular, the QIF method substantially
improves the estimation of regression parameters in generalized estimating
equation settings (Liang & Zeger, 1986). Considering a real world example of air
pollution for health impact assessment, even a slight difference in the
regression parameter estimates can have a major impact on our health and
environmental policies. Further, it is also the first effort to connect the
generalized method of moments (Hansen, 1982) in econometrics to estimating
functions in the statistics field. It attempts to answer a question frequently
asked by econometricians: how to choose the most informative moment conditions
with the lowest dimension possible. The research will also serve an educational
purpose through developing a new course on longitudinal data and training of
graduate students.
