
* 0103886
* Design and Analysis of Fractional Factorial Split-Plot Experiments in Industry
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2001,06/05/2003
* Derek Bingham,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2004
* USD 128,392.00

The goal of this research is a theoretical and practical study of split-plot
designs in industrial applications. While split-plot designs maintain many of
the fundamental features of industrial experimental design such as effect
sparsity, effect hierarchy and effect heredity, the more complicated
randomization structure impacts both the design and the analysis of the
experiment. Regular and non-regular fractional factorial split-plot designs are
studied. In both cases, the fundamental problems considered are (i) defining
optimality criteria for split-plot designs in industrial applications; (ii)
constructing optimal split-plot designs; and (iii) analysis of split-plot
designs. Novel approaches for constructing optimal regular and non-regular
fractional factorial split-plot designs will be proposed. To analyze non-regular
fractional factorial split-plot designs, new Bayesian variable selection
procedures are entertained. Lastly, the connection between split-plot designs
and other designs (i.e., compound orthogonal arrays and robust parameter
designs) will be addressed.

The design and analysis of experiments have been successfully used in efforts to
improve products and processes. They have made important contributions to
scientific discovery and innovation and will continue to do so for the
foreseeable future. Most recent advancements relate to experiments where the
trials are performed as completely randomized designs. However, many industrial
processes take place in multiple. This experiment structure induces correlation
between observations and a "split-plot" design results. The aim of the proposed
research is a theoretical and practical study of the design and analysis of
fractional factorial split-plot experiments in industrial applications. The
proposed work will develop new techniques for constructing and analyzing such
experiments. The potential gains realized by performing an experiment as a
split-plot design include more efficient and cost effective designs and
increased power to detect some significant effects of interest.


