
* 0103727
* Topics in Design of Scientific Experiments
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, STATISTICS
* 06/15/2001,06/22/2005
* Sam Hedayat,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 355,171.00

ABSTRACT DMS 0103727 S. Hedayat

The investigator together with his co-researchers study and employ a
combination of mathematical, statistical, and computational tools which are
useful in discovering new orthogonal arrays useful for multifatorial
experiments. Proper and relevant small Chebyshev-systems and maximum principles
will be developed for identifying and constructing optimal designs for non-
linear models. When needed genetic algorithms will be developed for the purpose
of explicitly constructing optimal and near optimal designs useful for linear
and non-linear models.

This proposal develops new methods and theory for the purpose of collecting
informative and cost effective data. Two broad cases are considered. Those cases
where data are controlled by many factors, and those cases where medicinal
chemists are seeking for natural products with chemotherapeutic and
chemopreventive properties among thousands of agents. In both cases the goal is
to collect the minimum amount of data with maximum info/cost value. The proposed
research has important applications in collecting and analyzing raw optical
density data used by medicinal chemists. This research provides a mechanism for
integrating, coordinating and expanding interdisciplinary interaction between
statisticians and researchers in the areas of pharmaceutical and medical
sciences. The emerging uses of natural products in preventing and treating
disease add urgency to a portion of the proposed research. The outcomes of this
proposal will also assist scientists working on research projects sponsored by
NIH Office of Dietary Supplements (DOS) and National Centers for Complementary
and Alternative Medicines (NCCAM).
