
* 0104195
* Block Designs: Advances in Theory and Use
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2001,07/06/2001
* John Morgan,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 172,500.00

A problem common to many disparate fields of scientific and industrial enquiry
is that of comparing a set of experimental conditions, or `treatments', when
faced with heterogeneity in the units of material on which the experiment is to
be performed. The technique of blocking specifically addresses this problem.
Typically using values of some identifiable nuisance factor, the experimental
units are partitioned into homogeneous subsets called blocks. Inferences can
then be based on the more precise comparisons of measurements from the same
block. The design problem is to determine which treat- ments are assigned to
which units in which blocks, said assignment being driven by the desire to
maximize the quality of information that will ultimately be produced. The
problem becomes more complicated as more nuisance factors, with various inter-
relationships, are introduced or identified. This project addresses the design
problem for a variety of commonly encountered experimental settings, with two
broad goals: (i) to extend the known theory for determining optimal designs for
a wider range of settings than is now known or available; and (ii) to produce a
comprehensive catalog of designs to be incorporated into a larger, web-based
resource that will include a vari- ety of downloadable combinatorial designs
useful for statisticians, mathematicians, and other scientists in academia and
industry. By collecting optimal designs in a single, easily accessible resource,
the use of good designs can be increased and the practice of experimental
science consequently sharpened.

When comparing v treatments, the most commonly encountered situation across a
range of scientific endeavors is that of a single blocking variable partitioning
bk experi- mental units into b blocks of k units each. This project will examine
optimality problems for these simple block designs, and the attendant
combinatorial issues, augmenting the- ory by computation where needed, to
produce designs for a practical range of parameter combinations (v; b; k),
including settings where equireplication is not possible. The most frequently
used designs with two blocking factors are row-column designs, in which two
blocking factors can be visualized as row and columns in a rectangular array,
and re- solvable designs, in which a second blocking factor partitions a simple
block design into subsets of blocks each consisting of a single replicate. This
project will also address problems in optimality and construction of designs in
both these classes, with special emphasis on plans most demanded in practice:
those with few replicates.
