
* 0104016
* Complex Statistical Models: Theory and Methodology for Scientific Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2001,05/06/2003
* Larry Wasserman,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Xuming He
* 06/30/2004
* USD 390,000.00

Complex Statistical Models: Theory and Methodology for Scientific Applications

Larry Wasserman, Christopher Genovese, Robert E. Kass and Kathryn Roeder

ABSTRACT

This project is aimed at developing statistical theory and methodology for
highly complex, possibly infinite dimensional models. Although the methodology
and theory will be quite general, we will conduct the research in the context of
three scientific collaborations. The first is ``Characterizing Large-Scale
Structure in the Universe,'' a joint project with astrophysicists and computer
scientists. The main statistical challenges are nonparametric density estimation
and clustering, subject to highly non-linear constraints. The second project is
``Locating Disease Genes with Genomic Control.'' We aim to locate regions of the
genome with more genetic similarity among cases (subjects with disease) than
controls. These regions are candidates for containing disease genes. Finding
these regions ina statistically rigorous fashion requires testing a vast number
of hypotheses. We will extend and develop recent techniques for multiple
hypothesis testing. The third projects is ``Modeling Neuron Firing Patterns.''
The goal is to construct and fit models for neuron firing patterns, called spike
trains. The data consist of simultaneous voltage recordings of numerous neurons
which have been subjected to time-varying stimuli. The data are correlated over
time and a major effort is to develop a class of models, called inhomogeneous
Markov interval (IMI) process models, which can adequately represent the data.

Statistical methods for simple statistical models with a small number of
parameters are well established. These models often do not provide an adequate
representation of the phenomenon under investigation. Currently, scientists are
deluged with huge volumes of high quality data. These data afford scientists the
opportunity to use very complex models that more faithfully reflect reality. The
researchers involved in this proposal are developing methodology and theory for
analyzing data from these complex models. The methods are very general but they
are being developed for applications in Astrophysics, Genetics and Neuroscience.
