
* 0104075
* Adaptive Methods for Nonparametric Classification and Regression/Supervised Learning, Inference in HMM and State Space Models and Inference in Semiparametric Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2001,06/19/2005
* Peter Bickel,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 630,001.00

In non and semiparametric inference Bickel, in collaboration with Ritov and
others, proposes to study how an increasing but proportionally vanishingly small
cross validation sample can be used systematically to optimize supervised
learning (classification and regression) procedures, for example ADA BOOST.
Further they propose to study a unified theory for testing of semiparametric
hypotheses and develop efficient tests for bioequivalence. In dependent data
models, they propose to extend previous results on Hidden Markov models to state
space models and study how procedures obtained by fitting and use of approximate
likelihoods such as particle filters behave.

The investigator and collaborators propose to analyze and develop new effective
methods for identifying (by machine) the type of a newly perceived object or
predicting some feature from historical information. This ranges from machine
reading of hand written zip codes to predicting travel times of cars from one
destination to another to predicting tumor type from microarray data. In a
similar direction they propose to see how well computer simulation based
approximations to ideal prediction methods work in very complicated models
applying to situations such as voice recognition. Further they propose to study
methods of inference bearing on questions such as whether a new drug which may
be more expensive and have side-effects is sufficiently better than drugs
currently in use to be authorized for distribution.
