
* 0108882
* A Conference in Honor of Wayne A. Fuller
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 04/01/2001,03/21/2001
* Sarah Nusser,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 03/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

The main objective of the conference is to encourage intellectual discourse on
emerging statistical topics that honor Wayne Fuller's forty plus years of
contributions to statistics and fields of application. To do so, we have several
goals for the conference: 1. To advance statistical knowledge in the areas of
time series analysis, measurement error models, and survey sampling. To achieve
this goal, we have invited a distinguished slate of statisticians who will
present their work in three sessions. 2. To highlight the importance of
applications and the impact that statistical developments have in other fields
of inquiry. For this purpose, we have invited a set of researchers who will
discuss the influence of Fuller's work in various areas, including dietary
assessment, small area estimation, econometrics and economics. 3. To provide a
friendly and open environment in which young statisticians can present their
work and interact with senior statisticians. We plan to achieve this goal by
inviting researchers in the early stages of their careers to present a talk in
one of the invited sessions or in the special poster area that will be dedicated
to young investigators. 4. To gather statisticians from all over the world for a
two-day celebration of statistics in general and of Fuller in particular. A
lively exchange of ideas and knowledge, a definition of future directions for
research in these important areas, and a fostering of communication and
collaboration among researchers at different stages of their careers and from
different geographic locations are lasting results from the conference that we
hope to produce.
