
* 0203921
* Point Processes and time Series: Mutual Information Analyses
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2002,06/16/2004
* David Brillinger,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 261,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0203921 PI: David Brillinger Title: Point processes and time
series: mutual information analysis

ABSTRACT This research concerns the theoretical and empirical investigation of
the mutual information coefficient. It extends the ordinary correlation
coefficient to the case of random processes. The processes to be studied
include: point processes, time series, spatial-temporal processes and random
networks. The mutual information coefficient will become a function of time or
space or frequency amongst other quantities. The statistical properties of a
variety of types of estimates, including kernel-based, wavelets with shrinkage,
recurrence times will be developed. The tools of strong approximations, limit
theorems, ergodic theory and nonparametric estimation will be employed. Claude
Shannon introduced the concepts of entropy and mutual information in 1948. These
have both revolutionized and driven the way that our technological society has
developed. Mutual information characterizes the strength of dependence between
variates and of scientific relationships. It is intended to develop extensions
of the idea to random functions and random scatter. The work will be both theory
and data driven. The work may have important payoffs for science is about laws
and relationships.


