
* 0203243
* Spline Smoothing and Nonparametric Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2002,07/25/2002
* Randall Eubank,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 194,889.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0203243 PI: Eubank Title: Spline smoothing and nonparametric
regression

ABSTRACT

A number of nonparametric regression type problems are investigated. These
problems are connected through the use of spline smoothing in their solution
methodology. Specific problems that are studied include: 1) testing the lack-of-
fit of a parametric regression model using a spline smoother in a setting where
standard smoothing parameter consistency asymptotics do not hold under the null
hypothesis, 2) estimation using spline smoothers in varying coefficient models,
3) variance estimation and testing for heteroscedasticity for partially linear
models, 4) computational methods for nonlinear spline smoothing problems with
both linear and nonlinear parameters, 5) adaptive selection of regularization
parameters for spline smoothing of data from ill-posed integral equations and 6)
computation and large sample properties of equality constrained local polynomial
smoothers with applications to copula density estimation.

The problems that are investigated in this research project concern regression
analysis which represents the standard statistical approach to studying
relationships between variables. The classical approach to regression analysis
assumes that the form of the relationship between a collection of variables is
known apart from a few unknown parameters that must be estimated from the data.
This project uses more modern techniques that employ flexible or nonparametric
curve fitting methods to produce estimators as well as to assess the validity of
parametric models. New estimation methodologies are developed for several
settings which include time varying coefficient models and partially linear
models. Time varying coefficient models provide a generalization of parametric
models where the parameters in the regression relationship are allowed to evolve
as a function of some other variable such as time. This type of model is useful
in a number of settings such as for analyzing data from longitudinal case
studies and for prediction of lottery sales as a function of jackpot level.
Partially linear models provide a mix of parametric and nonparametric methods
where the regression relationships for some of the variables can be modeled
parametrically while others must be handled using flexible nonparametric
techniques. This latter type of model has been found useful, for example, in
modeling yield from agricultural field trials as a function of field fertility
and for examining the utility of particular blood enzymes in pregnant women for
prediction of future incidences of cancer.
