
* 0204297
* Robust Statistics for Correlated Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2002,09/28/2005
* Marc Genton,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rong Chen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 179,186.00

Abstract

DMS-0204297 PI: M. Genton

Title: Robust Statistics For Correlated Data

This research focuses on two main new ideas. First, the concept of breakdown
point is generalized to correlated observations by defining the critical region
of the badness measure implicitly rather than explicitly, thus covering
situations with both uncorrelated and correlated observations. Secondly, a new
method to robustify likelihoods is introduced that can be applied in any
situation where a parametric likelihood is available. This new approach is
intimately connected to measurement error models and reduces to well-known
contaminated normal likelihoods in location-scale independent, identically
distributed settings. This new approach will be used to robustify many of the
commonly used methods in spatial data settings.

The applications of this research include real data sources from environmental
sciences, namely ozone concentrations and fine particulate matter in the U.S.
This work will have impact on both, theoretical statisticians and practitioners
of spatio-temporal statistics, and hence will foster collaboration between
academia and industry. It aims to provide more reliable analyses of spatio-
temporal data sets, and thus contribute to a better understanding of physical
processes governing atmospherically-transported pollutants. In particular, it
will provide more reliable evaluations of the effectiveness of the legislated
emission reductions mandated in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Moreover,
this project will support the teaching and promotion of robust statistics and
spatio-temporal statistics at North Carolina State University.
