
* 0204182
* Weighted Empirical Likelihood
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2002,08/02/2002
* Jian-Jian Ren,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 101,334.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0204182 PI: Jian-Jian Ren Title: Weighted empirical likelihood

Abstract

The objective of this research is to investigate the applications of a new
likelihood function, called weighted empirical likelihood, in constructing
confidence sets and tests for various important nonparametric or semiparametric
statistical inference problems in survival analysis using different types of
incomplete data, including right censored data, doubly censored data and
interval censored data. Weighted empirical likelihood function is formulated in
a unified form through the probability mass of the nonparametric maximum
likelihood estimator for different types of incomplete data. The PI has shown
that the high-order expansion of the log-likelihood ratio for a quite general
class of statistics can be obtained in a unified way for various types of
censored data aforementioned. Thus, with the help of the adjusted n out of n
bootstrap, the weighted empirical likelihood ratio can be used to construct
efficient confidence intervals or tests. The proposed procedure does not require
the precise knowledge of the convergence rate of the statistic of interest,
which is particularly appealing for interval censored data. All preliminary
studies show that the desirable properties of weighted empirical likelihood
method include accuracy, efficiency, generality, and independency of the precise
knowledge of the convergence rate of the statistic of interest. In this
research, the issues under consideration include: (a) Applications of weighted
empirical likelihood in statistical inference problems with various types of
incomplete data, including the construction of confidence intervals and tests
associated with profile likelihood problems, accelerated life model,
proportional hazards model, and logistic regression model, etc.; (b) Coverage
accuracy of weighted empirical likelihood ratio confidence intervals; (c)
Efficiency of weighted empirical likelihood inferences; (d) Comparison with
alternative methods if they exist. Incomplete data are frequently encountered in
medical follow-up and reliability studies. Recently, statisticians are paying
more attention to some more complicated types of incomplete data, such as doubly
censored data, interval censored data, truncated data, etc., as these data occur
in important clinical trials and scientific research. For instance, doubly
censored data were encountered in a recent study of primary breast cancer,
interval censored data were encountered in AIDS research, and doubly truncated
data were encountered in astronomical research. Up to now, the statistical
research on these more complicated types of incomplete data still generally lags
behind that on right censored data. Since Owen (1988), the empirical likelihood
method has been developed to construct tests and confidence sets based on
nonparametric likelihood ratio. Studies have shown that the empirical likelihood
ratio inferences are of comparable accuracy to alternative methods. However, so
far the applications of empirical likelihood method to censored data are
relatively few and are mostly on right censored data. Examples show that for
complicated types of incomplete data, such as interval censored data, the
investigation of the limiting distribution of log-likelihood ratio can be quite
difficult. In this context, aiming to provide solutions for various difficult
problems that arise in medical and scientific research, this project intends to
develop reliable statistical methods based on a new likelihood function, called
weighted empirical likelihood function.
