
* 0204662
* New Directions in Dimension Reduction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2002,04/05/2004
* Bing Li,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 01/31/2006
* USD 178,543.00

Abstract

DMS-0204662 PI: Bing Li

This research will develop methods in dimension reduction, which aim at
increased accuracy and a wider spectrum of applications. Specifically, the work
will proceed in three main directions. (1) The classical formulation makes the
conditional density in regression the target for dimension reduction. This does
not take into consideration that in many applications the primary interest
centers in the conditional mean. Moreover, the classical formulation requires
homoskedasticity among predictors, which can be too restrictive for some
problems. To address these issues the investigator proposes to reformulate the
problem as reducing the dimensions of the predictors as they appear in the
conditional mean. This will allow further dimension reduction, it will improve
accuracy and remove the requirement for homoskedasticity. (2) Within the
classical formulation one cannot handle categorical predictors, which occur
frequently in practice. This research will broaden the proposed formulation so
that it can handle such cases. (3) It is then possible and natural to combine
these two new elements to further develop a more focused, and less restricted
dimension reduction method for conditional means for regressions involving
categorical predictors.

The methods of dimension reduction were introduced originally to provide a
comprehensive graphical tool for exploratory data analysis. Recently, active
developments are under way due to the rapid growth of computing power; this has
dramatically increased the scope and dimensions of the collected data sets.
Besides its important role as a graphic method, dimension reduction is
particularly useful in problems where interest lies in identifying connections
among the variables, such as classification and clustering. It is also useful
when the dimension of a data point exceeds the total number of data points,
which is typically the case for many scientific data sets, such as gene
expression data. But the available dimension reduction methods have several
limitations, such as assuming homogeneity between predictors and not be able to
handle categorical predictors. This research will tackle these limitations of
the current methodology.


