
* 0204552
* Collaborative Research: Self-Consistency and Wavelet Regressions with Irregular Designs
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2002,04/12/2004
* Xiao-Li Meng,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 188,568.00

Proposal IDs: DMS - 0204552 and DMS - 0203901 PIs: Xiao-Li Meng and Thomas Chun
Man Lee Title: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: SELF-CONSISTENCY AND WAVELET REGRESSIONS
WITH IRREGULAR DESIGNS

Abstract

This award is for a comprehensive research project for a joint investigation, to
be conducted by PI Meng of Harvard University (the lead institution) and PI Lee
of Colorado State University, on the use of the self-consistency principle for
wavelet regressions with irregular designs. Wavelet estimators enjoy excellent
theoretical properties and they are capable of adapting to very complex spatial
and frequency inhomogeneities. In addition, their computation is very fast when
the regression design points are regular. However, when the design points are
not regular, as is typical in statistical applications, standard wavelet methods
are no longer applicable. This collaborative research proposes to attack this
problem from a missing-data perspective by viewing an irregular-design problem
as a regular-design one but with missing data. This new perspective allows the
investigators to apply well-established missing-data methods, guided by the
self-consistency principle, to construct efficient irregular-design wavelet
estimators, as well as fast algorithms to compute such estimators.

Wavelet regression is a powerful curve and surface fitting method that has
attracted enormous attention from researchers across different fields, in
particular applied mathematicians, computer scientists, engineers, and
statisticians. Self-consistency is a fundamental statistical principle for
constructing the most efficient statistical estimators in many incomplete data
problems. This collaborate research effort combines these two powerful methods
with the aim to make wavelet methods much more applicable to real-life problems,
varying from medical imaging to fishery economy to global warming, where
irregularities are rules rather than exceptions.
