
* 0204688
* Bayesian, Empirical Likelihood and Counting Process Methods for Semiparametric Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2002,06/28/2002
* Ian McKeague,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 87,600.00

Abstract

DMS-0204688 PI: Ian McKeague

This project aims to enhance the scope of semiparametric models for use in
weather prediction, ocean circulation and biomedical applications. A synthesis
of Bayesian, empirical likelihood, counting process and Monte Carlo methods is
used to advance statistical methodology in these areas. Five specific topics are
investigated: Bayesian single-index models, Bayesian inversion of ocean
circulation data, empirical likelihood methods for treatment comparisons, tests
for mark-specific hazards and cumulative incidence functions, and covariate
selection for semiparametric hazard function regression models.

The initial phase of the project is motivated by a weather prediction problem
and introduces Bayesian methodology for single-index models, incorporating some
frequentist methods, as well as useful prior information, into the inference
machinery. Next, a Bayesian inversion approach for the ocean circulation inverse
problem is developed, motivated by the success and popularity of this approach
in other ill-posed inverse problems. With a view towards biomedical
applications, empirical likelihood based methods for comparing two or more
treatments are studied. A new approach for comparing mark-specific hazard
functions, which is useful for the analysis of HIV genetic data collected in
AIDS clinical trials and the assessment of HIV vaccine efficacy, is introduced.
Finally, a model selection procedure for finding the best subset of covariates
in a flexible new class of semiparametric hazard function regression model is
developed.
