
* 0234048
* Conference on New Directions in Experimental Design (DAE 2003); May 14-17, 2003; Chicago, IL
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2003,12/06/2002
* Dibyen Majumdar,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 03/31/2004
* USD 23,152.00

DMS-0234048 PI: Dibyen Majumdar Co-PI's: Kathryn Chaloner, Angela Dean
Conference on New Directions in Experimental Design (DAE 2003, Chicago) May
15-17, 2003

Abstract

The advancement of statistical theory and methodology over the past years has
resulted in the development of sophisticated methods capable of analyzing
complex experiments. This has given rise to a demand for efficient designs for
these experiments. Development of these designs will require new approaches and
new techniques. At the same time, a new generation of enthusiastic and talented
researchers in design of experiments will be needed in the years to come to
carry out original theoretical and applied research in the emerging areas. The
junior researchers of today need to be nurtured and encouraged to assume this
role. In order to address these needs it is intended to bring together senior
and junior researchers and practicing statisticians from universities and the
industry for a three-day conference in Chicago. The emphasis will be on design
of experiments for biomedical and pharmaceutical studies. In particular, there
will be featured sessions on: Designs for HIV Studies; Bayesian Methods for
Designing Clinical Trials; Chemical Compound Selection from Huge Databases;
Crossover Designs; Designs for Random Effects, Variance Components and
Hierarchical Models. The conference will also give prominence to recent
innovations in the more traditional areas of experimental design that, besides
solving existing problems, enrich the researcher's toolkit.

The principal objectives of the conference are threefold: (i) to focus on future
new directions of research on design of experiments in the biomedical and
pharmaceutical sciences; (ii) to support, encourage and provide stimulus to
junior researchers, that is, recent Ph.D.'s and current Ph.D. students, who are
working on, or have a strong interest in, design of experiments; (iii) to create
an atmosphere for the exchange of ideas and information, between statisticians
and researchers in universities and the pharmaceutical industry. It is estimated
that at least half of the participants will be junior researchers, who will be
encouraged to give talks and present posters. Other participants will include
leading authorities from universities and the pharmaceutical industry. Junior
researchers will be provided the opportunity to be matched with a senior mentor.
Ample opportunities will be provided for formal and informal discussions.
