
* 0239427
* CAREER: Statistical and Computational Tools for the Analysis of High Dimensional Genetic Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2003,07/16/2008
* Chiara Sabatti,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0239427 PI: Chiara Sabatti Title: CAREER: Statistical and
computational tools for the analysis of high dimensional genetic data

Abstract

This project will enable the creation of novel statistical models and
computational tools for the analysis of data in high dimensional spaces, as the
one generated in the field of genetics. In particular the investigator and her
colleagues will (a) develop models for genomic sequences that aim at
establishing the total number of binding sites, their location and their
interaction with each other; (b) pursue de-noising of gene array data, modeling
of the dependence between the expression of various genes, and the
identification of the number of different chemical signals originating change in
expression; (c) model the notion of ``haplotype blocks'' and define the
procedures to identify them with the purpose of gene mapping, and develop
appropriate procedures of correction for multiple comparison in the same
context. The project illustrates relations between the topics of model
selection, multiple comparison, high-dimensional function estimation and leads
to deeper understanding of connections between Bayesian models, minimum
description length principle, and false discovery rates. The proposed research
will additionally develop a new set of computational tools that are based on
Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling and representation of the objective
distribution on a variety of different scales.

The outlined research helps to tackle some fundamental questions regarding the
role and the expression of genes, thus leading to improvements of the general
welfare, trough the discovery of genes related to diseases, the development of
genetic therapies, and the engineering of the over-production of protein of
interests on industrial scale. By making the algorithms for genome and gene
expression analysis publicly available, and upgrading the computing
infrastructure, the project broadens the participation to scientific
investigation of under-served community and enhance the general infrastructure
for research. The proposed organization of interdisciplinary workshops, research
activities and courses assures a broad dissemination of the results to enhance
scientific understanding. The organizations of seminars on teaching statistics
in interdisciplinary settings for high-school and college instructors goes in
the direction of integrating research and education, promoting teaching,
training, and learning.
