
* 0239053
* CAREER: New Directions in Mixture Models and their Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2003,05/15/2006
* Ramani Pilla,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 313,246.00

Mixture models, which can be viewed also as clustering techniques, have become
widely used statistical tools in the analysis of heterogeneous data, aiding
researchers in interpreting existing data or in classifying new data. This
project extends the current interests of the PI in mixture models to new
directions while integrating them into education. It is well known that under
the normal mixture model with unequal variance, the likelihood is unbounded and
hence the global maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) does not exist. High-
dimensional data analysis is becoming increasingly important in many applied
fields, including bioinformatics, astronomy and imaging. Moreover, finding the
nonparametric MLE is widely regarded as computationally intensive, with the
particular difficulty being locating the mass points. To address these issues
this project will (1) establish spacings-based inferential tools and asymptotic
theory for the normal mixtures with unequal variances to overcome the
limitations of the likelihood approach; (2) generalize these methods to
multivariate normal mixture model; (3) develop theory and algorithms for
multivariate mixtures via the penalized dual method; (4) develop methods for
solving nonparametric mixture problems; (5) extend the multivariate mixture
methods to identify features in spatial patterns and in turn develop efficient
pattern recognition algorithms for use in hyperspectral image classification,
mammography and minefield detection; and (6) integrate research and education to
advance discovery and understanding of mixtures.

This project will: (1) promote discovery and understanding of the mixture
models for modeling univariate and multivariate heterogeneous data; (2) broaden
and initiate new applications to advance mixture models to new frontiers; (3)
promote collaborative learning and foster critical thinking through student
involvement in the PI's research projects; (4) build a firm foundation for the
PI in contributing to a well-integrated research and education program in the
theory, computation and application of mixture models and related areas; (5)
impart education that will train a new generation of scientists and engineers
capable of developing mixture models tools to solve important problems arising
from new frontiers of biology, engineering and medicine; (6) result in offering
an interdisciplinary course in mixture models and applications to graduate
students, enabling and promoting interactions between statistics and allied
fields; (7) enhance multidisciplinary research experience for students through
the PI's collaborations and partnerships with the U.S. Navy and international
scientists.


