
* 0243594
* Stochastic Models and Inference for the Reliability of Complex Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS, MANFG ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
* 08/01/2003,05/01/2005
* James Lynch,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 01/31/2007
* USD 224,316.00

Important aspects of modeling the failure or reliability of complex systems are
(i) the modeling of the component interactions and (ii) incorporating
information about each component into the system. Both are needed to relate the
system damage caused by component failure to the failure of the entire system.
Here, new approaches to these problems are taken. The first approach is based on
load-sharing systems of components, where the interactions among components are
modeled by load-sharing rules. For examples, for a mechanical system undergoing
an increasing load, such as a fibrous composite material under tensile loading
where fiber segments are the components, or a routing system under increasing
"traffic" where the nodes are components, the load-sharing rule describes how
the tensile load or traffic is transferred/redistributed from failed components
to working components. The second approach is based on an entropy/information
formalism where damage/destruction in the system is quantified in terms of
hazard and reverse hazard functions. These new approaches should lead to more
realistic stochastic or probabilistic models for the failure of general systems
such as those mentioned. In addition, many complex systems, or pieces of
equipment, degrade over time or under increasing load before they fail, and
modeling such degradation for prediction of failure is an important part of this
project. Engineering degradation tests can often be performed at regular
intervals to measure the levels of the degradation processes of such systems.
The resulting degradation data, along with any actual failure data, can be used
to fit models which provide estimates of the failure distributions or give a
basis for prediction of a degradation threshold that causes system failure.
Analogously, the same approaches to degradation modeling can be utilized in the
progression of a disease toward a meaningful endpoint in medical or health
settings. Hence, in this research project, development of models for degradation
and failure will be undertaken that involve cumulative damage concepts and
result in tractable approaches for statistical inference based on known, but
perhaps little-used, distributions, such as inverse Gaussian-type or Birnbaum-
Saunders-type distributions. In particular, covariates, or acceleration
variables, will be included in the models, and classical inference, as well as
Bayesian analysis, will be investigated for these general cases.

Accurate prediction of the failure of pieces of equipment or general systems is
essential in decision making concerning maintenance or replacement policies for
such systems. This is an especially important factor in preventing catastrophic
failures of key systems or equipment during critical operations. The overall
objective of this research project is to address the above issue by (1)
developing new mathematical models for system failure under more realistic
conditions and assumptions about the system, taking into account physics-of-
failure considerations, and (2) developing new procedures to make inferences
about system failure based on either observed failures of such systems or
observed levels of the degradation of the system over time, or both.
