
* 0244583
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Sequential Monte Carlo Methods and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2003,07/01/2003
* Xiaodong Wang,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 246,401.00

Proposal IDs: DMS-0244638, DMS-0244583 and DMS-0244541 PIs: Jun Liu, Xiaodong
Wang, and Rong Chen Title: FRG Collaborative Research: Advanced Sequential Monte
Carlo Methods

Abstract

Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) can be loosely defined as a family of techniques
that use Monte Carlo simulations to solve on-line estimation and prediction
problems in stochastic dynamic systems. By recursively generating random samples
of the state variables, SMC adapts flexibly to the dynamics of underlying
stochastic systems. In this FRG project, the investigators and their colleagues
will develop a few advanced SMC methods, including novel operations in SMC
(pilot exploration, flexible resampling, tempered SMC, etc.) and the
nonparametric SMC framework. To demonstrate their wide applicabilities in
solving scientific problems, they will apply the developed methodologies to a
wide spectrum of problems found in computational biology (e.g., the discovery of
cis-regulatory binding motif modules, progressive multiple sequence alignment,
the inference for gene relationships, and chain polymer analyses) and wireless
information networks (e.g., the design of adaptive nonparametric receivers in
various wireless channels, mobility tracking in wireless networks, handoff the
design of adaptive nonparametric receivers in various wireless channels,
mobility tracking in wireless networks, handoff management and admission control
in cellular networks). The proposed research will significantly enrich and
advance the statistical modeling methodology and statistical computation theory
and is expected to culminate in the formulation of novel modeling, analysis, and
computation techniques in computational biology and wireless information
networks.

Stochastic modeling is essential in many application fields ranging from
computer vision and engineering to molecular biology and statistical physics.
But statistical analyses of these models often pose significant challenges to
researchers. The sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methodology recently emerged in
the fields of statistics and engineering has shown great promise in solving a
large class of highly complex inference and optimization problems regarding
stochastic models, opening up new frontiers for cross-fertilization between
statistical science and many application areas. The investigators have been
working closely in the past on both theoretical developments of SMC and
applications of SMC in computational biology and telecommunications, and have
made significant impacts. In the meantime, many aspects of SMC theory are yet to
be explored; and new challenges arising from applications in these two areas
demand novel SMC strategies to be developed. For example, computational biology
and wireless communications are two fronts of vital importance in modern science
and engineering. With the explosive growth of research and development in these
two areas, efficient and accurate statistical methods that can cope with
nonlinear, non-Gaussian, and nonstationary features are in urgent need. It is
thus important to continue the interdisciplinary research that has been carried
out by the investigators to further advance the SMC theory and to bring this
powerful statistical paradigm into the most exciting areas of today's scientific
and engineering research and development. In this project, the investigators and
their colleagues will continue to develop novel SMC methods and to investigate
their theoretical properties. They will also apply the developed methods to a
wide spectrum of problems found in computational biology and wireless
information networks. The proposed research is expected to culminate in the
formulation of novel modeling, analysis, and computation techniques in
computational biology and wireless information networks.
