
* 0304661
* Crossover Designs for Comparing Test Treatments with a Control Treatment: Optimality, Efficiency, and Robustness
* DMS,STATISTICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/15/2003,07/02/2003
* Min Yang,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 01/31/2006
* USD 85,163.00

The goal of this project is to find optimal, efficient, or robust crossover
designs for comparing several test treatments with a control treatment.
A-optimality and MV-optimality are considered as optimality criteria. Orthogonal
matrix theory will be applied to simplify the corresponding information matrix.
Permutation techniques will be employed to determine the corresponding
achievable lower bounds under the optimality criteria. Five objectives are
designed to accomplish this goal. (1) Identify and construct optimal/efficient
designs under the traditional model; (2) Identify and construct
optimal/efficient designs under the self and mixed carryover effects model; (3)
Identify and construct robust designs that perform well under various models;
(4) Propose corresponding algorithms for Objectives (1) through (3) and develop
a software package to facilitate the dissemination and wide application of the
research results; and (5) Develop curriculum in the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln's advanced experimental design courses.

Crossover designs have been widely used in a variety of fields, especially in
clinical trials. Although there exists a great deal of research on identifying
and constructing optimal/efficient or robust crossover designs when all
treatments are equally important, knowledge on such designs when comparing
several test treatments with a control treatment is extremely limited and
urgently needed. At present, there is little applicable guidance on how to
conduct such experiments. The results of this study, when applied, are expected
to significantly reduce the time, money, and the number of patients needed in
clinical trials. In addition, it is expected that this research will help the
FDA improve its guidelines to crossover designs. Furthermore, the user-friendly
software package can help both statisticians and non-statisticians to utilize
research results from the project, thus reduce costs and speed up new drug
development.
