
* 0305749
* Detection, Estimation and Optimization Problems in Stochastic Systems, and Applications to Genetics, Engineering and Economics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2003,04/12/2007
* Tze Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 946,785.00

Proposal: DMS-0305749 PI: Tze L. Lai Title: Detection, Estimation and
Optimization Problems in Stochastic Systems, and Applications to Genetics,
Engineering and Economics

ABSTRACT:

The investigators will study a large number of change-point like problems that
arise in industrial quality control, automated fault detection of complex
engineering systems and gene mapping. A common feature of these problems
involves the probability that a random field exceeds a high threshold. A unified
analytic approach will be developed to evaluate the relevant boundary crossing
probabilities. Importance sampling techniques and sequential Monte Carlo methods
will also be developed to supplement the analytic approximations. For on-line
applications, relatively simple parallel, recursive algorithms, which are not
too demanding in computational and memory requirements and yet are nearly
optimal from a statistical viewpoint, will be developed. Another direction of
research is financial time series and stochastic control problems in financial
economics. New statistical models, computational algorithms, and data analysis
and forecasting methods will be developed to address a variety of sequential
decision, portfolio selection, and pricing problems in investments and financial
markets.

The project will address problems of (i) industrial quality control, especially
control of complex engineering systems, (ii) gene mapping, i.e., the
identification of genomic regions containing a gene (or genes) affecting a trait
of interest in humans, model experimental organisms, or agriculturally important
crops, and (iii) financial economics, especially time series analysis of
financial data. The problems will be studied by using recent developments in
probability and statistical theory, and by extensive experiments involving
computer simulations. Computational algorithms will be developed to facilitate
applications. The investigators will also develop new undergraduate and graduate
courses in statistical genetics and in financial mathematics and write textbooks
for these courses.
