
* 0306526
* Spatial-temporal Analysis of Earthquake Catalogs using Point Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2003,08/07/2003
* Frederic Schoenberg,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 146,258.00

The aim of this project is the development and application of statistical
techniques for describing earthquake catalogs, focusing primarily on spatial-
temporal marked point process models and closely related objects such as
tessellations and branching processes. The goals of the seismological
application are the fitting, assessment, and improvement of models such as the
epidemic-type aftershock sequence (ETAS) model, which are useful for describing
earthquake catalogs, especially the geometric and spatial-temporal structure of
earthquake faults, and the thorough investigation of errors in records of
earthquake parameters and their impact on seismological inferences such as
estimates of seismic hazard and standard errors for model parameters. In
addition to the development of new useful stochastic models, the main
statistical goals are the extension of assessment methods, especially point
process residual analyses via rescaling and thinning, to the case of spatial-
temporal marked point processes as well as other types of models such as
tessellations and branching processes, and the development of tests for
stationarity in the residuals that are powerful in the detection of departures
from spatial homogeneity and from the assumption of spatial-temporal-magnitude
separability.

Major earthquakes are catastrophic events that can cause numerous injuries, loss
of lives, and billions of dollars in damages to public and private property.
This project has the potential for very direct societal impact on the
preparation for and response toward these potentially devastating occurrences.
Seismic hazard estimation, defined as the quantification of the likelihood of an
earthquake of at least a given size occurring in a certain region within a given
time interval, is crucial to civil engineering, earthquake preparedness and
response systems, and the determination of earthquake premiums which in turn
influence governmental policy and property valuation. The refinement of spatial-
temporal models for earthquake patterns described in this project is necessary
for more precise estimation of seismic hazard..Further, the analysis of errors
in earthquake catalogs and their impact on seismic hazard estimates is critical
in order for proper awareness of uncertainties in earthquake forecasts among the
public and scientific community. The statistical tools developed in this project
are useful for other applications as well. In particular, spatial-temporal
marked point process models are important for describing the occurrences of
other natural phenomena besides earthquakes, such as wildfires, disease
epidemics, hurricanes, and many others.
