
* 0306202
* Statistical Analysis of Networked Point Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2003,10/06/2010
* Jiayang Sun,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 257,032.00

Motivated by problems arising in the analysis of neural data, the investigator
and colleagues will develop new statistical methods for the analysis of
functional data, and in particular to study multiple replications of point
processes. The main question of interest is understanding the structure of the
rate functions, and understanding how the rate functions relate to covariates.
Particular attention will be given to the time distortion, or latency problem,
where differences in the time scale among different replications are considered.
Such time-scale differences are of particular interest in neural data
applications, as they represent different speeds at which subjects complete
tasks in response to a stimulus. The research will develop new methods, based on
tools from extreme value theory, for functional regression and analysis of
variance problems.

Nerve cells, or neurons, are fundamental to communication between the brain and
other parts of the body. When a subject receives an external stimulus, for
example, a visual stimulus may consist of showing an object to the subject,
nerve cells react and transmit information about the stimulus to the brain
through a series of electrical pulses. The proposed research will advance
understanding of this communication process by developing new methods for
analyzing the neural signals. The statistical methods developed during the
proposed research will study how the response to a stimulus differs among
different subjects, and how these differences relate to factors such as species,
age and gender. The proposed research has applications in product design. As an
example, a warning device such as a traffic signal may be required to generate a
stimulus to warn users of potential hazard. Understanding the response of
different individuals to a given stimulus, and the different responses to
different stimuli, will lead to improved products and safety for a wider variety
of users.
