
* 0306243
* Modeling Recombination
* DMS,Genetic Mechanisms, STATISTICS
* 07/01/2003,05/13/2003
* Elizabeth Housworth,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 120,143.00

Proposal: DMS-0306243 PI: Elizabeth A. Housworth Title: Modeling recombination

Abstract:

Recombination plays a vital role in the proper disjunction of chromosomes in
meiosis and is essential to the production of viable gametes. Many organisms use
a strategy called interference to regulate the distribution of crossovers among
all recombination events that include simple gene conversions (non-crossovers)
as well as crossovers. Recent evidence suggests that the organisms that also use
recombination to pair their chromosomes early in meiosis have an additional set
of crossovers that is not subject to interference. The investigator develops the
statistical theory to test this two-pathway hypothesis by extending previous
techniques used to model the distribution of crossovers subject to interference.
The investigator analyzes data from a variety of organisms to determine if the
two-pathway model provides a better fit than previous models to recombination
data from organisms that use recombination to pair their chromosomes during
meiosis. Multivariate optimization techniques contribute to the development of
tools for determining the design of experiments to test this hypothesis and to
obtain sharp estimates of the model parameters. The investigator explores the
advantages of using the two-pathway hypothesis in gene mapping methods by
comparing its performance with simulated data to that of methods using no-
interference and interference-only models of recombination.

A basic understanding of recombination is important for understanding certain
causes of infertility, miscarriages, and birth defects in humans. For instance,
trisomy is related to certain exchange configurations on the chromosomes during
meiosis being susceptible to missegregation (for example, an egg receives an
extra copy of chromosome 21 and a child resulting from the fertilization of this
egg has 3 copies, two from its mother and one from its father, leading to Down
syndrome). Trisomy is involved in up to 25% of miscarriages in addition to birth
defects. Furthermore, mathematical models for the distribution of exchanges
between maternal and paternal chromosomes in meiosis provide the fundamental
basis for locating genes, including those that are linked to genetic diseases.
Including the most appropriate models for these exchanges in gene mapping
algorithms improves their efficiency without increasing the error rate they
claim. If the proposed model proves to fit data the best, its inclusion in gene
mapping algorithms will become increasingly important due to the use of Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms that provide a large number of markers for finding
genes associated with complex disease traits. Additionally, the proposed
research intimately connects the statistical methods to a current, empirically
testable, biological hypothesis about recombination. The results will be
disseminated to both the statistical and biological communities and the
activities supported by this grant will include training graduate students in
this interdisciplinary area.


