
* 0306612
* Statistical Integration and Approximation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2003,08/27/2004
* Art Owen,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 443,349.00

Abstract

PI: Art B Owen proposal number: 0306612

This project centers on numerical investigation of multi-dimensional functions.
The first application is to integration of these functions. At present digital
nets do not exploit much smoothness in the integrand. New constructions of
randomized digital nets are developed to exploit increased smoothness in the
integrand. While digital nets and integration lattices have been randomized,
there is little or no work on randomizing Smolyak rules. This project develops
such randomized Smolyak rules. The quality of the resulting techniques is
studied theoretically and in computational investigations. The second
application is approximation and interpretation of multi-dimensional functions
by quasi-regression. The primary application of interest is to determine the
relative importance of various inputs and their interactions to provide
diagnostics and interpretation of prediction functions fit in machine learning
applications.

A multidimensional function is one that depends on more than one input and often
on many inputs. In many applications one wants to average such a function over
all possible inputs. In finance, the function might be the payoff of a security,
the inputs are random future prices, and the average determines a fair price. In
computer graphics, images are often generated by averaging the contributions of
many sampled paths of light. Recently, methods that mix deterministic strategic
sampling with random sampling have been successfully applied. This project
develops some new methods of this type and investigates how well they work. The
second application is to determine numerically which of perhaps dozens of input
variables to a function is most important and whether the variables act
individually or synergistically.


