
* 0311766
* An International Workshop on Bayesian Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2003,03/20/2003
* David Draper,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 04/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

An International Workshop on Bayesian Data Analysis PI: David Draper Proposal:
DMS 0311766

Abstract

Bayesian statistical methods have gained considerably in power, scientific
relevance, and applicability over the last 10 years, with the widespread
adoption of simulation-based computation methods involving Markov chain Monte
Carlo techniques as the engine of progress. Cutting-edge Bayesian modeling is
now going on in a wide variety of fields, including bioinformatics, computer
science, engineering, epidemiology, machine learning, and statistics.
Interdisciplinary transfer of ideas is important but increasingly difficult to
achieve, as the literatures in each field burgeon and the use of different terms
for similar concepts hampers the ability of search engines to help workers in
one field keep up-to-date in other disciplines. Bayesian methodology is
important to study in its own right, but for greatest scientific relevance (1)
careful attention to modeling and (2) the need for methodology to be appropriate
to context are also crucial.

In this project the Statistics Group within the newly-forming Department of
Applied Mathematics and Statistics (AMS) at the University of California, Santa
Cruz (UCSC), will address these issues by hosting an International Workshop on
Bayesian Data Analysis at UCSC from Friday through Sunday 8-10 August 2003, as a
kind of satellite meeting to be held right after the Joint Statistical Meetings
(JSM) nearby in San Francisco, CA, from August 3--7, 2003. Our objectives are to
bring together about 100 people interested in Bayesian modeling and data
analysis from a wide variety of disciplines around the world, including about 30
invited participants (leading Bayesian researchers) as speakers and discussants,
to promote multidisciplinary discussion of common problems and interdisciplinary
transfer of ideas (many of these people will be young researchers). The focus of
the Workshop will be Bayesian data analysis: starting with a real problem in
science or decision-making, formulating this problem in statistical terms, using
Bayesian methods to solve the original problem, and discussing the strengths and
weaknesses of the solution both statistically and substantively, with plenty of
attention to the interplay between the real-world context and the Bayesian model
building, checking, and reformulating. NSF funding will be principally used to
provide partial travel and local expenses support for young researchers,
minorities, and other under-represented groups.


