
* 0313274
* ITR DMS: Advancing the State of the Art in Statistical Computing and Simulation in Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS, ITR SMALL GRANTS
* 08/15/2003,08/06/2003
* Jane Harvill,MS,Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

The work proposed is a blend of developing new methods in statistics and high
performance computing (HPC), and their application to gamma-ray burst (GRB) time
profiles to extract embedded information that could help with our understanding
of these explosive events. In statistics, the proposed work extends functional
coefficient autoregressive (FCAR) models to a multivariate framework and
develops estimation and inference methods for FCAR models. FCAR analysis is
highly computationally intensive, thus requiring the need for high performance
computing (HPC) facilities. Since techniques in FCAR analyses are applicable to
a wide variety of disciplines, the computational tools for parallel processors
developed are flexible enough to be used in other problems in areas such as
environmental modeling or econometrics. There are two principal goals for the
analysis of the GRB data. First the multivariate FCAR procedures are applied to
the GRB time profiles to determine (1) evolution of time scales during the
burst, (2) classification schemes for burst profiles, and (3) evidence of
relativistic time dilation, a debated effect that is subtle due to the large
dynamic ranges in GRB properties. A secondary goal is the application of kernel
density estimation to look for, and catalog, features in GRB count spectra.
Additionally, the photon spectrum is described in a more general way by applying
FCAR modeling techniques. From a computing perspective, these scientific
applications are, in general, large, data-parallel, irregular and
computationally intensive. The significant contribution of the HPC component is
two-fold. First, a competitive methodology for integrating dynamic scheduling
into parallel scientific applications is developed, which is flexible enough to
adapt to new emerging technologies, and robust enough to address a wide spectrum
of performance degradation factors of implementations running in parallel and
distributed environments. Then from this methodology, a software infrastructure
for statistical computing is built that integrates advanced parallelization
techniques and novel dynamic scheduling methods. In this work, the principal
investigators develop new statistical techniques for analysis of complex data
sets which evolve over time. Of prime importance are the relationships between
variables hidden in the data, and these cannot often be described by simple
mathematical functions. Once discovered, these relationships are used to
describe the underlying physical causal phenomena and to predict future
observations. The specific application used in this proposal is the study of the
brightness time profiles of gamma-ray bursts (GRB), extremely large cosmic
explosions that occur daily in outer space. With the advent of quicker and
better GRB afterglow observations, astrophysical models are becoming more
sophisticated. Consequently, in order to analyze the time profiles, this study
develops more sophisticated statistical tools to uncover subtle clues that
indicate what causes these explosive events. The results of this work help form
the foundation of the next generation of GRB models. The computing challenges
play an essential role due to the development of a software infrastructure that
uses state-of-the-art tools and techniques and environments that accommodate new
emerging technologies.
