
* 0314302
* The Seventh Purdue International Symposium on Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2003,03/21/2003
* Mary Bock,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

DMS-0314302

PI: Mary Ellen Bock

Abstract

The Seventh Purdue International Symposium on Statistics will be held June 19
to 24, 2003, at Purdue University, Indiana. It consists of a main conference on
Statistical Decision Theory and related topics (June 21, 22), a workshop on
Bioinformatics (June 19, 20), a workshop on Statistical Consultancy (June 23,
24) and a workshop on Multiple Comparisons and Mixture Models for Large Data
Sets (June 23, 24). This series of unique international meetings has long been a
major event for presentation and dissemination of Statistical Theory and
Methods. In this meeting, as in the previous one, special effort has been made
to stress applications to interdisciplinary research and large data sets. In
recent years there has been an explosion of new theory and methods that
specifically target high dimensional data analysis in interdisciplinary problems
of science and industry. These new methods help mine, explore and analyze large
data sets. The conference and the workshop will focus on some of these problems
and methods. The funding provided by the National Science Foundation will be
used to support the main conference and the workshop on Multiple comparisons and
Mixture Models for Large Data sets by providing partial or full support of
travel with preference for young researchers with no alternative funding and
underrepresented groups.
