
* 0337163
* NSF Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Data Mining and Bioinformatics; January 8-10, 2004; Gainesville, FL
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2003,08/04/2003
* George Casella,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 07/31/2004
* USD 17,500.00

DMS-0337163 PI: George Casella

ABSTRACT

NSF Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Data Mining and Bioinformatics at
the University of Florida, January 8-10, 2004

There is a large demand for statistical tools to help us analyze and understand
massive amounts of data. Traditional statistical approaches often fail to cope
with the underlying complexity of such datasets. Some of the potential
statistical issues are model selection, including algorithms to search through
model spaces, robustness, data quality and sampling, multiplicity issues,
inference in high-dimensional, small sample ("large p small n") problems,
appropriate scaling of data, and inference based on complex datasets from
medical images, microarrays or environmental monitoring. Biological questions
inherent in such data include determining the three dimensional structure of
proteins based on DNA sequences and determining the differential expression
levels of thousands of genes from data collected on microarrays. Data mining
(DM) is the generic term that encompasses such methods for massive datasets.
Data mining on biological and genomic data is often called Bioinformatics (Bio).

The topic of Data Mining and Bioinformatics is ideal for a NSF regional
conference. It appeals to a wide spectrum of researchers with diverse
statistical interests from those interested in internet trafficking to fraud
detection to microarrays to protein structure. The challenge of drawing
inferences based on these massive datasets will appeal to those interested in
theoretical and methodological statistics. Finally, the excitement of accepting
the fine challenge of analyzing unorthodox data where existing statistical
methodology is not satisfactory will undoubtedly fascinate researchers concerned
with applications of statistics.

It is hoped that this conference will provide an assessment of the current state
of the art in the workings and use of DM/Bio, bring up open problems, and foster
collaboration among research workers in academia, industry and government in an
effort to provide solutions to these problems and answer questions of great
importance to both science and society. We expect the conference to generate
interest in this topic among researchers nationwide (particularly young
researchers), among faculty and graduate students at the University of Florida
and neighboring universities, and promote interactions between junior and senior
researchers.




