
* 0348869
* CAREER: Model Selection for Semiparametric Regression Models in High Dimensional Modeling and its Oracle Properties
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,09/06/2009
* Runze Li,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 440,000.00

proposal: DMS 0348869 PI: Runze Li institution: The Pennsylvania State
University

Model Selection for Semiparametric Regression Models in High Dimensional
Modeling and its Oracle Properties

Abstract

Model selection is fundamental to high-dimensional data analysis, and
semiparametric regression models are potentially useful for analysis of high-
dimensional data. Model selection for semiparametric regression models consists
of two components: model selection (such as choice of smoothing parameters) for
the nonparametric component, and variable selection for the parametric portion.
Traditional variable selection schemes, such as the stepwise deletion and the
best subset variable selection, could be extended to semiparametric modeling,
but they are expensive in computation since they require the smoothing
parameters to be selected for each submodel. The objectives of this proposal are
to develop new widely applicable model selection procedures for three classes of
semiparametric models which provide a unified framework for many existing
semiparametric regression models in the literature. In this proposal, the PI (a)
studies the asymptotic behaviors of the proposed estimators, (b) demonstrates
how the rate of convergence of the resulting estimator depends on the
regularization parameter, (c) shows that the proposed procedures perform as well
as the oracle procedure in variable selection for semiparametric regression
models, and (d) addresses issues related to implementation of the proposed
procedures. The PI also examines finite sample performance via extensive Monte
Carlo simulation studies and applies the proposed procedures to analysis of real
data.

With modern data collection devices and vast data storage space, one can easily
collect high-dimensional data, such as biotech data, financial data, satellite
imagery and hyperspectral imagery. Analysis of high-dimensional data poses many
challenges for statisticians and is becoming the most important research topic
in statistics. This proposal (a) lays down a well-grounded and comprehensive
framework for model selection for semiparametric regression modeling in high-
dimensional data analysis, (b) has significant impact on the future research of
high-dimensional statistical modeling, and (c) enhances significantly the
availability of statistical tools and software for high-dimensional statistical
modeling. The proposed work is incorporated into a new topic course from which
graduate students may directly benefit. The proposed work also benefits a broad
range of scientists and researchers in various fields, including automotive
engineering, medical studies, prevention studies, public health and social
sciences.
