
* 0353029
* Estimation, Modeling and Prediction of Nonseparable and Nonstationary Space-Time Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,01/10/2008
* Montserrat Fuentes,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2008
* USD 111,652.00

M. FUENTES: DMS - 0353029

ABSTRACT

Classical geostatistics and Fourier spectral methods are powerful tools to study
the spatial temporal structure of stationary and separable processes. However,
it is widely recognized that in real applications spatial temporal processes are
rarely stationary and separable. Thus an important extension of these spectral
methods is to processes that are nonstationary and nonseparable. In this work,
the investigator presents some new spectral approaches and tools to estimate,
model, and test for nonstationarity and nonseparability. The investigator
introduces nonparametric approaches and fitting algorithms to estimate the
spatial temporal structure of a nonstationary and nonseparable spatial process
defined on a continuous space, and studies the asymptotic properties of these
estimates. The methods are based on a spectral approach, using spectral
functions that are space-time dependent. The most important scientific
contributions of the research proposed here are: the parametric and
nonparametric estimation of the complex spatial temporal dependence of
environmental processes in general situations (nonstationarity, anisotropy,
nonseparability); the introduction of flexible models for spatial prediction of
environmental processes using spectral methods; and new methodology for spatial
prediction and estimation in the presence of massive data.

Spatial processes are an important modeling tool for many environmental and
scientific problems. Environmental scientists who work with spatial temporal
data, however, do not typically believe that real data satisfy the simple model
assumptions such as separability and stationarity that are currently used in
practice. Therefore, it is is imperative for statisticians to develop methods
without using those assumptions, especially for use with massive spatial-
temporal (environmental) data sets. Through collaborations with scientists, the
new statistical models and methods proposed by the investigator for estimation
and prediction of space-time processes, will enhance science by improving
weather and air quality mapping. The investigator will develop applications in
collaboration with atmospheric scientists and oceanographers on data
assimilation problems and on assessment of the performance of weather, ocean,
and air quality numerical models. The methods proposed here for space time
processes are also applicable to other fields. Past interactions of the PI with
various scientists at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) are evidence that previous work of the PI has had an
impact on various fields. At NCSU there is a high proportion of women, American
and African-American students compared to other Statistics departments. Five out
of the seven PhD students currently working on their dissertations under the
PI's supervision are women. The PI will continue her efforts to broaden the
participation of minorities and women.




