
* 0355474
* A Statistics Program at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,07/13/2006
* Douglas Nychka,CO,University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,230,000.00

ABSTRACT PI: Douglas Nychka proposal: 0355474

The Geophysical Statistics Project (GSP) at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) provides a unique opportunity to address important research
problems at the interface between the geosciences and statistics. The
statistical research includes contributions to the analysis of nonstationary
spatial and spatio-temporal data, the design and analysis of computer
experiments, filtering, the statistics of extremes, data mining, and statistical
computing. These methods are adapted to large data sets and publicly available
software is available to implement new methods for spatial data and extremes.
The intellectual contributions to applications in the geosciences is equally
broad and includes the introduction of stochastic modeling for sub-grid scale
processes, estimating the climatology for extreme events, the construction of
spatially coherent weather generators, and statistical improvements to methods
of data assimilation.

A grand scientific challenge for this century is to understand the complex
interrelationships among the atmosphere, ocean, land processes, biosphere and
human activities that define the Earth System. Coupled with this effort is the
need to predict changes to our environment and to translate such changes into
more immediate economic and societal impacts. There is a corresponding challenge
for statistical science to tackle the large and complex data sets that are now
the norm in many areas of science and engineering and to leverage the rich
structure and prior knowledge afforded by traditional numerical models. Through
the training of young researchers, a vigorous visitor program and participation
within several of the NCAR strategic initiatives, this work reaches a wide
community of statisticians and researchers in the geosciences. In this context,
some specific problems are the design and analysis of large computer experiments
that simulate the Earth's climate, extrapolating historical meteorological data
sets to locations where they are not observed, improving the algorithms used to
make numerical weather predictions, and identifying models that include random
processes to represent complicated geophysical phenomenon. One common element
throughout this research is quantifying the uncertainty in a derived method or
result. Uncertainty estimates are often difficult to obtain without a
statistical treatment but are particularly important when the analysis is
subsequently used for decision making or to assess risks.


