
* 0402824
* Research in Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2004,06/20/2008
* Jiming Jiang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2009
* USD 120,148.00

In this project, the principle investigator (PI) proposes research on four
important topics aimed to develop methods of statistical inference and model
diagnostics in cases of correlated observations. These topics are: (i) partially
observed information and inference about non-Gaussian linear mixed models; (ii)
iterative weighted least squares procedures for analysis of longitudinal data;
(iii) A test of global maximum for dependent observations; and (iv) generalized
linear mixed model diagnostics. Linear mixed models are widely used in practice
for correlated observations. A typical assumption regarding these models is that
the observations are normally distributed. However, the normality assumption is
likely to be violated in practice. It is known that normality based methods such
as REML still produce consistent estimators even if normality fails. However,
the estimation of standard errors of these estimators is complicated, because
for non-Gaussian data the asymptotic covariance matrix of the Gaussian estimator
involves additional unknown parameters. Project (i) aims to completely solve
this long-standing problem of practical interest. Furthermore, project (ii)
proposes an iterative weighted least squares procedure for computing efficient
estimators of the regression coefficients in linear models for longitudinal data
analysis and studies its properties. Project (iii) aims to extend a method
developed in the i.i.d. case for checking whether a root to the likelihood
equation corresponds to the global maximum of the likelihood function. Project
(iv) develops goodness-of-fit tests and methods of informal model checking for
generalized linear mixed models.

Correlated responses are often encountered in practice. For example, in medical
studies repeated measures are often collected from the same individuals over
time. It would be reasonable to assume that correlations exist among the
observations from the same individual. Linear and generalized linear mixed
models are two important classes of statistical models widely used in cases of
correlated observations. For linear mixed models methods of inference have been
developed, but mostly under the assumption that the observations are normal (or
Gaussian). However, the normality assumption is likely to be violated in
practice. The PI aims to develop a powerful method for inference about non-
Gaussian linear mixed models. For generalized linear mixed models, the PI
proposes to develop methods of model checking that fills an important gap in the
applications of these models. The methods developed are likely to have impact in
other fields of statistics as well as in fields such as biomedical research,
genetics, biology, economics, education and social science.
