
* 0403443
* Statistical Inference Based on Data Tilting
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2004,05/12/2004
* Liang Peng,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 85,578.00

The investigator studies three subjects: extreme value theory, ARCH/GARCH
models, and nonparametric regression with censored data. The particular issues
examined in this proposal include: 1) constructing confidence intervals for high
quantiles in risk management; 2) constructing confidence intervals for the
difference of two means with heavy tails; 3) constructing confidence intervals
for parameters in ARCH/GARCH models; 4) constructing a confidence interval for
the maximal moment exponent of a GARCH (1,1) sequence; 5) forecasting the 1-step
ahead conditional Value-at-Risk based on GARCH models; 6) applying the data
tilting method to obtain confidence intervals for the tail index of a double
autoregressive model; and 7) applying the data tilting method to obtain
confidence intervals for a conditional survival function with censored data. The
proposed activity described above involves novel applications of data tilting
methods. The research approach is a combination of theoretical asymptotic
analysis, Monte Carlo simulation and real data analysis.

The problems studied in this project arise from real applications in various
fields including meteorology, hydrology, insurance, and finance. Examples are:
in the design of electrical distribution systems and buildings, the extremes of
wind pressure loading must be accounted for; insurers who underwrite the
financial risk associated with natural risks like floods, storms and earthquakes
must have good estimates of the size and impact of extreme events in order to
set their premiums at a profitable level. This project studies the following
issues: modeling extreme events; predicting Value-at-Risk in risk management;
estimating frontier functions for comparing the performance of different firms;
estimating parameters of volatility models in financial time series; and
estimating the conditional life time in assessing the influence of risk factors
on survival. Progress in this project can enhance the interaction among several
areas in statistical science, including extreme value theory, nonparametric
smoothing, time series analysis, and survival analysis. The new methods to be
developed can be applied to financial time series, sea level prediction,
internet traffic data, medical data, to name a few. The theoretical asymptotic
results to be developed are expected to have broader applications as well.
