
* 0404594
* Flexible and Adaptive Statistical Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2004,09/19/2008
* Robert Tibshirani,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2009
* USD 336,000.00

In the past 10-15 years there have been significant developments in the areas of
applied regression and classification. Much of the impetus originally came from
outside of the field of statistics, from areas such as computer science, machine
learning and neural networks. In some cases, statisticians have helped to
synthesize these innovations, often by reinterpreting them from the point of
view of standard statistical models. As a result, we now have at our disposal a
very powerful collection of techniques for adaptive regression and
classification. These are now being applied to medical diagnosis, bioinformatics
and genetic modeling, chemical process control, shape, handwriting, speech and
face recognition, financial modeling, and a wide range of other important
practical problems. In this proposal, the investigator develops new methods for
adaptive regression and classification, with particular application to problems
in bioinformatics and genomics. One such method is the "fused lasso", a
technique which seeks solutions which are both sparse and and smooth. It is
designed for problems in which the features have a natural ordering, e.g. in
time or space. Protein mass spectometry represents one such area of application.

In this research, the investigator develops new statistical algorithms for
analyzing data from biological and human experiments. This work is part of the
exploding field of "bioinformatics", which seeks to make sense of the huge
volume of data produced by new technologies in biology and medicine. This kind
of work represents the next step after the sequencing of the human genome, and
has enormous potential for societal impact through disease prevention and
treatment.
