
* 0405330
* Monte-Carlo multi-step ahead forecasting for nonlinear time series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2004,04/29/2004
* Lijian Yang,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 192,053.00

ABSTRACT PI: Lijian Yang PROPOSAL : 0405330

This research develops multi-step ahead forecasting methods for nonlinear time
series using a Monte-Carlo procedure. The focus is on taking advantage of three
types of simplifying structures in nonparametric auotoregression time series
models: small number of significant lags, additive model, and additive
coefficient model. For time series data generated according to one of these
structures, plug-in type predictors are developed by estimating the data
generating process (DGP) and then using the estimated DGP to generate
realizations. By employing local polynomial and polynomial spline techniques for
the regression structure and kernel density estimation for the noise
distribution, the empirical distribution of these generated realizations
approximates the theoretical distribution of the time series at rates much
faster than that of general multivariate function smoothing. Hence, the proposed
forecasts are much more accurate than those made with many existing methods.
Multi-step ahead forecasting of time series generated by either multiple index
or partially linear autoregression are also studied, for which the forecasting
accuracy is improved significantly as well. Besides being theoretically
justified, the proposed forecasting methods are expected to be computationally
expedient and should be easily accessible to practitioners working with time
series data.

Time series data appear in many scientific disciplines in the form of sequences
of numbers observed over fixed time period. Economic time series include leading
indicators such as inflation index, oil price, real GNP, unemployment rate,
etc., observed monthly or quarterly. Climatology studies the trend and variation
over time of humidity, precipitation, temperature, etc, while geographers
collect daily measurements of such variables as leaf area index, soil adjusted
vegetation index, soil moisture index and investigate relationships that exist
among them and with other indices. Of central importance in the analysis of time
series is the understanding of the hidden mechanism that generate the data
sequentially, and the use of such knowledge to predict what the next one or few
numbers will be. These are one- and multi-step ahead forecasting. The
statistical tools developed through this research significantly enhance the
capability to forecast macro-economic time series data several quarters, even
years, ahead. Advanced forecasts of this kind can greatly help the making of
macro-economic decisions. These forecasting methods have strong impact in
multiple disciplines beyond macroeconomics, for instance, in the study of
interaction between climate change and the various geographic indices.


