
* 0405202
* Statistical Models and Methods for Some Applied Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2004,02/09/2005
* Yehuda Vardi,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2006
* USD 60,000.00

The project focuses on: (1) multivariate methods based on the new concept of L1
data-depth, (2) combining classifiers with applications to biometrics
measurements, (3) multivariate ordered event-time data with bias and
incompleteness. All are rich areas for statistical applications and theory,
where the PI's have made important contributions. In (1), the new notion of L1
depth was recently to derive a multivariate data-analytic tools, including
clustering and robust regression. These tools were shown to be robust against
data contamination, asymptotically efficient, and computationally "friendly" for
high dimensional data. The projects extend the methods to include depth-based
clustering validation, informative visualization, and multivariate linear- and
nonlinear-regression based on a new concept of depth-relative-to-a-model. In
(2), classification based on biometrics data is characterized by high
dimensionality of objects, large number of classes, and small number of examples
per class in the training data. Recent research shows that merging of
classifiers can improve correct-classification rate for such problems. The
project focuses on the new method of mixed group rank (MGR) combiners which is
shown, based on benchmark data, to improve on the constituent as well as on
other combination-methods. The project further develops MGR type combiners,
establish their theoretical underpinnings, and provide the necessary
computational tools to handle large data sets. In (3), multivariate ordered
event-time data are common in observational studies, including epidemiology,
clinical studies, behavioral studies, and more. Such data are hard to analyze,
as they are typically subject to biased-sampling and censoring. A new
multivariate nonparametric framework enables the extension of univariate
statistical methods to multidimensional data. New statistical methods will be
developed in nonparametric and semiparametric models for a variety of sampling
schemes. Asymptotic (large sample) theory gives theoretical justification for
the methodology.

The proposed research advances several important areas in multivariate
statistics. New models, methods, and algorithms will be developed for
multivariate clustering, robust multivariate regression, combination of
classifiers, and the analysis of biased incomplete multivariate event-time data.
The proposed research has direct impact on a broad range of scientific
applications outside the immediate realm of statistics. Examples include
genetics studies, biometrics classification methods, epidemiological, clinical,
and behavioral studies.
