
* 0405791
* Efficient Estimation in Semiparametric Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2004,09/14/2004
* Anton Schick,NY,SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 93,388.00

The Principle Investigator proposes to continue his research program on
efficient estimation in semiparametric models with an emphasis on non- and
semiparametric regression models, on bivariate models with partial knowledge
about the marginals, and on time series models. Special attention will be paid
to the possibility of (efficient) root-n consistent estimation of curves such as
stationary densities and conditional expectations in time series models with
independent innovations. Work on regression models will focus on diagnostics and
on imputing when responses are missing at random. In connection with the latter
fully imputed estimators will be studied. Such estimators impute not only the
missing but also the observed responses. Current work by the Principal
Investigator suggests that the fully imputed estimator is typically better than
the partly imputed estimator, which only imputes the missing responses. One goal
of the research is to prove this conjecture and to show that fully imputed
estimators can even be made to be efficient. The work on bivariate models will
deal with fine-tuning results for known and equal marginals obtained so far, and
on extending such results to more general models including those in which the
marginal distributions are linked through a parameter. Work on two monographs,
one on efficient estimation in regression models and the other on efficient
estimation in time series models, is also planned.

The proposed research will advance the theory of efficient estimation in
semiparametric models and will provide more efficient ways of analyzing data in
many concrete problems. Since semiparametric models are widespread in many
fields that use statistics, the proposed research will have an impact on all
these fields. For example, results on time series and Markov chain models have
applications in econometrics and mathematical finance; results on bivariate
models have applications in actuarial sciences and in medical research; results
on imputing are useful in medical studies. The planned monographs are intended
to disseminate some of the research from the proposed research to a wider
audience.
