
* 0405748
* A Contour Based Monte Carlo Algorithm with Applications to Computational Statistics and Bioinformatics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2004,08/25/2004
* Faming Liang,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 90,000.00

Simulation from complex systems, such as proteins, neural networks, and spin-
glasses, is one of the most challenging problems in scientific computation. The
energy landscape of these systems can be characterized by a multitude of local
energy minima separated by high energy barriers. In simulation from these
systems, the conventional Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms, such as the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm and the Gibbs sampler, tend to get trapped in one
of local energy minima indefinitely, rendering the simulation ineffective. The
goal of this research is to develop an effective Monte Carlo algorithm for
simulation from complex systems, and to apply the new algorithm to some
computational problems in statistics and bioinformatics, including molecular
structure prediction, phylogeny estimation, neural network training,
combinatorial optimization, optimal design, highest posterior density (HPD)
interval construction, model selection, and others. The preliminary results show
that the contour Monte Carlo algorithm, which is proposed in this research, will
potentially play a leading role in stochastic optimization in place of other
algorithms, such as simulated annealing and genetic algorithms.

In this research algorithms are developed that are potentially useful in many
fields such as biology, engineering, and the social sciences. These algorithms
are powerful in identifying best solutions to optimization problems in applied
sciences. Students, researchers, and users of statistics, such as computational
biologists and computer scientists, will benefit from this research.
