
* 0405681
* Collaborative Research: Sufficient Dimension Reduction for High Dimensional Data with Applications in Bioinformatics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,05/04/2006
* Bing Li,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2007
* USD 268,984.00

Abstract proposals: 0405360 and 0405681 PIs: Cook & Li

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dimension Reduction with application to bioinformatics

As represented in the existing literature, sufficient dimension reduction (SDR)
encompasses model-free methods for linearly reducing the dimension of the
predictor vector in regression and classification problems without loss of
information. SDR methodology has a brief but striking record of success,
although its inferential foundations are relatively narrow and the restriction
to linear reductions can be limiting in some applications. The investigators and
their co-authors expand the inferential foundations of SDR through the
development of optimal methods within the context of linear reduction and the
study of new nonlinear reduction methods. The new optimal reduction methods
permit the investigators to derive model-free tests of conditional independence,
which are roughly data-analytic equivalents of t-tests on coefficients in model-
based linear regression. They emphasize bioinformatics applications in general
and the analysis of data from high-throughput genomic technologies in
particular.

The computer revolution has produced an unprecedented capacity for data
generation, processing and storage, with the consequence that data reduction is
paramount in many research areas and business applications. For instance,
genomic technology can produce measurements for thousands of genes across
multiple tissue samples, and WalMart makes over 20 million transactions daily.
The development of diagnostics for breast cancer based on fine needle aspiration
can involve the study of numerous measurements on extracted cells across
hundreds of patients. In response to this proliferation of information, the
investigators and their colleagues study methods for reducing data to an
essential core. Their approach is unique because their overarching goal is
reduction without loss of information on the issues under consideration. In the
development of diagnostics for breast cancer, this goal translates into reducing
numerous cell measurements to an index that can be used to classify a breast
mass as malignant or benign without loss of information, allowing the physician
to present a more informed recommendation to the patient.
