
* 0405782
* Estimation and Prediction in Spatial Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2004,07/15/2004
* Hao Zhang,WA,Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 89,999.00

ABSTRACT PI: Hao Zhang proposal: DMS 0405782

This research concerns two major objectives of geostatistics: estimation of
spatial correlation and prediction of values at unsampled sites. Specific
problems to be studied can be categorized into three groups: (i) Infill
asymptotics for Gaussian processes. Recent advances in spatial statistics show
that asymptotic results are useful for the analysis of spatial data. This
research establishes infill asymptotic properties of estimators of variogram
parameters. In addition, it also provides, through theoretical and numerical
studies, some guidelines about which asymptotics to employ in a finite sample
case because there are two distinct asymptotics: the increasing domain
asymptotics and infill asymptotics. Results are quite different under the two
asymptotics. (ii) Univariate model-based Geostatistics. Spatial generalized
linear mixed models (GLMM) are used in model-based geostatistics to model and
predict spatial non-Gaussian variables. This project studies consistency and
asymptotic distributions of the maximum likelihood estimators of the parameters
in the GLMM. (iii) Estimation of multivariate covariogram and inferences in
multivariate model-based geostatistics. This project develops and implements
explicit algorithms for estimating multivariate covariograms. It also develops
the multivariate spatial GLMM that is a powerful model when one or more spatial
variable is non-Gaussian such as binomial counts. Inferential methods are
studied and implemented in S-Plus and R.

Geostatistical data arise in many fields including hydrology, ecology,
agriculture, natural resource evaluation, environmental sciences and health
studies. In the midst of the wide applications there is a real need for
theoretical work to understand the properties of estimation and prediction. The
results of this research for univariate goestatistics partially meet the need
and are readily applicable to the analysis of geostatistical data. There is also
a great need to develop appropriate statistical models for multiple spatial
variables. For example, in environmental and health studies, multiple variables
are often observed at different locations. Due to spatial correlations, modeling
these spatial variables is a challenging problem and is understudied. This
research develops methods and algorithms for modeling such multiple spatial
variables. Hence the research results have broad impacts on a variety of
scientific disciplines.


