
* 0405243
* Localized Cross Spectral Analysis and Pattern Recognition Methods for Non-Stationary Signals
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,05/11/2007
* Hernando Ombao,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2008
* USD 271,029.00

Abstract PI: Hernando Ombao proposal: 0405243

The PI develops a systematic body of methods and models for analyzing massive
non-stationary signals. The basic tool is the SLEX library, a collection of
bases, each basis consisting of orthogonal localized Fourier waveforms. The SLEX
methods give results that are easy to interpret because they are time-dependent
analogues of the Fourier spectral analysis of stationary signals. Moreover, the
SLEX methods use computationally efficient algorithms, thus, they will be
capable of handling massive data sets. The PI develops a family of multivariate
models for non-stationary signals recorded from several subjects. The model
explicitly takes into account the time-evolving inter-connection between the
components of the multivariate signals. In addition, the PI develops an
automatic procedure for decomposing the high dimensional multivariate signals
into SLEX components using the eigenvalue-eigenvector decomposition of the time-
varying SLEX spectral matrix. The SLEX components are non-stationary and have
zero-coherency. Thus, they contain non-redundant information on the time-varying
cross spectra, which will be used as the primary feature for model selection as
well as for discrimination and classification. Finally, the PI develops an
automatic and systematic method for extracting time-varying higher order
spectral features of non-stationary signals. The PI develops the SLEX higher
order spectra, which can account for the time-evolutionary interaction between
different frequency components in the signal. In this proposal, the SLEX are the
foundation on which the body of coherent and systematic methods for non-
stationary signals is built.

This proposal is motivated by the statistical problems that confront the
neuroscience community. Major advances in technology now enable neuroscientists
to collect complex data sets for investigating the more intricate functioning of
the human brain. There is currently a major interest to study how different
brain areas interact with each other in response to a mental stimulus. There is
also a widespread interest in exploring the association between impairment in
brain connectivity and various mental disorders. To study brain connectivity,
various types of signals (EEGs, MEGs, fMRI) are recorded. Analyzing brain
signals is quite challenging because the brain is a complex organ. Moreover, the
signals collected are both non-stationary and massive. The SLEX methods that the
PI develops in this proposal address these issues. The SLEX methods are able to
capture the local temporal features of the signals. Moreover, the methods are
able to handle massive data sets, because they use computationally efficient
algorithms. As part of the educational component of this proposal, the PI works
closely with graduate and undergraduate students in this research undertaking.
