
* 0406143
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Analysis on Manifolds: A Nonparametric Approach for Shapes and Images
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2004,05/22/2006
* Rabindra Bhattacharya,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2007
* USD 162,358.00

The shape or image of an object may be recorded digitally by a finite number k
of landmarks or positions on the object, called a k-ad. The space of orbits
under rotation and translation of k-ads is the size-and-shape space. If one
includes scaling with rotation and translation, then the space of orbits under
the resulting group of transformations on the k-ads is the shape space. These
are examples of Riemannian manifolds, some with singularities. One approach
proposed here for inference about a distribution on a general differentiable or
Riemannian manifold M, based on a random sample from it, is to carry out a
multivariate analysis of the image under the so-called Log map on one or more
tangent spaces to M. Apart from this intrinsic approach, less computation
intensive extrinsic procedures based on embeddings in Euclidean spaces are
investigated. The project explores consistency and asymptotic distribution
theory on manifolds for robust tests and confidence regions from both points of
view--intrinsic and extrinsic.

One motivation for this study comes from the need to identify deformations or
shape changes for purposes of medical diagnosis and biomorphology. Immediate
applications also arise to machine vision and pattern recognition. There are
significant impacts of this research on these and many other fields. Another
important goal of this project is to train students in the newly developed
methodologies, leading to the dissemination of knowledge gained through this
research and the creation of a body of technicians and experts to apply it.
