
* 0406361
* Analysis of High Dimensional Data Using Subspace Clustering
* DMS,STATISTICS, INFORMATION & KNOWLEDGE MANAGE, INFORMATION INTEGRATION
* 09/15/2004,05/23/2006
* Andrew Nobel,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2008
* USD 252,689.00

An important and visible trend in empirical science today is the increasing
prevalence of large data sets that contain from thousands to hundreds of
millions of measurements. Examples include data sets arising from high
throughput measurement techniques such as gene expression arrays, proteomics and
computer network monitoring. While the analysis of large data sets is important
to scientists, it is often outside the realm of classical statistical methods,
and frequently presents new conceptual and computational challenges. The funded
research has two principle parts. In the first, the investigators are studying
the application of a relatively new development in the field of Data Mining,
known as subspace clustering, to the exploratory statistical analysis of high
dimensional data. In the second, the investigators are applying ideas from
Statistics and Probability to the development of new subspace clustering
methods, and to rigorous mathematical analyses of their results. Research is
being carried out in the context of ongoing collaborations with biological
scientists, and is being incorporated in software that will be used by the
collaborating scientists to identify and assess significant sample-variable
associations in a variety of large data sets.

An important and visible trend in empirical science today is the increasing
prominence of large data sets that contain from thousands to hundreds of
millions of measurements. Examples include data sets arising from high
throughput measurement techniques such as gene expression arrays, proteomics and
computer network monitoring. Whereas small to moderate data sets typically have
more samples than measurements, in large data sets it is common to have more
measurements than samples, so-called ``high dimension and low sample size''. The
investigators are studying the application of data mining methods known as
subspace clustering to the exploratory analysis of high dimensional data.
Subspace clustering identifies distinguished sample variable interactions
(submatrices) in a given data matrix. Unlike standard two-way clustering, the
sample and variable sets for different clusters can overlap. The investigators
are investigating the noise sensitivity of existing subspace clustering
algorithms, and are developing and implementing new subspace clustering methods
for average based selection criteria that are better suited for applications
where noise is present. As an application of these methods, they are using
subspace clusters to classify high dimensional data. Using a variety of tools
from combinatorial probability, the investigators are also developing a rigorous
theoretical framework in which multiple testing and the statistical significance
of subspace clusters can be addressed. The funded research is being carried out
in the context of ongoing collaborations with biologists and computer
scientists.


