
* 0406169
* A Synthesis of Objective Bayesian and Designed Based Methods for Finite Population Sampling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Glen Meeden,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 201,292.00

ABSTRACT proposal: 0406169 PI: Glen Meeden



A synthesis of objective Bayesian and designed based methods for finite
population sampling

Project Abstract

In the frequentist or design approach to finite population sampling prior
information is incorporated in the sampling design. However in some cases when
calculating estimates the design weights need to be readjusted, and then it can
be difficult to find sensible estimates of variance. In the Bayesian approach
prior information is incorporated through a prior distribution. Since the
posterior distribution does not depend on the design it has been difficult to
theoretically reconcile the two approaches. The Polya posterior is an objective
Bayesian approach to finite population sampling that is appropriate when little
or no prior information is available. The investigator is developing a synthesis
of this objective Bayesian approach and the design based approach. It has two
main threads. In the first the Polya posterior is extended to problems where it
cannot be applied directly because of additional prior information contained in
auxiliary variables. This leads to a constrained or restricted version of the
Polya posterior. In the second Bayesian models are developed which directly
include the design in the specification of the prior. Such models are a
generalization of the Polya posterior and using them one can objectively
incorporate into a prior the same kind of information that is encapsulated in a
design. The investigator is developing the underlying theory and methods to
simulate from these objective posteriors so that estimators can be found in
practice and their frequentist properties studied.

One of the most basic problems of statistics is making an inference about a
population based on a sample collected from the population. When little is known
about the population the mean of the values in a random sample is used as an
estimate of the population mean. However in addition to the estimate one also
needs a sensible measure of its uncertainty or variance. In most situations
there is prior information available about the population. This information
should be used in deciding what units are to be included in the sample, the
value of the estimate and the appropriate measure of uncertainty. The
investigator is working on a synthesis of the two standard approaches to these
problems. The results should make more effective use of available prior
information than present methods. Because of the many surveys done each year by
government and others improving survey practice is of great practical
significance.


