
* 0406229
* Adaptive Sampling Designs in Network and Spatial Settings
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats, 
* 08/01/2004,08/11/2005
* Steven Thompson,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The purpose of this research project is to develop new adaptive sampling designs
and inference methods for sampling in network and spatially structured
populations. Adaptive sampling designs are those in which the procedure for
selecting the sample can depend on values of variables of interest observed
during the survey. In spatial settings, that can mean adaptively adding new
units to the sample in the vicinity of high or otherwise interesting observed
values. In network or graph settings, links can be adaptively followed from
interesting sample nodes to add new nodes to the sample. A variety of new
sampling procedures, together with design and model based estimation methods,
will be investigated in the study. A new, flexible and versatile class of
adaptive designs, termed ``active set adaptive sampling,'' was found during the
preliminary work toward this project. Designs in this class have certain
advantages over adaptive cluster sampling and some of the traditional network
sampling designs in being more flexible, allowing for control of total sample
size and not requiring complete inclusion of connected components. Design-
unbiased estimates are possible with some of these designs, providing inferences
that are robust against assumptions about the population. These designs lend
themselves toward model-based inferences as well and can be used in some
situations to help ensure that the assumptions for the model-based inferences
are met. This project will advance the theory and methodology of adaptive
sampling and in particular will fully investigate and develop several categories
of new adaptive sampling designs within this class and develop and evaluate
design and model based inference methods for use with adaptive designs of all
types.

With adaptive sampling designs, the study design can change in response to the
values and patterns observed during the study. For example, in a study of an at-
risk hidden human population, social links from particularly high-risk
individuals can be followed to add more individuals to the sample; in a survey
of an unevenly distributed natural resource, new observations may be adaptively
made in neighborhoods of high observed abundance. In previous work it has been
established that in many situations the theoretically optimal sampling strategy
is an adaptive one. Specific adaptive designs, such as the adaptive cluster
sampling designs developed in a previous project, have been shown to give
substantial gains in precision or efficiency over conventional strategies for
certain types of populations, in particular rare, clustered ones. The results of
the proposed research will provide research tools for other scientific fields,
including the biological, environmental, health, and social sciences. Each of
these fields has to deal with populations that are difficult to sample by
conventional means because of their unpredictably uneven spatial and network
structures. The sampling methods resulting from this project have applications
to many situations of importance to society, including studies of hidden
populations such as those at risk for HIV/AIDS, environmental assessment and
monitoring, biological surveys, natural resources explorations and inventories,
Internet surveys, rapid response to natural and induced health threats, studies
in human social behavior, and archaeological studies.


