
* 0406085
* Collaborative Research: Highly Structured Models and Statistical Computation in High-Energy Astrophysics
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2004,08/09/2004
* David van Dyk,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 343,775.00

Pricipal Investigators: David Van Dyk and Xiao-Li Meng

Institutions: UC Riverside and Harvard University

Collaborative Research: Highly Structured Models and Statistical Computation in
High-Energy Astrophysics

Abstract

The California-Harvard Astrostatistics Collaboration aims to design and
implement fully model-based methods of statistical inference to solve
outstanding data analytic problems in high-energy astrophysics. The
Collaboration's methods explicitly model the complexities of both astronomical
sources and the data generation mechanisms inherent in new high-tech instruments
and fully utilize the resulting highly structured models in learning about the
underlying astronomical and physical processes. Using these models requires
sophisticated scientific computation, advanced methods for statistical
inference, and careful model checking procedures. The PIs of the Collaboration
(van Dyk and Meng) both have substantial research experience in developing the
methods that the Collaboration is extending, employing, and publicizing:
inferential and efficient computational methods under highly-structured models
that involve multiple levels of latent variables and incomplete data. Such
models are ideally suited to account for the many physical and instrumental
filters that compose the data generation mechanism in high-energy astrophysics.
The five consultants on the project (Chiang, Connors, Kashyap, Karovska, and
Siemiginowska) all have expertise on the instrumentation and science of high-
energy astrophysics, and, all have collaborated with statisticians in efforts to
develop appropriate methods to address scientific questions. There are two
primary impacts of this project: the impact of the development of more reliable
statistical methods on scientific findings in astronomy and the impact of the
new statistical inference and computation methods in a wide range of scientific
fields. As the Collaboration develops methods and distributes free software for
specific inferential tasks, it also educates the astronomical community as to
the benefit of careful use of sophisticated statistical methods. (The
Collaboration organizes one or two special sessions at meetings of the American
Astronomical Society each year.) It is expected that a fundamental impact of the
proposed research will be a more general acceptance and more prevalent use of
appropriate methods among astronomers. Second, the Collaboration is an example
of a new mode of statistical inference. Rather than using off-the-shelf models
and methods, it is becoming ever more feasible to develop application specific
models that are designed to account for the particular complexities of a problem
at hand. The Collaboration develops inferential and computational methods for
handling such multi-level models. As application specific multi-level models
become more prevalent, these methods will have application throughout the
natural, social, and engineering sciences.

In recent years, there has been an explosion of new data in observational high-
energy astrophysics. Recently launched or soon-to-be launched space-based
telescopes that are designed to detect and map ultra-violet, X-ray, and gamma-
ray electromagnetic emission are opening a whole new window to study the cosmos.
Because the production of high-energy electromagnetic emission requires
temperatures of millions of degrees and is an indication of the release of vast
quantities of stored energy, these instruments give a completely new perspective
on the hot and turbulent regions of the universe. The new instrumentation allows
for very high resolution imaging, spectral analysis, and time series analysis.
The Chandra X-ray Observatory, for example, produces images at least thirty
times sharper than any previous X-ray telescope. The complexity of the
instruments, the complexity of the astronomical sources, and the complexity of
the scientific questions leads to a subtle inference problem that requires
sophisticated statistical tools. For example, data are subject to non-uniform
censoring, errors in measurement, and background contamination. Astronomical
sources exhibit complex and irregular spatial structure. Scientists wish to draw
conclusions as to the physical environment and structure of the source, the
processes and laws which govern the birth and death of planets, stars, and
galaxies, and ultimately the structure and evolution of the universe.
Nonetheless little effort has been made to bring the strength of modern
statistical methods to bare on these problems. The California-Harvard
Astrostatistics Collaboration develops statistical methods, computational
techniques, and freely available software to address outstanding inferential
problems in high-energy astrophysics. The methods developed are an example of a
new mode of statistical inference: Rather than using off-the-shelf methods, it
is becoming ever more feasible to develop methods that are application specific
and are designed to account for the particular complexities of a problem at
hand. The inferential and computational methods designed by the Collaboration
for handling such multi-level models have application throughout the natural,
social, and engineering sciences.
