
* 0406430
* Functional Analysis of Sparse Longitudinal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2004,08/18/2006
* Jane-Ling Wang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 374,522.00

Project Abstract proposal: 0406430 PI: Jane-Ling Wang

Functional Regression Analysis of Sparse Longitudinal Data

Recent advances in modern technology have facilitated the collection of repeated
measurements over a period of time on the same subject. Such data are common in
nearly all fields including the biological, medical, neural, physical and social
sciences, but are termed differently, with "longitudinal data" being the
preferred term in health and social sciences and "functional data" being the
preferred term in engineering and physical sciences. Statistical approaches to
analyze such data are also intrinsically different in the longitudinal and
functional data research communities. Parametric approaches such as GEE and GLMM
are predominantly used methods to analyze longitudinal data, while nonparametric
approaches play the analogous role for functional data. Due to the limitations
of each approach, semiparametric models combining longitudinal and functional
data analysis methods emerge as a promising alternative, which can bring out and
combine the best aspects of the two approaches. Longitudinal or functional data
are intrinsically complex owing to irregularity of observational times,
dependence of observations within subjects, sparsity and size of the data. They
pose challenges both on the computational and theoretical fronts. This proposal
aims at bringing together methodology from various areas in statistics,
including nonparametric smoothing, multivariate statistics, random and mixed
effects models, dimension reduction and robustness, to address several
challenging issues and to provide flexible modeling and efficient implementation
for longitudinal/functional data. The proposed methods range from extension of
traditional linear models to new semiparametric and nonparametric models, and
focus particularly on handling sparse longitudinal data with or without
measurement error. A new version of functional principal components (PCA)
analysis was developed recently by the PI and collaborators, where the
functional principal component scores are framed as conditional expectations.
This extends the applicability of functional PCA to typical situations in
longitudinal data analysis, where only few repeated measurements are available
per subject. This approach is known as Principal Components Analysis through
Conditional Expectation (PACE) for longitudinal data. With PACE serving as the
backbone, the proposal includes three projects: (1) Modeling covariate effects,
(2) Semi-parametric dimension reduction approaches, and (3) Robust covariance
estimation and functional PCA.

In addition to new methodology, statistical theory will be a major focus to
establish formal inference procedures. So far, theoretical results for
functional data are scattered and this proposal aims to fill the gaps. The
proposed research is motivated by ongoing interdisciplinary research
collaborations of the PI with biologists and physicians. The new approaches are
applied to data generated from these ongoing and future collaborations. The
proposed research helps to better understand the relationship between
reproductive activity and longevity and will contribute to the growing fields of
aging research and biodemography. As the procedures developed will be applicable
to general longitudinal or functional data from other disciplines, they will
provide much needed modern statistical tools to analyze such data, which in turn
will facilitate the advancement of many scientific fields. Moreover, with the
fast rising trend towards the collection of such large and complex data sets,
there is a shortage of Ph.D. statisticians trained to handle such data. The
research assistantship provides a training opportunity to address this need. The
PI is engaged in undergraduate research training, and continues this activity in
addition to the dissemination of the new research findings through teaching,
training, and the web.
