
* 0413864
* Multiscale Stochastic Modeling, Analysis and Computation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/15/2004,09/26/2007
* Markos Katsoulakis,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 314,454.00

Problems in diverse scientific disciplines ranging from materials science to
macromolecular dynamics, to atmosphere/ocean science and climate modeling
involve the nonlinear interaction of physical processes across many length and
time scales ranging from the microscopic to the macroscopic. From a modeling and
computational perspective, microscopic simulation methods such as Molecular
Dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms can describe complex, out of
equilibrium interactions at small scales (e.g. between atoms or molecules).
Although there is substantial progress in improving aspects of these
computational methods, they are still limited to short length and time scales,
while on the other hand device sizes and morphological features observed in
experiments often involve much larger scales; at the same time stochastic
fluctuations--inherited from the microscopics--can be important, for instance in
self-organization problems characterized by small coherent structures such as
pattern formation in nanotechnology applications. In addition to such challenges
posed by the disparity in scales within the same model, in many instances we are
faced with an additional disparity in models: for example in phenomena with
detailed fluid/surface or boundary layer interactions it is necessary to couple
microscopic, possibly stochastic models describing the dynamics of atoms or
molecules on a surface, along with continuum PDE for species, fluid and
thermodynamic variables on the overlying to the surface gas phase. It is
therefore inevitable that features of the microscopic model will essentially
enter as a subgrid effect in the coupling with the coarse computational grid of
the macroscopic PDE models. In this case, the proper incorporation and
simulation of stochastic effects from the subgrid microscale is a critical
element in the modeling and simulations. The proposed projects focus on aspects
of the aforementioned issues by putting forward a combination of interconnected
modeling, computational and analysis questions, roughly divided in two
categories: (i) Mathematical strategies for the coarse-graining of microscopic
models and the corresponding simulators, addressing problems which are currently
intractable with conventional MD/MC due to scale limitations. Here, it is not
directly attempted to speed up microscopic simulation algorithms; instead, a
hierarchy of new coarse-grained stochastic models (referred to as Coarse Grained
Monte Carlo methods) is derived, ordered by the magnitude of space/time scales.
This new set of models involves a reduced set of observables over the original
microscopic models incorporating microscopic details and noise, as well as the
interaction of the unresolved degrees of freedom. (ii) Hybrid
stochastic/deterministic systems describing detailed fluid-surface interactions
arise in applications that range from deposition process and catalysis to fuel
cell design and microreactors, to biology and atmosphere and ocean science. Here
two such applications are addressed, namely catalytic reactors and stochastic
parametrizations of tropical convection. Due to their inherent complexity it is
also necessary to develop simpler, test bed problems that capture significant
features of the multi-scale nature of the physical models, but are still
amenable to asymptotics, mathematical analysis and tractable computations.

The modeling and simulation of problems with multiple interrelating length and
time scales is one of the preeminent issues in essentially all timely scientific
and engineering challenges, ranging from the design of nanodevices, to
biomolecular dynamics, to the spread of epidemics and climate modeling. In spite
of a continuously increasing computing power many of these problems remain
intractable, at least in realistic conditions, and new modeling and simulation
strategies need to be developed. As several paradigms have recently
demonstrated, the critical step in this process is the use of (the limited in
number and flexibility) existing multiscale mathematical and statistical tools
as well as the development of new ones, that enable the creation of new
algorithms for complex systems. In the proposed work an array of such novel
multiscale mathematics and computing methods is developed. The research is
motivated by and targeted to a number of the aforementioned applications. Two
such particular examples are, (i) the surface processes in catalytic reactors
and fuel cells, and (ii) the tropical and open ocean convection.
