
* 0426056
* SGER: Multi-scale Modeling for Homeland Security and Supply-Chain Logistics Efficiency
* DMS,STATISTICS, SERVICE ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
* 01/01/2005,12/01/2004
* Jye-Chyi Lu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 12/31/2005
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) formulates multi-scale spatial
modeling procedures for handling data in various details to support solution of
complex logistics optimization problems. The investigators develop reliability
concepts useful in the logistics field for solving homeland security related
problems. Finally, this project integrates probability and statistical models
with operations research tools to improve seaport container-operation efficiency
to meet the needs of security inspections.

Evaluation and design of secure and reliable supply-chain logistics networks are
of critical importance to the modern U.S. economy. In particular, balancing
security and efficiency objectives in the design and operation of transportation
logistics systems and seaport container inspections is vitally important, and to
do so presents unique mathematical and statistical modeling challenges. This
interdisciplinary team of statisticians and logisticians will bring years of
experience in research and education to explore the potential in this field. The
key scientific impact of this project is that the theory and methods developed
in this project serve as the foundation for advances in multi-scale data
modeling and hierarchical decision-analysis tools. This project also provides
several broader impacts required by the NSF, e.g., collaboration with industry
for disseminating research results, education of high-quality students through
thesis advising and class teaching (with case studies explored in this project),
and support of summer research experience for students from underrepresentated
groups.
