
* 0432446
* Travel Support for the 55th Session of the International Statistical Institute
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2004,08/25/2004
* William Smith,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Using NSF support, the American Statistical Association (ASA) awards a travel
grant to at least 11 United States participants to attend the 55th Session of
the International Statistical Institute (ISI) in Sydney, Australia, from April 5
- 12, 2005. The ISI meeting includes the meetings of the Bernoulli Society,
International Association for Official Statistics (IAOS), International
Association for Statistical Computing (IASC), International Association of
Survey Statisticians (IASS), and the International Association for Statistical
Education (IASE).

The travel grant program administered by ASA is for participation in an umbrella
meeting with sessions of interest for thousands of statisticians. The grant
provides partial support to defray transportation costs for approximately eleven
(11) individuals selected from institutions and non-profit associations.
Participants will be notified of the availability of the travel grant through
Amstat News, a membership publication with over 19,000 circulation and on the
ASA Home Page on the Internet. Also, notices will be sent to university and
college statistics and mathematics departments to encourage younger and
underrepresented statisticians to apply for travel support. An ASA committee
will do the review and selection of the applications. Special consideration will
be given to statisticians who have recently received their doctorates and to
women and minorities in order to broaden research, educational and networking
opportunities.




