
* 0449204
* CAREER: Stochastic Modeling and Inference in Biophysics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,07/08/2009
* Samuel Kou,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,001.00

Prop ID: DMS-0449204 P I: Kou, Samuel Organization: Harvard University Program:
Career 2005 Title: CAREER: Stochastic Modeling and Inference in Biophysics

Abstract

Advances of experimental and computing technology have profoundly changed the
field of biophysics. On the experimental side, recent developments in
nanotechnology have allowed scientists to follow biological processes on single-
molecule basis, providing scientists with powerful means of studying many
biophysical processes that were inaccessible just a decade ago. This new
frontier also raises significant statistical challenges. It calls upon an urgent
need for stochastic modeling, because many classical models derived from
oversimplified assumption are no longer valid for single-molecule experiments.
Parallel to the experimental progress, the rapid advance of computing resources
and Monte Carlo methods also offers great potential for biophysical studies,
because in most biophysical experiments inference on the underlying stochastic
dynamics is complicated by latent processes, and many biophysical problems are
computing intensive. The proposal consists of three projects: (A) Constructing
stochastic models that account for the subdiffusion phenomenon in single-
molecule biophysics, where the goal is to provide models that are not only
physically meaningful, but also capable of explaining the subdiffusion
phenomenon that eludes classical diffusion models. (B) Developing data
augmentation tools to handle latent processes in biophysical experiments, where
the goal is to use the data augmentation techniques to augment the hidden
processes so as to efficiently infer from the experimental data the biophysical
properties of interest. (C) Developing more efficient Monte Carlo method for
computing intensive biophysics problems, where the goal is to construct new
Monte Carlo methods capable of sampling complicated distributions, and apply the
new method to study the HP protein folding problem.

Technology advances have profoundly changed the society and science in the
recent decades. The field of biophysics benefits from these advances in
particular, as the technology advances have allowed scientists to study many
biological processes that were inaccessible just a decade ago. These advances
also raise significant challenges for statistics, because the unprecedented
amount of data brought by the new technology requires critical statistical
analysis. While the United States leads the world in both statistics and
biophysics research, future prominence depends on innovations in both fields and
the interdisciplinary collaborations between them. The research in this proposal
aims at developing new statistical models and inference tools that can be
directly applied to biophysics studies and will lead to new insight about the
physics of complex biological processes. The development of statistics and
biophysics not only presents many interdisciplinary research opportunities, but
also attracts many bright students in mathematical, biological and physical
sciences. The proposed research is integrated with the principal investigator's
educational activities at both the graduate and undergraduate level. It seeks to
meet high academic standards, while providing graduate training that will
prepare students for interdisciplinary research careers.


