
* 0457248
* Smoothed multiple endpoint procedures.
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,06/27/2005
* Harold Sackrowitz,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 160,000.00

Classical multiple endpoint testing procedures such as Scheffe, Tukey,
Bonferroni etc. are oftentimes too conservative. This is particularly true if
the number of endpoints is large as in many recent applications. In an effort to
declare significance of endpoints more rapidly than classical multiple
comparison methods permit, procedures with stepwise structure were introduced.
Most recent procedures have a stepwise structure, that is they are either
single-step, step-up or step-down. To evaluate and compare procedures the
proposers have studied properties of these stepwise procedures. One very
surprising result of considerable practical value is that the popular step-up
procedure is inadmissible, even for a vector risk function consisting of average
size as one component and average type II error as the other component. The
step-up and step-down procedures also have a disturbing practical property;
namely a small negative change in one variable accompanied with reasonably
sizeable positive changes in other variables can lead from many rejections to
many acceptances. The current proposal is to find "smooth" procedures that
retain the desirable properties of stepwise procedures while improving on the
shortcomings. By representing the step-up procedure as a linear combination of
products of indicator functions a smooth competitor to step-up is found and will
be evaluated. Another idea proposed is to find a parametric empirical Bayes
procedure that will control the average size component of the vector risk used
to evaluate procedures. A critical aspect of the proposal is to study the amount
of improvement the new methods have over step-up.

The investigators study the problem of how to decide which among many possible
individual entities are significant. For example, there are thousands of a
person's genes examined in a microarray. Which genes are different or expressed
differently when one examines cancer patients compared to non-cancer patients.
To be able to decide such could provide a valuable diagnostic tool for early
detection of cancer. This example, is one of many, that illustrates the problem
of multiple testing procedures. Other areas of application include detection of
covert communications, detection of bioweapons, comparing several treatments
with a control, examination of mutual fund data in an effort to single out
successful funds, examining testing methodologies in education and psychology
settings. New and efficient statistical methodologies are introduced and
analyzed in this research undertaking.
