
* 0502347
* EMSW21-RTG Statistics for Physical and Engineering Sciences: A Plan for the Establishments of a Research Training Group
* DMS,STATISTICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/15/2005,07/12/2005
* Alicia Carriquiry,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,101,547.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION Arlington, Virginia 22230 ABSTRACT Research Training
Groups Program FY 2005

Prop ID: DMS-0502347 PI: Carriquiri, Alicia L. NSF Program: WORKFORCE IN THE
MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES Institution: Iowa State University Title: EMSW21-RTG
statistics for Physical and engineering sciences: A plan for the establishment
of a research training group Panel and ad-hoc Ratings: E, E, G, V, V, V.

Statisticians are playing an increasingly important role in cross-disciplinary
research addressing important, challenging scientific problems. The overall
objective of this RTG program is to train young statisticians in Statistics for
the Physical and Engineering Sciences in a cross-disciplinary, experiential
(first-hand exposure) research environment, that brings together scientists from
industry, government, and academia. This program aims to solve problems of
national importance through collaboration with external partner scientists, and
by educating and training undergraduates and graduate students, in cross-
disciplinary research. Activities planned to achieve the objective include
student internships providing an experiential research component and shorter-
term visits between partner scientists and ISU faculty members to initiate and
extend research collaboration. The activities will also include joint Ph.D.
program expansion in the Iowa State Statistics Department, new course offerings,
weekly RTG seminars, and two workshops on topics of research in the RTG. The
five initial focus areas for the RTG are: reliability of critical systems, nano-
metrology and high throughput technologies, calibration of computer models of
complex physical systems, accelerated discovery of useful new chemical compounds
and behavior of complicated systems such as large wireless networks. The
creation and development of this experiential, cross-disciplinary research
environment for educating and training the nation's next-generation
statisticians will provide a national model for advancing scientific discovery
while promoting education and learning. Expected results have the potential to
be implemented widely and to provide solutions in important areas of
application, such as complex physical and information networks, nano-technology,
and high-performance material discovery.

Statisticians are playing an increasingly important role in cross-disciplinary
research addressing important, challenging scientific problems. The overall
objective of this RTG program is to train young statisticians in Statistics for
the Physical and Engineering Sciences in a cross-disciplinary, experiential
(first-hand exposure) research environment, that brings together scientists from
industry, government, and academia. This program aims to solve problems of
national importance through collaboration with external partner scientists, and
by educating and training undergraduates and graduate students, in cross-
disciplinary research. Activities planned to achieve the objective include
student internships providing an experiential research component and shorter-
term visits between partner scientists and ISU faculty members to initiate and
extend research collaboration. The activities will also include joint Ph.D.
program expansion in the Iowa State Statistics Department, new course offerings,
weekly RTG seminars, and two workshops on topics of research in the RTG. The
five initial focus areas for the RTG are: reliability of critical systems, nano
(very small-scale)-metrology and high throughput technologies, calibration of
computer models of complex physical systems, accelerated discovery of useful new
chemical compounds and behavior of complicated systems such as large wireless
networks. The creation and development of this experiential, cross-disciplinary
research environment for educating and training the nation's next-generation
statisticians will provide a national model for advancing scientific discovery
while promoting education and learning. Expected results have the potential to
be implemented widely and to provide solutions in important areas of
application, such as complex physical and information networks, nano (very
small-scale)-technology, and high-performance material discovery
