
* 0503718
* Topics in the Theory of Randomization
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,04/28/2005
* William Rosenberger,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 160,000.00

The investigator will explore theoretical properties of randomization procedures
with applications to sequential randomized clinical trials. The first problem
the investigator will address is sequential monitoring of randomization tests
following restricted randomization, which will require extensive use of
techniques in sequential analysis and nonparametric statistical inference. The
second problem the investigator will address is the development and properties
of response-adaptive randomization procedures, including procedures designed for
continuous responses, and survival responses with censoring. The third problem
the investigator will address is certain theoretical properties of covariate-
adaptive randomization procedures, particularly randomization-based inference
procedures following covariate-adaptive randomization. The ultimate goal of the
investigator is to complete a systmeatic study of randomization, its properties,
and its relevance in clinical trials.

The investigator will explore properties of randomization, the hallmark of a
well-designed clinical trial. The first problem the investigator will address is
sequential monitoring of randomized clinical trials, which refers to making
early decisions about the effectiveness of new therapies when compelling
evidence is accrued at an interim point in a clinical trial. There are currently
no sequential monitoring techniques available that allow the randomization
itself to be incorporate into these decisions, and hence current methodology
completely ignores the design of the trial in the analysis. The second problem
the investigator will address is response-adaptive randomization, and he will
develop new procedures for clinical trials where the outcome is time-to-event or
some continous measure, e.g. cholesterol level. These response-adaptive
procedures are attractive from an ethical point of view, because they seek to
maximize power to detect a relevant clinical outcome, while simultaneously
minimizing the expected number of treatment failures patients will experience
while participating in the clinical trial. The third problem the investigator
will address is proporties of covariate-adaptive randomization procedures, which
is designed to minimize tial imbalances in important confounding variables that
might bias results of the clinical trial. Each of these topics is relevant to
today's clinical trials in the drug development phase of new pharmaceuticals.
