
* 0504269
* Semiparametric Models, Methodologies and Related Theory for Analysis of Censored Survival Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,04/12/2007
* Wenbin Lu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2008
* USD 49,828.00

This project addresses issues related to semi-parametric regression models,
methods and theories with censored survival data. The investigator and his
collaborators aim to develop semi-parametric efficient estimators of the
regression parameters for the proportional hazards mixture cure model. The
approach is extended to another class of semi-parametric cure models. They
propose a general class of mixture transformation models, which are common in
medical and econometrics literature, and study them via estimating equations as
well as some nonparametric smoothing techniques. In addition, they plan to
develop estimating equations for multivariate failure time data based on
marginal linear transformation models and propose a class of independence tests
for multivariate failure time data with the adjustment of covariates. They also
derive relatively simple method for analysis of survival data from case-cohort
design and discuss more efficient parameter estimation via the projection
method. The statistical problems studied here are motivated by applications in
biomedical sciences, engineering sciences, sociology, economics and genetics.
The project develops appropriate statistical models, inferential methods and
mathematical theory. The results can be used to facilitate design of clinical
trials and epidemiological studies, particularly in studies of cancer,
cardiovascular diseases, to analyze engineering reliability and market
penetration data, to assess the association among failure times due to
unmeasured effects, such as familial genetic effects, after adjusting some
environmental factors.


