
* 0504387
* Statistical Methods in Fast Functional MRI
* DMS,STATISTICS, , 
* 07/01/2005,05/22/2007
* Larry Shepp,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 435,435.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER.: 0504387 INSTITUTION: Rutgers University New Brunswick NSF
PROGRAM: STATISTICS PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR and Co-PI: Shepp, Larry and Zhang, C
Hui PROPOSAL TITLE: Statistical Methods in Fast Functional MRI



Abstract

The proposed research will further advance and use statistical methods developed
by the principle investigators and their collaborators to sharply improve time-
resolution for the functional magnetic resonance imaging. The objective remains
to improve the time-resolution of functional magnetic resonance imaging by
sampling only a small fraction of the Fourier transform of the spin density, and
using a prolate wavelet filter to approximately obtain an integral representing
the total activity of the difference in susceptibility between task and pre-
task, over various regions of interest in the brain at successive time-points.
The cost for this is a decrease in spatial resolution. A nearly optimal
trajectory will be used for sampling a small cube in three-dimensional k-space
about the origin. This sampling region is also nearly optimal. The use of a,
again nearly optimal, prolate filter will provide a low spatial but high
temporal resolution image of the deoxy-hemoglobin density. An aim of the project
is to find one or more consistent locations in the brain where oxygen is
consumed during higher level processing by the brain of the image in the primary
visual region. This region would then be scanned in a two-dimensional experiment
where a slice plane is chosen to go through the region which would then give
convincing demonstration of feasibility of the proposed methods. The proposal
focuses on developing statistical methods and related theory for fast functional
magnetic resonance imaging, to sharply improve the time-resolution of present
techniques. Fast fMRI is expected to have profound and far-reaching consequences
in the understanding of brain function, a problem of central scientific interest
at the present time.


