
* 0504896
* A Unified Framework for Statistical Modeling with Multivariate Skewed Distributions and Application to Spatial Selection Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2005,05/13/2009
* Marc Genton,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2009
* USD 90,000.00



The investigator proposes to develop a new unified definition of multivariate
skewed distributions, which are essential to statistical modeling of data.
Indeed, skewed distributions provide flexible parametric classes of multivariate
distributions for the statistician's toolkit that allow for modeling key
characteristics such as skewness, heavy tails, and multimodality. They also
contain the multivariate normal distribution as a special case, enjoy pleasant
theoretical properties, and prevent the difficult task of multivariate data
transformation. The investigator proposes to establish links between the new
unified definition and existing definitions in the literature, as well as
investigate novel distributions emerging from this framework. The investigator
also intends to establish the theoretical and inferential properties of the
multivariate skewed distributions resulting from the unified definition. This,
in turn, provides the necessary basis for the development of selection models
for spatial data, and yields a skewed version of the famed kriging procedure, or
from another point of view, a spatial version of the celebrated Heckman model.

The primary impact of this project is that the new framework for multivariate
skewed distributions will provide valuable tools to applied statisticians and
practitioners, especially in environmental sciences. Another impact will result
from the development and free distribution of implementations of the results
emerging from this research in software such as R and Matlab. In order to
facilitate the wide dissemination of results from this project, a webpage will
be created and maintained. It will contain programs, research reports,
references, and links to information about multivariate skewed distributions.
