
* 0504859
* Nonparametric Location and Scatter Functionals
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,04/10/2007
* Richard Dudley,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 173,000.00

Abstract: Nonparametric location and scatter functionals

Given n independent observations, each with distribution P, one can form an
empirical measure by taking the average of point masses at the observations. For
a functional T of P, evaluating T at the empirical measure gives an estimator of
T(P) which will converge to it almost surely if T is suitably continuous at P.
The project will continue a search for functionals continuous at as many P's as
possible, which may be all P in one dimension, but in higher dimensions an open
dense set. Then if T is also differentiable at P in a sufficient sense, the
estimators will be asymptotically normal and converge to T(P) at a rate of 1
over square root of n. Functionals of location include the mean mu when it is
finite. In one dimension, another location functional is the median m, and scale
functionals include the standard deviation sigma and median absolute deviation.
The classical mu and sigma can be undefined or infinite at laws decreasing too
slowly at infinity. For some laws P there is an interval of medians, whose
midpoint gives a unique choice of m, but m is discontinuous at such P.
Simultaneous maximum likelihood estimation of location and scale for t
distributions with degrees of freedom nu larger than 1 extends to location and
scale functionals defined and continuous at every probability distribution on
the line, and infinitely differentiable at distributions having no atom as large
as nu over nu plus one. On multidimensional spaces, the square of a scale
parameter is replaced by a scatter matrix analogous to a covariance matrix, and
the continuity and differentiability will be sought on a dense open set of
distributions, via t functionals and by other methods.

Location and scale or scatter functionals are some of the most basic in
statistics. But by far the two best known functionals of location, the mean and
median, each have serious drawbacks. Using the mean, one assumes in effect that
all data are correct. The mean can be overly influenced by outlying, extreme
observations such as gross errors. Using the median, on the other hand, guards
against the possibility that nearly half the data may be incorrect. If a
distribution has more than half its probability in an interval, the median must
be in that interval and may very poorly represent the rest of the distribution.
Functionals combining some of the advantages of the mean and median while
avoiding the worst drawbacks of either can and should be more widely studied and
used. Then one can have kinds of averages that guard against a more realistic
possibility that some small fraction of the data may be incorrect.
