
* 0504162
* Random Processes: Data Analysis and Theory
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2005,04/03/2007
* David Brillinger,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2009
* USD 270,000.00

Random process data analysis has become a major theme of contemporary science.
Motivated by problems from wildlife biology and forestry, techniques for the
statistical handling of spatial-temporal point process data and of curved
trajectories in the plane are developed as well as statistical methods for
random process data generally. In particular probabilists have discovered
various theoretical results concerning vector-valued stochastic differential
equations, but their statistical and data analytic properties have not been
totally developed. Stochastic differential equations are employed to describe
the observed trajectories of the animals in the reserve. The equations are
unusual in having paths of explanatories included and sometimes time lags. The
fact that an animal's motion is bounded by a high fence also affects the
analysis. In the work approximations to the random model are needed. The large
sample accuracy of the approximations will be studied. The tools of point
processes, smoothing and time series analysis are being employed with the
wildfire data. Predictors of future risk and possible loss as the fire season
proceeds and for future years are being developed.

Two specific problems addressed are of broad impact and of societal importance.
The problems are risk estimation for wildfires and the investigation of the
effects that humans moving through an animal reserve have on the behavior of the
animals. A question in the latter case is with what level of human usage can
wild animals and humans share a habitat. There are data available from designed
experiments with humans walking, riding horses, bicycling and on all-terrain
vehicles traveling in the reserve. Both problems are studied using data sets
come from the Forest Service, U. S. Department of Agriculture. This work is of
particularly broad impact for there are the possibility of reducing human threat
from fire, and of maintaining natural resource values. Predictions of the risk
as a function of time and space will allow efficient placement of fire fighting
resources. The intellectual merit of the work includes that quite a variety of
interesting analytic problems arise, motivated by these applications, and these
problems will be addressed in the research. The data sets are large so it is
anticipated that real progress will be made on understanding the applicability
of the methods.


