
* 0504972
* Multivariate growth charts and robust quantile estimation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,05/12/2005
* Ying Wei,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 105,000.00

Growth charts have been widely used in clinics and medical centers to monitor an
individual subject's growth or health status in context of population values.
Current growth charts consider only one measurement at a time. The investigators
propose to develop a framework for multivariate growth charts. More
specifically, the objectives of the proposed research include (1) to provide a
mathematically formal but clinically sensible definition of multivariate growth
charts, and study their properties; (2) to propose methodology for estimating
and incorporating time effects and other potential covariate effects (e.g. past
growth) into those growth charts; (3) to develop statistical inference and model
assessment tools; (4) to compare the proposed methodology with existing methods
and explore alternative devices for multivariate growth chart construction; (5)
to propose robust quantile estimators to limit the impact of outliers.

The multivariate growth charts can provide much more informative tools than the
currently available univariate growth charts in many areas of public health and
biomedical applications. For example, pediatrics will be able to do better
screening for obesity with a multivariate approach using longitudinal
information on weight and height than with a single body-mass-index (BMI) chart.
The methodologies to be developed by the investigators (e.g. estimation of
covariate-adjusted multivariate quantile functions) are of general interest to
statistical research. The proposed research will be widely disseminated through
publications, presentations in domestic and international conferences, and
collaborations with clinical researchers.
