
* 0504726
* Haplotype-Based Association Modeling for Whole-Genome Scan and Candidate Gene Studies
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2005,07/15/2005
* Jung-Ying Tzeng,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2009
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract

Principal Investigators: Tzeng, Jung-Ying Proposal Number: DMS-0504726
Institution: North Carolina State University

Proposal Title: Haplotype-based Association Modeling for Whole-Genome Scan and
Candidate Gene Studies

Identifying genes responsible for human diseases can illuminate significant
insight to the detection, treatment and prevention of these diseases. In the
search for genes underlying human complex diseases, haplotype-based association
analysis has been recognized as a tool with high resolution and, more
importantly, potentially great power for identifying modest etiological effects
of genes. However, in practice, its efficacy has not been as successful as
expected in theory; one primary cause is that such analysis requires a large
number of parameters in order to capture the abundant haplotype varieties. While
high degrees of freedom can hinder the power of identifying modest genetic
effects on complex diseases, the need to incorporate covariates of other risk
factors further worsens the degrees-of-freedom problem in mapping genes for
complex diseases. To tackle this issue, the proposed work constructs an
efficient and powerful model-based framework for association analysis at
haplotype level. The central focus of the methods development is on the
efficient use of haplotype information in a model-based framework, and different
strategies of reducing haplotype complexity are considered at different research
stages to optimize efficiency. For screening-stage analyses, the PI constructs
approaches based on haplotype similarity of pair-wise comparison in a regression
platform to detect chromosomal regions that are likely to harbor disease genes.
For refinement-stage analyses, the PI develops evolutionary-based methods of
haplotype grouping to identify specific disease-associated haplotypes, and
integrate new dimension-reduction techniques into existing regression methods.

The proposed work aims not only to provide novel association tools in complex
gene mapping, but also develop a routine method for case-control studies and
offer a methodological foundation for future advancement. With the availability
of a better statistical tool, scientists can advance their understanding of
complex diseases, and design better diagnostic and therapeutic strategies that
improve human health.




