
* 0504953
* Collaborative Research on Bayesian Nonparametric Methods for Spatial and Spatiotemporal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2005,09/09/2008
* Alan Gelfand,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2009
* USD 67,966.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigators: Kottas, Athanasios and Gelfand, Alan Proposal Number:
DMS - 0505085 and DMS - 0504953 Proposal Title: Collaborative Research on
Bayesian Nonparametric Methods for Spatial and Spatiotemporal Data Institution:
University of California Santa Cruz and Duke University

The investigators develop Bayesian nonparametric methodology for spatial and
spatio-temporal data analysis. Point-referenced spatial data arises in several
fields, including atmospheric science, ecology, environmental science, and
epidemiology. In fact, often such data is replicated across time say through
sampling at monitoring sites. In certain cases, with appropriate preliminary
manipulation, the replicates may be viewed as independent. More often, the
temporal dependence is retained and, discretizing time, a time series of spatial
processes emerges. In either case, virtually all of the modeling for the spatial
processes is specified parametrically; in fact, it is almost always a Gaussian
process which is most frequently assumed to be stationary. The investigators
study new classes of nonparametric spatial models to remove these assumptions.
These models are applicable to either of the above replicated settings. In its
simplest form, the investigators use Dirichlet processes to create random
spatial processes, which are non-Gaussian, nonstationary, and have non-
homogeneous variance. These processes are defined through their finite
dimensional distributions, and are referred to as spatial Dirichlet processes. A
spatial Dirichlet process is then convolved with a pure error process to create
an illustrative spatial process with a nugget component. Such models are
hierarchical and can be fitted through Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. In
application, the investigators use spatial Dirichlet processes to introduce
spatial random effects into the modeling, either directly with independent
replicates or embedded within a dynamic model to handle temporal dependence. The
investigators study an assortment of problems associated with the use of spatial
Dirichlet processes, including their theoretical global and local properties;
their use as mixing models; their use with semiparametric mixing; their
implementation in dynamic models; their utilization for interpolation at given
time points and for forecasting at future time points; their use with non-
Gaussian first stage specifications for the data; their use in describing
multivariate distributions and, as a special case, for extended regression
modeling; their use in modeling spatial point process data; and their extension
to richer classes of so-called generalized spatial Dirichlet processes.

Point-referenced spatial data arises in application areas as diverse as
environmental science, climatology, ecology, epidemiology, and real estate
markets. As researchers collect more and more space and space-time data, the
need for analyses to enhance their understanding of the complex processes they
are sampling grows. This inspires the need for sufficiently rich models to
accommodate a variety of global and local behaviors. The primary motivation for
this research is to expand the catalog of space-time modeling tools available to
such scientists. This research work suggests the first approach to nonparametric
Bayesian spatial and spatio-temporal data analysis. Nonparametric Bayesian
approaches have witnessed increased utilization in recent years as a result of
their successful application to certain problems in, for example, engineering
and biomedical fields. Similar success is anticipated by bringing this
methodology to space-time settings. In particular, it is anticipated that, for
fields such as epidemiology, environmental contamination and weather modeling,
researchers will value the flexible modeling framework the work offers. And, an
increase in usage of the methodology is expected as the computational techniques
to fit the models are advanced.










