
* 0505535
* Design, Analysis, and Monitoring of Network Characteristics Using Tomography Techniques
* DMS,STATISTICS, ERC-Eng Research Centers, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/15/2005,07/02/2008
* George Michailidis,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 238,334.00

Abstract

Prop ID: DMS-0505535 PI and co-PI: Michailidis, George and Nair, Vijay
Institution: University of Michigan Ann Arbor Title: Design, Analysis, and
Monitoring of Network Characteristics Using Tomography Techniques

This research program is motivated by problems that arise in assessing and
monitoring the quality of service (QoS) characteristics of computer and
communication networks. It focuses on active network tomography where end-to-end
traffic measurements are obtained by actively probing the network. The project
examines a number of important and interesting statistical issues dealing with
the collection, modeling, and analysis of network data using active tomography.
Specifically, it introduces a new, flexible class of probing experiments that
has advantages over the current schemes. The investigators will study several
research issues related to the design of efficient flexicast probing
experiments: questions of identifiability, construction of efficient designs,
optimal allocation of test probes (according to some suitable metric), and real-
time monitoring strategies to detect and localize network problems. A
substantial portion of the research deals with estimation and inference for a
large-scale inverse problem with missing data. The focus is on fast and scalable
algorithms for estimating packet loss rates and delay distributions and their
asymptotic properties. Furthermore, new models for spatial and temporal
dependence that capture the main features of network traffic will be introduced
and the behavior of various estimation methods under these models will be
analyzed. Finally, an important component of this research program is the
validation of the proposed models and techniques on real data. Present day
computer networks have evolved into large, complex, decentralized systems. There
is a great deal of interest in estimating key network performance parameters and
quality of service indicators, such as traffic intensities, link delays and
dropped packet rates, and in identifying bottleneck nodes and detecting network
failures in the form of connectivity, routing faults and malicious activity.
However, the lack of centralized control makes the quantitative assessment of
network performance a rather difficult task, since detailed queueing and traffic
models do not capture their complexity and characteristics well. Network
tomography is capable of assessing the performance of large-scale networks and
in localizing anomalous behavior to individual components and subnetworks. The
understanding and insights gained as a result of the proposed research will lead
to a core of basic principles and a toolkit of key statistical methods and
techniques for the analysis and design of network monitoring schemes. Efficient
and scalable network monitoring could significantly benefit network control and
provisioning by incorporating the necessary information into admission, flow and
routing control protocols. The proposed techniques and algorithms will be
integrated into an open source tool, called FLEXICAST. The research program will
also be integrated into the educational activities of the Department of
Statistics. Planned efforts include training of graduate and undergraduate
students, the development of a new course, stimulation of collaborations with
students and faculty in Engineering, and interaction with the networking
community to help transfer the research results to industry.


