
* 0505201
* Hybrid likelihood methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,06/16/2009
* Ian McKeague,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2009
* USD 180,000.00

ABSTRACT

Prop ID: DMS-0505201 PI: McKeague, Ian W. NSF Program: STATISTICS Institution:
Columbia University Title: Hybrid likelihood methods

Empirical likelihood is being extended in three directions: to allow for plug-in
estimates of nuisance parameters in estimating equations, slower than root-n
rates of convergence, and settings in which there are a relatively large number
of estimating equations compared to the sample size. This work is motivated in
part by the need to more effectively compare survival distributions in clinical
trials and cohort studies. Methods of finding confidence intervals for split
points, as represented by jumps in parametric regression models within broader
semiparametric models, are also being investigated. This involves developing
cube-root asymptotics for hybrid likelihood methods. A new confidence set is
constructed by inverting a hybrid likelihood ratio statistic. This part of the
project is motivated by an application to the development of a phosphorus
threshold standard for the Everglades. Finally, hybrid likelihood techniques are
being developed for use in HIV vaccine efficacy trials in which it is important
to take into account dependence of the relative risk of infection on the
divergence of infecting HIV viruses.

Hybrid likelihood provides a unified way of looking at techniques that adapt a
nonparametric likelihood based approach in some way, for example through the use
of plug-in estimates for nuisance parameters, or by the use of a likelihood
derived from a working (but not "true") model. The use of hybrid likelihood has
become increasingly common in recent years and is attractive in many applied
areas because it combines the power of likelihood based methods with a pragmatic
sense of the need to find tractable and easily implemented solutions to complex
statistical problems. The investigator is extending the scope of hybrid
likelihood methods in a variety of settings. Methodological work is conducted on
three specific topics: empirical likelihood with applications in survival
analysis, confidence intervals for split points with application to the
estimation of pollution thresholds, and comparison of mark-specific relative
risks with application to the detection of viral divergence in HIV vaccine
efficacy trials.


