
* 0505595
* Practical Perfect Sampling for Bayesian Computation and Engineering and Financial Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,06/06/2006
* Xiao-Li Meng,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 258,511.00

This is a comprehensive research project aimed at making perfect or exact
sampling a more practical tool for common Bayesian modeling, as well as for
engineering and financial applications. Key reasons for the current limitation
of exact sampling include the non-applicability of available algorithms because
they operate under assumptions that are not present (such as monotonicity or
compact spaces) or assume elements that are not available (such as suitable
``bounding chains''), and the fact that many proposed perfect sampling
algorithms take too long or too much memory to be practical beyond certain
``stylized'' applications. The investigators propose to take full advantage of
specific problem structures arising in common applications to enhance the
performance of exact simulation algorithms. More precisely, in the context of
Bayesian computations, the investigators study the idea of data augmentation and
multi-shift/scaling couplers to implement and to speed up perfect sampling
algorithms for a number of common Bayesian models. The investigators also
propose a new exact simulation algorithm that is suitable for applications in
stochastic modeling (as in the contexts of engineering and finance),
particularly for distributions that are solutions of fixed point stochastic
equations. In addition, the investigators study a general procedure to implement
a regeneration-based exact simulation algorithm. Finally, the investigators
analyze related methods, such as ``nearly perfect sampling", which by allowing a
known and controlled error term, can potentially provide considerable gain in
terms of both speed and applicability.

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a class of very popular methods for
scientific computation, and Perfect Sampling is a subclass of MCMC methods that
aim to deliver more accurate results. The price one pays for this better
accuracy is that the construction of a Perfect Sampling algorithm is typically a
difficult task. The main purpose of this proposal is to study practical
strategies for reducing such difficulties and thereby to make Perfect Sampling a
more practical tool than currently it is. The research activities on perfect
sampling described by the investigators focus on widely used models in
statistical inference, production and manufacturing systems and financial
econometrics. Therefore, the research plan that the investigators propose can
have a substantial impact in a great variety of applications in Statistics,
Industrial Engineering and Finance. The proposed research activities will also
greatly advance the general knowledge and understanding of the applicability of
perfect sampling in practice thereby addressing a key problem in the MCMC
methodology. The proposed activities will have broad impact in both statistical
computation practice and theory, via both research and associated teaching and
advising due to the direct involvement of student research assistants and via
seminars and publications. The investigators will also make every effort
possible to recruit the best research assistants who at the same time will also
enhance diversity in their general research environment.
