
* 0505499
* Mathematical Methods for Small--Sample Biostatistical Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,04/15/2005
* John Kolassa,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 86,998.00

The investigator applies various mathematical methods to extend the range of
application of saddlepoint approximation techniques and exact enumeration
techniques in statistical inference. These techniques are applied to multi-
dimensional conditional inference, achieved primarily by developing new
approximations to multivariate tail probabilities for some component of a vector
of sufficient statistics conditional on the remaining components, and methods
for calculating these tail probabilities exactly. Particular attention is paid
to probability models whose sufficient statistics have lattice distributions,
since standard asymptotic techniques frequently fail in this context. These
models, including logistic and Poisson regression and contingency table models,
are very frequently used in applied biostatistical work. Specifically, this
research includes the application of multidimensional saddlepoint approximations
to order--restricted hypotheses. It extends existing Approximations applicable
to continuous distributions to general non-lattice distributions. It develops
guidelines for tuning approximate conditional inferential methods to obtain
higher power. Computational algorithms developed as part of this work are
publicly available.

Many current statistical techniques rely on mathematical approximations; the
accuracy of these approximations ranges from very good to inadequate. This
research involves approximations known to be almost always of high accuracy, and
applies them in some statistical contexts that are widely used by scientists in
a variety of disciplines. This research allows investigators to draw valid
conclusions from smaller data sets, particularly in cases when important
research questions are phrased in terms of a number of quantities that must be
accounted for. This situation occurs in a wide range of areas, from finance to
political science to medicine. For example, a new medical therapy might be
expected to lead to improvements, potentially measured in a number of ways. The
investigator wishes to demonstrate that individuals receiving the new therapy at
least as well according to all of the potential measures, and better on at least
one measure, than do patients on the original therapy. Standard statistical
methods do not handle such situations in an efficient way; the current research
represents a significant improvement.
