
* 0505902
* Eighth North American Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 08/01/2005,02/16/2005
* Galin Jones,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 01/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

The Eighth North American Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and
Probability is a meeting of recent Ph.D. recipients in Statistics and
Probability. Anyone who has received a Ph.D. since 2000 or expects to receive a
Ph.D. by 2006 is eligible to attend. The purpose of the conference is to promote
the professional development of new researchers primarily by introducing them to
each other's research in an informal setting. All participants are expected to
give a short, expository talk or contribute a poster on their research. Topics
will range across a variety of areas from theory and methods to applications.
This will provide a unique opportunity for junior researchers to exchange ideas
and initiate contacts amongst themselves as well as provide them an opportunity
to interact with the invited senior participants. The meeting is to be held
prior to the 2005 Joint Statistical Meetings in Minneapolis, MN.

The New Researchers conference series is explicitly aimed at training the future
leaders in Statistics and Probability. At present, researchers develop contacts
with others in their field either through their own institutions or at meetings
of professional societies. It is often the case that, at their own institutions,
junior researchers have limited contact with senior colleagues. Also, meetings
of professional societies are rather large and junior researchers often find
them overwhelming. In helping to create networks of new researchers, the
conference will lay the groundwork for future collaboration and the informal
exchange of ideas and knowledge. It also assists in general professional
development. Knowing people outside of one's research specialty area is critical
for professional growth, assisting with making contacts at other universities
and industries, and helping with professional service activities. In particular,
traditionally underrepresented groups are strongly encouraged to attend.


