
* 0505133
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of Functional and High-Dimensional Data with Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2005,05/31/2005
* Marianna Pensky,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2008
* USD 72,000.00

This project deals with statistical inference in phenomena that result in
massive, multidimensional and/or functional data sets. Prime examples are
geophysical, biomedical, and internet related data. In addition to high
dimensionality, such data are often characterized by self-affinity and require
non-standard (functional) models for their modeling and subsequent statistical
analysis. The methodology to be developed will advance both the theory and
practice of functional data analysis, a very fast-developing and modern area of
statistics. The common and novel features of the statistical methods proposed
here lie in the nature of analyzed data. The data sets are massive,
multidimensional, functional, and possibly self-affine (fractal or
multifractal). Recent progress in multiscale data representations provide
natural and efficient environments for (i) developing scale-sensitive analyzing
tools for estimation, testing, classification, and deconvolution, and (ii)
describing, summarizing, and modeling self-similar data. Bayesian methodology
will be used whenever available prior information can be incorporated or
whenever sensible automatic priors are possible.

Development of new inferential methodologies is critical for the statistical
support of recent scientific initiatives and newly emerging technologies. The
proposed research is application driven, so the specificities of the application
fields influence the design and focus of the methodology. Techniques suggested
in the proposal deal with problems of testing of efficiency of new medical
treatments, target detection and classification as well as classification of
medical images, or more accurate recovery of radar or satellite data. Hence, the
methodologies which result from the proposal are applicable in such areas of
strategic interest as health and medicine and homeland security. In addition to
methodological impact, the proposed research has a strong educational component
consisting of training graduate students, involving undergraduate students in
research projects, conducting inter-departmental seminars, increasing awareness
of mathematics education among the work force, and attracting minority and
female students.


