
* 0505759
* Bayesian Analysis and Prediction of Gaussian Random Fields
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2005,03/08/2006
* Victor DeOliveira,AR,University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Rong Chen
* 04/30/2007
* USD 122,078.00

This project develops methodology for objective Bayesian analysis of spatial
data, both geostatistical and lattice data, that arise in many of the social and
earth sciences, such as economy, epidemiology, geography, geology and hydrology,
as well as computationally efficient algorithms to perform Bayesian analysis and
prediction based on moderate to large spatial datasets. On the methodological
side, the investigator derives new automatic prior distributions for the
parameters of different kinds of Gaussian random fields, specified either by
their covariance matrices or by their precision matrices. The research explores
the main statistical properties of Bayesian inferences based on these automatic
priors, such as conditions for posterior propriety, frequentist properties of
parameter and predictive inferences, and existence of predictive summaries. A
point of particular interest is the study of the pros and cons of the dependence
of these automatic priors on the sampling design. On the computational side, the
investigator derives methods to approximate these automatic priors
distributions, since evaluation of these priors is in most cases computationally
expensive, and develops new computationally efficient algorithms for Bayesian
inference and prediction of spatial data that would make feasible Bayesian
analysis based on moderate to large spatial datasets. The methodology proposed
in this project serves as an initial step toward the development of objective
Bayesian analysis for spatial hierarchical models used to describe non-Gaussian
data, since most of these models use Gaussian random fields as building blocks.

The statistical methodology developed during this project has practical impacts
in many social and earth sciences, such as economy, epidemiology, geography,
geology and hydrology, where the collection and analysis of spatial data have
become common tasks. A paradigm of statistics called the Bayesian approach
possesses several conceptual and methodological advantages when compared to
traditional approaches for the analysis of spatial data, but technical and
computational difficulties that arise during implementation have hindered its
more widespread use among practitioners. This is particularly so for the
analysis of some types large spatial datasets where current implementations of
the Bayesian approach are too cumbersome or unfeasible to be carried out. The
statistical methodology developed in this project would contribute to overcome
some of these technical and computational hurdles, and consequently to bridge
the gap between methodology and practice for Bayesian analysis of spatial data.
Graduate students would be engaged in the project, contributing to their
statistical training as well as the enhancement of the Statistics program at the
University of Arkansas.
