
* 0505636
* Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space Methods in Statistical Model Building and Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2005,06/29/2005
* Grace Wahba,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 54,000.00

Abstract Wahba, Grace G. Proposal ID: DMS - 0505636

Original Title: Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space Methods in Statistical Model
Building and Data Analysis

New Title: Positive Definite Kernel Methods in Statistical Model Building and
Data Analysis

Positive definite functions (a.k.a."kernels") play a key role in statistical
model building, classification, clustering and data mining. Such kernels provide
a distance metric for elements in their domain, which may be functions (as in
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces), or, more recently, trees, graphs, images,
sounds, DNA and protein sequences, microarray gene expression data, text
messages and other objects. A reasonable distance metric is a prerequesite for
prediction, classification, and clustering, and methods for obtaining such
metrics are an area of active research. The proposer will introduce, develop and
study the properties of a new class of nonparametric methods for obtaining
kernels in situations where noisy, crude, incomplete information related to
dissimilarity between pairs of objects in arbitrary sets is available. The
methods are called regularized kernel estimation, since they involve a tradeoff
between fitting the crude information available and a penalty or complexity
functional on the kernel, analogous to, but not the same as classical
regularization and the bias-variance tradeoff. Optimal tuning and dimensionality
reduction procedures will be proposed and their properties studied. The methods
proposed are believed to have new and important computational and theoretical
advantages, and these will be demonstrated, by development of efficient
computational algorithms, by simulation, by development of the theory, and by
application to a variety of scientific problems.

This work is motivated by the goal of obtaining better methods for clustering
and classifying objects mentioned above, by obtaining improved ways to describe
the "distance" betweein objects. For example, microarray gene chips may contain
information concerning, e. g. the type of tumor whose DMA is being studied, and
it is anticipated that this research will provide improved methods for
extracting this information in cases where it is difficult to identify the type
of tumor, and this will ultimately result in better diagnostic and treatment
outcomes. Similarly, it is of interest to cluster protein sequences into
functional classes, with the goal of identifying function by associating
sequences that are "nearby". It is anticipated that the present research will
provide a more efficient way of extracting information from crude or incomplete
dissimilarity data and, contribute to the long-term technology of understanding
protein function. Other potential applications include improved classification
of weather states, with the goal of clustering and classifying local situations
that have similar outcomes, signal detection in large neutrino detectors,
classification of astronomical bodies, and classification and clustering
problems in a variety of other scientific fields.


