
* 0505528
* Quotient Correlation, Nonlinear Dependence, and Extreme Dependence Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,05/16/2005
* Zhengjun Zhang,MO,Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rong Chen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 32,727.00

The proposal consists of five important steps. First, the investigator develops
new dependence measures (quotient correlation) and analyze the resulting test
statistics. It is important to develop test statistics for tail independence
based as much as possible on appropriate tail observations and less on
observations from the center which may bias the analysis. Clearly, the decision
on "where does appropriate" stands has to be carefully analyzed. Second, a new
measure for extreme co-movement is introduced. This measure allows one to
calculate probabilities of occurrences of certain extreme events in the future
given the past history of the extreme movement of underlying variables. Third,
the proposal includes the development of statistical estimation methods for max-
stable processes. This allows one to efficiently study clustered spatial-
temporal extreme observations. Fourth, procedures of how to calculate portfolio
risk measures -- such as unconditional or conditional Value at Risk -- are also
introduced using combined Markov process and max-stable process models. Fifth,
the statistical analysis of extreme co-movements is of considerable importance
in practice. For example, the notion of spillover in global financial markets
and credit loss data can be thought of as one area of application.

The intellectual merit of the proposal in a first instance stems from a precise
testing procedure for extremal dependence. As all definitions used depend on
some limit procedures and often concern statistical testing for parameters at
the edge of a specific parametric space (hence possibly testing is a non-regular
estimation problem), great care has to be taken to obtain tests with sufficient
power. The proposal is exactly aiming at finding a solution for this. Several
procedures for tackling this problem have been published, however, up to now, no
clear winning approach seems to exist. The investigator will carefully compare
and contrast new approaches with existing ones using simulated as well as real
data. The real data will come from areas as diverse as insurance, finance,
telecommunications, climatology, seismology, medicine, etc. Beyond these
methodological merits and specific applications, the proposal also has a
considerable broad impact. Throughout applications in diverse fields (like
above), extreme risks play an important scientific, societal as well as
(possibly) political role. The dissemination of new statistical tools leading to
a better understanding of the occurrence of joint extremes is of great
importance. This can be very well achieved at the level of new graduate courses,
publications in journals aimed at a broaden audience and in discussion with
scientists from other fields.
