
* 0505025
* Haplotype Linkage and Association Mapping of Quantitative Trait Loci
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2005,06/09/2006
* Ruzong Fan,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 61,147.00

The objectives of the project are to develop statistical methods and algorithms
for linkage and association mapping of quantitative trait loci. The research
includes: (1) to extend existing methodology to analyze non-temporal genetic
data; (2) to create novel approaches and models to analyze temporally
longitudinal human genetic data. The projects include the model building and
testing, well-designed simulation studies, and applications to empirical
datasets. Algorithms and software will be developed based on the techniques
developed in the research. For longitudinal human genetic data, multiple
measurements of quantitative or qualitative traits are taken for each individual
over time, in addition to the genotype information and covariates such as
gender, age, and familial income. The theory of stochastic processes will be
applied to build models and methods in longitudinal genetic study.

In human genetics, one important issue is to locate and to identify important
genetic variants/determinants of complex traits. Complex diseases are familial,
but the mode of inheritance is uncertain. Many common diseases are complex
disorders, such as asthma, diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, psychiatric disorders,
Parkinson's disease, cardiovascular disease, and arthritis. With the development
of the Human Genome Project, high resolution micro-satellite and chromosome-wide
haplotype maps of human genome, enormous amounts of genetic data on human
chromosomes are becoming available. The opportunities for genome-wide scan to
map complex disease genes are tremendous. However, it is not yet clear how to
extract the most useful information for complex disease gene mapping. To fully
utilize the massive genetic data for complex disease gene mappings, novel
mathematical and statistical methods are crucial. The investigator develops
appropriate models and handy algorithms in linkage and association mapping of
complex diseases. This helps to identify important genetic variants/determinants
of complex traits. The Broader Impacts are: (1) To advance discovery of common
disease genes and to facilitate identification of drug targets for medical
sciences and the pharmaceutical industry to benefit society and to enhance
public health; (2) to make algorithms and software for disease gene mapping
publicly available, and to upgrade and enhance general research and education
infrastructure; (3) to help develop an interdisciplinary graduate program in
training a new generation of researchers in bioinformatics.
