
* 0505552
* Unified Robust Multivariate Analysis Including High-Dimensional Testing Based on Scaler Scale Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,05/09/2005
* Kesar Singh,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 75,002.00

Abstract

Unified Robust Multivariate Analysis Including High-Dimensional Testing Based on
Scaler Scale Analysis Kesar Singh

The goal of this proposal is to develop a general framework for multiparameter
testing based on the concept of scale curves. Using a scale curve to measure the
scale of a distribution, in comparison with the traditional variance-covariance
matrix, has two distinct advantages: i) it provides a scalar measure and thus
easier to grasp its magnitude than the complex matrix measure; and ii) the scale
curve is a simple curve on the plane no matter how high the dimension of the
data, and this curve can be easily visualized and interpreted. The tests
proposed in this proposal are completely nonparametric and robust; and the
parameters considered range from the standard ones to high-dimensional
parameters pertaining to gene expression, astro-statistical and various
functional data. It accomplishes the highly complex testing tasks through easy
to read figures of scale bands. This scale curve based methodology can be easily
comprehensible and implementable by all practitioners of statistics.

The methodology developed in this proposal will broaden substantially the
application of scale curves and classical multivariate statistical analysis,
while bringing down the level of technical complexities. Progress from this
proposal should further the statistics discipline as a whole, and facilitate
many practical applications in domains such as genetics, and risk management.
For the educational purposes, the proposed research activities will allow the
student to learn about modern statistics techniques such as robust multivariate
analysis, the bootstrap, analysis of gene expression data, etc. Through this
project, they can acquire both theoretical research skills and hands-on
experience with real life data. Such training is essential for student to become
contributing statisticians in the future.


