
* 0505696
* Model-based Classification of Longitudinal and Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2005,05/04/2006
* Mohsen Pourahmadi,IL,Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 60,084.00

The idea of classification permeates many scientific studies and arises in
almost every area of human endeavors including the classical problems of
numerical taxonomy and market segmentation, and the modern areas of machine
learning, experimental spectroscopy and biotechnology. Fisher's linear
classifier which maximizes the separation between the groups in the spirit of
analysis of variance requires multivariate normality for each group with a
common covariance matrix. For heterogeneous covariance matrices, the optimal
classifier is no longer linear and has poor performance for small samples.
Though there are many heuristic and ad hoc methods to handle the case of unequal
covariances, model-based approaches using mixtures of multivariate normal
distributions and the spectral decomposition of the covariance matrices have
shown great promise for the traditional multivariate data. The goal of this
research is to develop new and flexible classification methods for longitudinal,
functional and multivariate time series data using the Cholesky decomposition of
covariance matrices instead of their spectral decompositions. For such data, the
Cholesky decomposition is more suitable and its components enjoy both
statistical interpretation as certain regression coefficients and geometric
interpretation in terms of volumes, shapes and orientations of ellipsoids
representing various groups in the data. It is proposed to study the
computational, statistical and empirical aspects of using the Cholesky
decomposition and compare the results with those obtained using the spectral
decomposition. The methods and tools to be employed include: generalized linear
and mixed models, factor analysis, time series analysis, maximum likelihood and
Bayesian estimation of mixture models in the presence of missing values, cross-
validation and bootstrap. The proposed research will extend classical
discriminant analysis to longitudinal and functional data. It is of great
practical interest and will provide insight into when a particular
classification method can be expected to work well, and may lead to the
development of new classification criteria and methods for discriminating
between nuclear explosions and earthquakes. A problem which is of critical
importance for monitoring a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The broader impact of
the proposed work can be seen in settings where high-dimensional and large
amounts of multivariate data are collected, such as clinical trials,
biotechnology, environmental monitoring and global change, epidemiology and
financial econometrics.
