
* 0505265
* Gene Tree-Species Tree Relationships Under the Coalescent Process
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2005,07/25/2005
* Laura Kubatko,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 02/28/2007
* USD 74,999.00

Abstract

Prop ID: DMS-0505265 Prev Awd: 0104290 PI: Salter, Laura Institution: University
of New Mexico Title: Gene Tree-Species Tree Relationships Under the Coalescent
Process

In this proposal, incongruence in gene trees and species trees is examined using
data from multiple genes in the context of the coalescent process. First, the
investigator will show that one currently advocated approach for the analysis of
data from multiple genes, the concatenation approach, can be statistically
inconsistent, even when a consistent method of phylogenetic tree estimation is
used. Second, an algorithm for maximum likelihood (ML) estimation of species
trees from data on multiple genes under the coalescent model will be developed
and implemented, and will be made freely available via the internet. The
availability of a method for ML species tree estimation will allow for
likelihood-based hypothesis testing of phylogeographic and population genetic
hypotheses. Further, methods for assessing uncertainty in the species tree
estimates will be developed by extending traditional bootstrapping methods in
phylogenetics to the case in which data have been collected for multiple genes
sampled randomly throughout the genome. Finally, tests for the adequacy of the
coalescent model will be developed by examining whether the observed gene trees
are consistent with a given species tree using several metrics to measure levels
of incongruence.

The inference of the evolutionary history of a collection of organisms based on
the information contained in their DNA sequences is a problem of fundamental
importance in evolutionary biology. The abundance of DNA sequence data arising
from genome sequencing projects has led to significant challenges in the
inference of these phylogenetic relationships. Among these challenges is the
inference of the evolutionary history of a collection of species based on DNA
sequence information from several distinct genes sampled throughout the genome.
This project studies the effect of the coalescent process on the inference of
species phylogenies using data from multiple genes. This work will first
demonstrate that failure to model the coalescent process can lead to incorrect
inferences of species relationships. The investigator will then develop methods
that can accurately estimate species phylogenies through explicitly modeling the
coalescent process, and will apply these estimation procedures to construct
techniques for hypothesis testing and for measuring uncertainty in estimated
species phylogenies.

--


