
* 0515990
* Adaptive Regression for Dependent Data by Combining Different Procedures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 12/15/2004,03/28/2005
* Yuhong Yang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 81,226.00

This proposal concerns research and education on adaptive regression when the
random errors are dependent. Many procedures have been (and will be) proposed
for nonparametric regression based on different assumptions. In applications, a
difficulty a user often faces is the choice of the best method for the data at
hand. This is specially the case for high-dimensional function estimation, where
to overcome the curse of dimensionality, various parsimonious models such as
projection pursuit, CART, neural nets, additive models, MARS, etc. are proposed
according to different characterizations of the target function. A main interest
in this research is to construct adaptive estimators by combining a collection
of candidate procedures. The goal for the combined procedure is to perform
automatically as well as (or nearly as well as) the best original procedure
without knowing which one it is. The random errors will be assumed to be
generally dependent, including both short- and long-range cases. The effects of
dependence on adaptation capability will be studied. It is anticipated that
theoretically proven and computationally feasible algorithms will be proposed to
combine regression procedures targeted at various characteristics of the
regression function and different dependence structures for the random errors.

Function estimation is an important statistical tool that tries to understand
accurately the functional relationships between variables based on data and it
has applications in many disciplines for successfully addressing scientific
questions. In reality, observations are always subject to random noise (error)
from different sources. When the random errors are dependent on each other, the
dependence may disguise the functional relationship of interest. Long-range
dependence refers to a situation where the errors are still highly correlated
even when they occur at times or locations that are far away from each other. It
is known that such a long-range dependence makes the estimation of the target
function much harder. In applications, the degree of dependence between the
errors is usually unknown, which makes the function estimation problem even
harder. In this proposal, we intend to develop methods that adaptively handle
different degrees of dependence among the errors so that the function of
interest can be estimated optimally without knowing the dependence structure of
the errors. The research results and related work by others on long-range
dependent data will be brought to students at various levels in several
statistics courses. Collaborations will be conducted with several professors at
Iowa State University and their students in atmospheric science, electrical
engineering, agronomy and possibly other fields to appropriately address long-
range dependence phenomena, which have been encountered often and known to cause
problems in data analysis with the existing statistical methods.
