
* 0520687
* Sixth International Conference on Forensic Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS, LSS-Law And Social Sciences
* 04/15/2005,04/04/2005
* David Kaye,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 03/31/2006
* USD 11,000.00

The International Conference on Forensic Statistics is the only conference that
brings statisticians, forensic scientists, social scientists, legal scholars,
judges, prosecutors, lawyers, and other experts together for formal
presentations, discussion, and debate on the varied uses of probability and
statistics in legislative, administrative and judicial proceedings. The sixth
conference in this series, sponsored by the Arizona State University Center for
the Study of Law, Science and Technology, and the Institute for Mathematical
Statistics, will be held in Tempe, Arizona, from March 17 to 19, 2005. Sessions
will center on analytical methods and interpretation in forensic science,
statistical studies of discrimination and fairness, and experimentation on jury
understanding of scientific and statistical evidence. Researchers will describe
current work on statistical issues and models in the analysis of fibers, glass
fragments, bullet lead, drugs, writing style, and fingerprints; on Bayesian and
other methods for interpreting DNA profiles in complex and problematic cases; on
social and statistical issues in searching convicted offender DNA databases; and
on many other applications of statistical and logical inference in legal studies
and litigation.



The conference is intended to spur the development of suitable statistical and
related methods that will improve law enforcement and civil justice. The logical
issues involved in forensic statistics are subtle and entail cross-disciplinary
work with experts in diverse fields. DNA evidence, for example, has introduced
daunting problems of statistical analysis, with complications such as samples
comprising mixtures of DNA from more than one person and the identification of
possible offenders through extensive searches of DNA databases. The highly
publicized false fingerprint identification in the March 11 Madrid train bombing
case and the weaknesses of the statistical aspects of existing bullet lead
identification procedures identified in a recent National Academy of Science
report commissioned by the FBI underscore the importance of improvements in the
analysis and presentation of forensic evidence. These are but a sampling of the
issues that will be illuminated by the many presentations from researchers in
the fields of computer science, probability and statistics, biology, chemistry,
linguistics, psychology, sociology, and law.


