
* 0527798
* Summer Research Conference on Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2005,04/15/2005
* Herman Senter,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 04/30/2006
* USD 10,000.00

The Southern Regional Council on Statistics (SRCOS) together with the American
Statistical Association is holding a Summer Research Conference (SRC) in
Statistics during June 5-8, 2005, on the Clemson University campus in Clemson,
South Carolina. The conference objective is to bring together statistics
researchers of all academic levels in a relaxed and stimulating atmosphere. The
program includes five technical sessions that focus on major research areas in
statistics: Time Series, Spatial Statistics, Survival Analysis and Reliability
Theory, Markov Chains, and Bootstrap and Computational Statistics. Two
additional sessions deal with issues in Statistics education, one focusing on
trends and directions, the other on emerging pedagogical tools and technologies.
A poster session is open for graduate students and other attendees to present
their research. The sessions of the conference are not concurrent. Those
attending the conference will be exposed to a wide range of topics of general
and specific interest and to a range of speakers (20) bringing different
perspectives to the material.

The research topic areas are broad, with applications of the methodologies in a
spectrum of fields (such as medicine, education, business, etc.) The individual
90-minutes sessions, featuring a senior speaker and two junior ones, are
structured to provide in-depth coverage of the topic, from an overview by the
senior speaker to specific, current research problems of the junior researchers.
Advanced graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior researchers are
encouraged to attend and present in the judged poster session. Support to offset
travel expenses for students and junior researchers by NSF is gratefully
acknowledged.
