
* 0534181
* Complex Datasets and Inverse Problems: Tomography, Networks, and Beyond; Rutgers University - New Brunswick, NJ; October 21-22, 2005
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2005,07/14/2005
* Cun-Hui Zhang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 16,000.00

Abstract Prop ID: DMS-0534181 PI: Zhang, Cun-Hui PO: Shulamith T. Gross
Institution: Rutgers University New Brunswick Title: Complex Datasets and
Inverse Problems: Tomography, Networks, and Beyond

The conference ``Complex Datasets and Inverse Problems: Tomography, Networks,
and Beyond'' will be held October 21-22, 2005 at Rutgers University. The
conference will focus on a number of important and emerging interdisciplinary
areas of research, including medical tomography, networks, and biased data.
Statistical tomography algorithms have been playing crucial roles in the
development of medical imaging systems, from CAT, PET, SPECT to MRI. In fast
functional MRI, brain functions are studied from data sets composed of multiple
time series of incomplete Fourier transformation of the deoxy spin density of
the brain. Networks are abundant around us: social, energy, traffic,
communication, and computer are just some of the examples. Enormous amount of
networks data have been collected in the information age we live in, but few
statistical tools have been developed for analyzing them as they are typically
governed by time-varying and mutually dependent communication protocols sitting
on complicated graph-structured network topologies. Many prototypical
applications in these and other important technologies can be viewed as
statistical inverse problems with large, high-dimensional, and probably
biased/incomplete data, which serve as the unifying ground for the conference.

The conference will advance several important areas in statistics, including
models and methodologies for complex datasets, inverse problems, imaging
systems, networks, and incomplete and biased data. Cutting-edge developments of
statistical models, methods, and algorithms will be discussed. The conference
will have direct impact on a broad range of scientific applications outside the
immediate realm of statistics. Examples include functional MRI and other medical
imaging systems, telecommunication, energy, transportation, and social networks,
network security, bioinformatics, epidemiology, and clinical trials. The
conference is expected to attract researchers in different areas of
applications, in medical imaging, telecommunications, bio-medical engineering,
bioinformatics, epidemiology, and more. These will comprise both internationally
renowned experts and graduate students or young researchers who wish to embark
in these rapidly progressing interdisciplinary areas. Time will be generously
allotted for informal discussion and fruitful exchange of ideas. Through these
activities, the conference will play an important role in fostering new research
partnership between young and senior participants and among researchers in
different areas of applications. The conference will promote research
activities, education, and participation of new investigators, graduate
students, and researchers from under-represented groups. The proceedings of the
conference have been arranged to be published as a volume in the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics Monograph series. This publication will help disseminate
widely the advances covered in the conference, especially among the researchers
who are not able to attend the conference.


