
* 0536938
* Winter Workshop on Frontiers of Theoretical Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 12/01/2005,11/16/2005
* A. Khuri,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 11/30/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract:

The workshop "Frontiers of Theoretical Statistics" is dedicated to exploring the
most recent developments in the theory of statistics. These include saddlepoint
approximation, generalized linear mixed models, bootstrap techniques, Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods, Bayesian inference, and combinatorial optimization,
among others. The workshop will provide an assessment of the current state of
knowledge of theoretical statistics, identify the most pressing needs for future
developments, and foster cooperation among research workers. The 12 invited
workshop speakers are well-known leaders in theoretical statistics. They include
Jim Berger (Duke University), Peter Bickel (University of California at
Berkeley), Ronald Butler (Colorado State University), R. Dennis Cook (University
of Minnesota), Jim Fill (Johns Hopkins University), Peter McCullagh (University
of Chicago), Susan Murphy (University of Michigan), Nancy Reid (University of
Toronto), Christian Robert (Ceremade University, Paris, France), Michael Steele
(University of Pennsylvania), Steven Stigler (University of Chicago), and Bin Yu
(University of California at Berkeley). The workshop will be hosted by the
University of Florida Department of Statistics, and will be held at the J. Wayne
Reitz Union of the University of Florida during the period January 13-14, 2006.

Theoretical statistics is the foundation upon which all statistical
methodologies and applications are based. Many recent advances in science, such
as in biological and medical sciences, physical and engineering sciences, are
intimately connected to advanced statistical and computational procedures. Some
of the goals of the workshop are: (a) To identify some of the major scientific
questions and challenges in the field of theoretical statistics that can only be
studied through interactive research. Focusing on such problems and trying to
answer them will contribute to science and humanity in a significant way. (b) To
provide support to new researchers by bringing them in contact with experienced
statisticians. The 12 invited senior speakers are leading authorities on many
aspects of theoretical statistics. Their participation in the workshop will
undoubtedly help in inspiring and motivating the young researchers. (c) To
provide a platform for new collaborations on theoretical statistics and its many
related areas. (d) Given the growing interest in finding immediate and direct
applications of theoretical statistics, the workshop will provide an impetus to
permeate new ideas in this direction.
