
* 0541993
* Red Raider Mini-Symposium 2005: Geometry and Statistics and Image Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2005,11/01/2005
* Victor Patrangenaru,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 5,000.00

Red Raider Mini-Symposium, November 17-19, 2005 : "Geometry, Statistics and
Image Analysis" focuses on nonparametric statistics on manifolds, analyzes on
shape spaces, saddlepoint approximations and systems theory leading to frontiers
of science in medical imaging, system reliability, survival analysis, pattern
recognition and bioinformatics. Principal speakers are Rudy Beran, University of
California Davis, internationally renowned for his contributions to robust
statistics, directional data analysis, and bootstrapping; Rabindra Bhattacharya,
University of Arizona, internationally renowned for his contributions to large
sample theory, Edgeworth expansions and bootstrapping, statistics on manifolds
and stochastic partial differential equations; Ronald Butler, Colorado State
University, internationally renowned for his contributions to saddlepoint
methods, systems theory and stochastic networks, special function
approximations, robustness and likelihood inference; John Kent, University of
Leeds, United Kingdom, internationally renowned for his contributions to
multivariate statistics, shape analysis and stochastic models for protein
structure, robustness, spatial statistics, tomography; Peter Kim, University of
Guelph, Canada, internationally renowned for his contributions to the interface
between geometry and statistics, density estimation on Riemannian manifolds and
applications of statistics to image acquisition, Madan Puri, Indiana University,
internationally renowned for his contributions to nonparametric statistics,
splines, tests of normality, fuzzy sets and measures, stochastic processes,
statistics of directional data, random sets, and time series and Anuj
Srivastava, nationally renowned for his contributions to "image understanding"
which aims to develop automated systems that can match human abilities in
analyzing images.

This symposium is conceived to bring together outstanding researchers working in
the interface of geometry, statistics and image analysis and consists of a
series of lectures by outstanding scholars in vibrant areas of mathematics and
statistics, with important applications in astronomy and geophysics, homeland
security, medical imaging, computer vision and pattern recognition. These
lectures provide an opportunity to learn about new research venues for the
members of the statistical community, especially early career researchers and
graduate students including women and under represented minorities. This mini-
symposium provides a perfect medium for interaction and collaboration between
the conference participants and the distinguished speakers. It will be very
helpful for shaping future directions of statistical research that address
problems of high societal impact.
