
* 0600933
* Robust Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,04/18/2006
* David Olive,IL,Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2009
* USD 89,162.00

This research considers the development of computationally practical robust
multivariate location and dispersion estimators, robust multiple linear
regression estimators and resistant dimension reduction estimators along with
the corresponding theory. Regression is the study of the conditional
distribution of the response variable given a vector of the predictor variables.
Dimension reduction searches for a lower dimensional vector of predictors that
carries all the information relevant to the regression. A 1D regression is a
special case of dimension regression and can be visualized in a plot of the
estimated sufficient predictor versus the response. Many of the most used
statistical procedures, including multiple linear regression and generalized
linear models, are special cases of 1D regression. Robust estimators are needed
since existing methods for dispersion, regression and dimension reduction such
as ordinary least squares and sliced inverse regression often perform poorly in
the presence of outliers.

Statistics is the science of extracting useful information from data and is used
by industry and government and in the fields of engineering, biological
sciences, geological and environmental sciences, information technology,
medicine, physical sciences, and the social sciences. Applications of the
methods under investigation include biomedical research, predicting future
observations based on previous data, and the analysis of economic and social
data. Increasingly complex high dimensional data sets are being collected for
scientific, social and strategic purposes. These data sets tend to contain
outliers which are observations that differ from the bulk of the data. Typing
and recording errors (e.g., 1000 or 10 pound women) may create outliers, but
often there is no simple explanation for a group of data that differs from the
bulk of the data. Robust statistics combined with dimension reduction is perhaps
the most promising technique for making the most used methods of statistics
simultaneously easier and more effective. Hence the research is also likely to
have a great impact on statistical education.


