
* 0603913
* Collaborative Research: Empirical Likelihood Based Statistical Methods for Diagnostic Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2006,06/16/2009
* Gengsheng Qin,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2009
* USD 79,935.00

The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve methodology is the statistical
methodology for assessment of the accuracy of prediction rules. It is commonly
used in a wide range of scientific fields such as signal detection theory,
medical imaging, weather forecasting, real and false alarms testing for anti-
terrorist system, and diagnostic medicine. Motivated by assessing diagnostic
accuracy of Dermoscope, prostate cancer screening test, and audio test and the
need to find tractable and easily implemented solution to complex statistical
problems in ROC studies, in this project the investigators develop new semi-
parametric and nonparametric statistical methods for ROC analysis, particularly
on the statistical inferences for the partial areas or the full areas under the
ROC curves (AUC) and ROC and AUC regression models. In this project, the
investigators extend the traditional empirical likelihood (EL) to the setting of
ROC analysis in three directions: (1) to develop EL-based semi-parametric
methods for the partial areas under the ROC curves, (2) to develop EL-based
nonparametric methods for the partial or full areas under the ROC curves, and
(3) to develop EL-based statistical methods for ROC and AUC regression models.
The new methods are expected to be more robust and more accurate than the
existing methods in evaluation of competing diagnostic systems. They have
potentially better small sample performances than the existing methods. A
software is developed for the actual use of the newly proposed methods for ROC
analysis. The methods developed from this project are great addition to existing
medical diagnostic testing and applicable to a wide range of scientific fields.

High-tech diagnostic systems of various kinds around us have been made
tremendous progress in the last two decades. Many new diagnostic systems have
been used to reveal diseases in people, malfunctions in nuclear power plants,
flaws in manufactured products, collision courses of aircraft, threatening
activities of terrorists, etc. However, costs of diagnostic systems can be high.
To select more accurate diagnostic system for widespread use, it is important to
develop appropriate statistical methods for evaluating the diagnostic accuracy
of competing systems. The use of attractive statistical methods like the semi-
parametric and nonparametric methods for ROC analysis developed in this project
is going to help diagnostic systems users make informed choices of the most
reliable diagnostic systems. This may contribute to the reduction of health care
costs in the long run.
