
* 0603868
* Multiple Testing: Further Development Of Theory And Methodology
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2006,05/22/2006
* Sanat Sarkar,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2009
* USD 169,907.00

MULTIPLE TESTING: FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THEORY AND METHODOLOGY

The primary goal of the investigator in this project is further development of
statistical theory and methodology for problems in multiple hypothesis testing.
Having realized that the traditional idea of controlling the familywise error
rate (FWER) is too stringent to use when large number of hypotheses are tested,
researchers have recently focused on defining less stringent error rates and
developing methods that control them. The false discovery rate (FDR) is the
first of these receiving considerable attention, even though there are still a
number of important related issues that are yet to be answered. The
probabilities of rejecting at least a number more than one and the false
discovery proportion exceeding a certain threshold are the two most recently
introduced concepts that generalize the FWER and represent meaningful
alternatives to the FDR. While some methods controlling them have been suggested
very recently, the potential to developing newer and more powerful procedures is
revealed by some recent work by the investigator. The development of such new
procedures and investigative studies comparing them to related methods,
theoretically as well as empirically, will be one major thrust of the present
research. When testing multiple null hypotheses against two-sided alternatives,
making directional decisions for the alternative hypotheses corresponding to the
rejected ones with a control of false directional rejections is often desired.
While such a procedure has been recently put forward in the framework of the
FDR, there is a good potential of developing newer procedures in light of some
work of the investigator together with students and colleagues. The development
of such new procedures will be the second major thrust of this research.

The results from this research will be of importance to virtually any
statistical investigation where questions are posed in terms of testing several
hypotheses. One particular area of application is DNA microarrays which are a
new and promising biotechnology that can monitor expression levels in cells for
thousands of genes simultaneously. The identification of differentially
expressed genes is an important and common question in these experiments. The
biological question of differential expression is framed as a statistical
problem of multiple hypotheses testing: the simultaneous test for each gene of
the null hypothesis that the expression levels do not associate with the
responses or covariates of interest. Developing a statistical procedure of
discovering the genes that are differentially expressed by controlling
statistical measures of false discoveries or false non-discoveries at a desired
level is one of the central issues in such a problem. Another area of
application is pharmaceutical investigations where multiple testing techniques
are routinely used in dose-response study or in evaluating a drug's efficacy
over a standard drug or placebo. This research has the potential to generate
collaborations with researchers in the biopharmaceutical industry and medical
schools. It would also benefit education through training of graduate students,
incorporation of the developed methodologies in statistics courses, and writing
textbooks.
