
* 0603890
* Theory and practice of nonparametric detection
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,12/27/2010
* Ery Arias-Castro,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2011
* USD 119,999.00

The scan statistic, or matched filter, has been extensively used for detection
tasks. In many instances, a parametric model is assumed for simplicity and
computational limitations. Also, various parametric settings for detection have
been studied over the years. In particular, the investigator has done a study
that establishes minimax rates for a large variety of problems and proves that
the scan statistic achieves the optimal rate. However, most detection problems
are nonparametric in nature, making it important to gain similar insight into
nonparametric detection problems. By studying the problem of detection on graphs
and drawing connections with Statistical Mechanics, the investigator brings a
new understanding of such problems. The investigator also designs flexible
graphical structures based on multiscale ideas to be the corner stone for
developing new tools in various applied settings.

The problem of detection arises in a wide variety of settings such as in
analyzing galaxy catalogs; object tracking; road tracking; satellite imagery,
which includes detecting man-made objects, detecting ships and fires;
environment monitoring, which includes controlling pollution levels of water
sources, detection of disease outbreaks and detection/localization of whales in
the Ocean from acoustic data. The investigator studies the theoretical
properties of the scan statistic in more complex (nonparametric) models for such
detection tasks. Though the scan statistic has been extensively used in
virtually all such problems, its behavior is mostly known under rather
simplified (parametric) assumptions. Further, the investigator develops new
tools for implementing the scan statistic in such complex detection settings.
Such efficient tools are currently needed in many Scientific and Engineering
fields, such as Astrophysics, in detecting galaxy clusters.


