
* 0604801
* Cluster-Based Bootstrapping in Multiple Hypotheses Testing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,04/28/2006
* Jeffrey Hart,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 97,000.00

Cluster-Based Bootstrapping in Multiple Hypotheses Testing

The subject of this investigation is nonparametric methodology designed to
provide sound inferences in large-scale multiple testing problems. In
particular, situations are considered in which one observes a large number of
small data sets and wishes to test as many hypotheses as there are data sets. A
primary concern is ensuring validity of tests when the data generating mechanism
is largely unknown. A fundamental model considered is one wherein the
distribution of data within small data sets is the same, up to location and
scale, for all data sets. This distribution is assumed to determine the sampling
distributions of all test statistics, and hence, given an estimate of the
within-data-sets distribution, the bootstrap can be used to estimate the
requisite sampling distributions. Cluster analysis is investigated as a means of
nonparametrically estimating the common within-data-sets distribution and also
the joint distribution of location and scale parameters across data sets.
Asymptotic properties of such estimates are investigated. These asymptotics
allow the number of small data sets to tend to infinity, but bound the sizes of
individual data sets. Extensions to models where the distributions across data
sets differ with respect to more than just location and scale are also
considered. A key idea in these extensions is defining and consistently
estimating one or a small number of reference distributions that define critical
values for all test statistics. This allows one to use existing technology to
control the false discovery rate even though all test statistics have different
sampling distributions, none of which can be estimated consistently.

Important areas of application for the research funded by this grant are
microarray analysis and proteomics, both of which provide enormous insight into
the study of genetics. The methods investigated have the potential of improving
methods of analyzing microarray and proteomics data. Genetics has had and will
continue to have a tremendous impact on society, particularly in the area of
medicine. Therefore, any method that improves upon existing technology for
analyzing genetics data has the potential of enhancing the general quality of
life.




