
* 0604596
* Invariant Coordinate Selection (ICS): A Robust Statistical Perspective on Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,05/01/2008
* David Tyler,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2009
* USD 138,000.00

ABSTRACT

Independent component analysis (ICA) is an increasingly popular method for
analyzing multivariate data within many diverse disciplines, such as computer
vision, psychology, electrical engineering, physics and meteorology. Although
essentially a multivariate statistical method, the primary development of ICA
has come from outside the area of statistics. Methods developed for ICA presume
somewhat specialized models for multivariate data. Nevertheless, these methods
tend to possess some natural robustness properties, and consequently, have been
used for exploratory data analysis in general and for cluster analysis or
unsupervised learning in particular. At present, the statistical properties of
ICA methods are not well understood. One goal of the proposed research is thus
to conduct a study of the statistical and robustness properties of ICA methods.
Another goal of the proposed research is to study the use of ICA methods as
general multivariate statistical methods rather than simply as solutions to the
ICA problem. To accomplish this, a new model free interpretation of ICA methods,
together with some extensions of these methods, is to be introduced and
developed. The principal investigator refers to this model free approach as
invariant coordinate selection (ICS).

The proposed research should have an impact on the many scientific and
engineering disciples using ICA models by providing a better statistical
understanding of their methods, consequently leading to improved methods and
applications. An important application of ICA models, for example, is in the
unraveling of convoluted signals or sources. The proposed research will also
help call further attention to these important statistical problems to the
general statistics research community. In addition, it is anticipated that the
proposed introduction and development of the ICS methodology will provide
important and potentially very popular new methods for exploring and analyzing
multivariate data, perhaps similar to the importance of principal component
analysis or discriminant analysis. These more general ICS methods should have
impact not only within the statistics community but also within the varied
disciplines, such as psychology, biology, geology, and others, that routinely
deal with multivariate data.
