
* 0604396
* Robust Functional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,03/27/2009
* Daniel Gervini,WI,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 119,894.00

The analysis of samples of curves is a field of growing importance in
Statistics. Samples of curves arise in longitudinal studies, where random
processes are observed on groups of individuals. Often some of these curves are
atypical compared with the rest of the sample, due either to individual
peculiarities or to measurement errors. The most common techniques for
functional data analysis are very sensitive to outlying curves, which may lead
to invalid statistical inference. Outlier-resistant multivariate techniques are,
in most cases, not directly applicable to functional data, where the number of
observations per curve is usually larger than the sample size. Therefore, the
investigator's goal is to develop robust methods for functional data analysis
that provide valid statistical inference even in presence of a significant
proportion of outlying curves. In particular, outlier-resistant estimators for
the mean and the variance components are proposed and studied. The properties of
these estimators (such as consistency, asymptotic distribution and breakdown
point) are studied theoretically and empirically, the latter by simulation and
analysis of real datasets. Algorithms and computer software implementing these
methods are being developed.

Examples of functional data are human growth curves, gene expression profiles,
and daily weather and environmental indicators (such as precipitation,
temperature, pressure, pollution level), to mention just a few. Thus, detection
of atypical growth curves can provide new insights into the effect of diseases
or other unusual circumstances on human growth, and detection of unusual gene
expression profiles can help understand the genetic causes of abnormal
biological processes or diseases. These examples illustrate the potential for
application of the methods being developed by the investigator to areas beyond
Statistics, such as public health and environmental sciences.
