
* 0604576
* Some New Developments in Competing Risks Models -- Extensions and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,04/07/2008
* Yanqing Sun,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 119,999.00

In this project, the investigator studies an extension of the competing risks
model to allow a continuum of competing risks, in which the cause of failure is
replaced by a continuous mark variable only observed at the uncensored failure
times, and its applications in the HIV vaccine efficacy studies. The
investigator develops statistical methods for the mark-specific proportional
hazards model, allowing the regression parameters to depend nonparametrically on
the mark and the baseline hazard to depend nonparametrically on both time and
mark. This research is motivated by the need to assess HIV vaccine efficacy,
while taking into account the divergence of infecting HIV viruses in trial
participants from the HIV strain that is contained in the vaccine, and adjusting
for covariate effects. The vaccine efficacy is expressed in terms of one of the
regression functions in a mark-specific proportional hazards model. The research
can find applications in other medical researches as well. The mark-specific
proportional hazards model and its applications to vaccine efficacy trials is
investigated when the mark variable is dsicrete/continuous and
univariate/multivariate. It is studied under the case-cohort designs where some
of the covariates may only be observed for a subset of the sample. The
semiparametric mark-specific proportional hazards model is also studied. The
statistical procedures concerning the mark-specific hazards functions naturally
extend the scope of methods that have been developed for competing risks data
with discrete marks and for failure time data with single cause of failure.
Since the mark-specific relative risks measure not only the relative risks of
developing the end-point event given the marks, but also depend on differential
exposure to the marks, one needs to be careful in their interpretations. To
allow for greater flexibility, direct modeling of the conditional hazard
function of failure time given the mark and covariate is considered. The new
methods are justified theoretically, evaluated in simulations and applied to the
HIV vaccine efficacy trials.

The investigator studies an extension and new applications of the classical
competing risks model. The goal of the reseach is to develop statistically
efficient and biologically interpretable methods for evaluating and achieving
efficacious HIV vaccines. The theoretical justifications for the statistical
methods are very challenging. By pursuing this research, significant progress
could be made in the theory of competing risks models and its applications. The
methods developed in this research will be used to analyze the data collected
from the HIV vaccine efficacy trials and provide useful input for developing
more effective vaccines. The research of the problems proposed here will also
generate many research topics at different levels suitable for graduate and
undergraduate studies, therefore promotes involvements of students in the
research of current sciences.


