
* 0604997
* Symmetry and Asymmetry in Experimental Design
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2006,06/01/2006
* John Morgan,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 144,276.00

Blocking of experimental material is a fundamental device for variance reduction
in the design of comparative experiments. The investigator is exploring
efficient applications of this principle from three distinct perspectives based
on symmetry/asymmetry notions in the treatments to be compared, in the available
experimental material, and in external restrictions on the set of permissible
designs. Conventional design optimality theory rests strongly on the assumption
of equality of treatment interest, expressed through summary measures of
experimental information that are invariant to treatment permutation. The first
goal is to develop a coherent optimality theory for evaluating designs when
permutability is not tenable, that is, when experimenters are faced with
asymmetry in treatment interest. Equality of treatment replications is another
conventional symmetry that, depending on the number of blocks available and
their sizes, can result in underutilization of resources and consequent
reduction of information. The second goal is to develop theory for dealing with
asymmetry of treatment replication in a comprehensive fashion. In some
experiments it is demanded that blocks be partitioned into subsets so that each
treatment occurs exactly once in each subset; a design for this situation is
said to be resolvable. Resolvability is an added symmetry in treatment
assignment, over that ordinarily required of a block design. The third goal is
to extend theory for optimal resolvable designs to cover numbers of treatments,
replicates and block sizes for which there are currently no available results.

Collectively, the investigator is pursuing an approach to the design of
comparative experiments that, by virtue of wider applicability, can compile
significantly expanded design catalogs as resources for experimenters in a wide
range of disciplines. A component of each of the problems described above, as
the optimality theory evolves, is the building and compiling of designs for many
combinations of blocks and treatments, and cataloging these online for free
access by researchers, experimenters, and statistical practitioners. Making good
designs easily available provides a basic tool for more efficient
experimentation, aiding progress in scientific advancement and industrial
innovation by increasing the quality of information that experiments can
produce.






