
* 0604896
* A Synthesis of Objective Bayes Factors for Model Selection and Hypothesis Testing
* DMS,STATISTICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2006,07/07/2006
* Luis Pericchi,PR,University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 71,549.00

Objective Bayesian testing and model selection has become an important research
subject recently, due to the widely accepted Bayesian principle and lack of
practical tools for testing and model selection under the Bayesian framework. In
this project the investigator develops 'synthesis Bayes Factor', taking into
account the main contributions so far, and develops substantial new theory,
methodology and computer software to reach the level of everyday practice.
Practical and specific guidelines with sound priors are developed for the most
common tests, like the Student-t test, F-Test, Goodness of Fit, test for
homoscesdasticity or test for correlation among variables. There is no easy
solution: To comply with desiderata of Objectivity and Large and Small sample
consistency, the Bayes Factors can not be based on Conjugate Priors, like
g-priors. The main tool to develop these tests is the Theory of Intrinsic
Priors, which digs out the implicit priors associated with several objective
Bayesian methods, like Intrinsic Bayes Factors, Fractional Bayes Factors, EP-
Priors, Bayes Factors based on Tests Statistics, etc. The guiding principle is
to accept an Objective Bayesian Test, only when the associated prior is sensible
and the procedure is consistent and objective. In this project, Objective
Bayesian Student-t tests, F-Tests, Homoscesdasticity tests, Goodness of Fit test
and a small sample Bayes Factor approximation, an improved BIC, are developed
and justified.

The University of Puerto Rico (UPR) is one of the major educational institutions
in the USA, that is comprised of underrepresented groups. Thus this project will
naturally integrates diversity into the NSF programs. The Rio Piedras (RP)
Campus in San Juan is the largest and oldest campus of the UPR University
System. The Department of Mathematics is affiliated to the College of Natural
Sciences, along with the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Physics, Environmental Studies and the Institute of Tropical Ecosystems Studies.
It is notorious that Statistics needs reinforcement in the College, both in
terms of courses given and research output. Bayesian Statistics is undergoing an
important development worldwide. It is seen with interest by several researchers
in the UPR, particularly in Environmental Sciences, Biology, the Campus of
Medical Sciences and the Engineering School at the Mayaguez Campus. This project
serves as a focal point to the development of Bayesian Statistics in the
University, and this development will influence the university as well as some
Federal Agencies as USGS. This project also strengthens the PhD program in
Mathematics and the PhD program in Computer Science, and will serve as support
of one Ph.D student whose thesis would be directly developed under this grant.
