
* 0604318
* Saddlepoint and Bootstrap Methods in Stochastic Systems and Related Fields
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,06/11/2007
* Ronald Butler,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 10/31/2007
* USD 95,753.00

Abstract

The author proposes to develop a complete framework for implementing
nonparametric statistical inference in stochastic systems. These stochastic
systems are semi-Markov processes and include most of the commonly used
stochastic models in reliability, multi-state survival analysis, epidemic
modeling, and communication and manufacturing systems. Three tools are required
to complete the framework: cofactor rules for transforms, saddlepoint
approximations to invert the transforms, and the bootstrap to provide
statistical inference in conjunction with the two previous tools. With any one
of the three tools missing, statistical inference is no longer generally
possible. Such a complete theory was the goal of the cybernetics movement during
the late 40s to mid 70s which devoted a great deal of effort into developing a
Laplace transform approach to such modelling. Ultimately this approach failed
due to the difficulty of inverting the transforms involved, a task very
successfully performed by using saddlepoint approximations. It also lacked a
statistical theory of inference, a need that is filled admirably by the
bootstrap. The work of this proposal takes a step towards achieving the ultimate
aims of the cybernetics movement: to facilitate probability computations and
nonparametric (bootstrap) inference for stochastic systems that cannot be easily
achieved by other means. Bootstrap simulation for inference without saddlepoint
assistance is beyond computational feasibility for systems of even modest size
and complexity. This project proposes to develop a complete framework for
implementing nonparametric statistical inference in complex stochastic systems.
These stochastic systems include most of the commonly used stochastic models
used in reliability, multi-state survival analysis, epidemic modelling, and
communication and manufacturing systems. The proposal also addresses significant
questions in other disciplines where answers are lacking due to certain
computational difficulties. In population genetics, solutions are provided for
statistical inference problems dealing with natural selection, mutation and
genetic drift; in ocean and electrical engineering accurate approximations are
given for distributions of wave crest heights in models used for sea surfaces
and in signal processing; in biological models for the transmission of pain
through the nervous system, methods are given to allow inferences about the
underlying mechanisms that drive the fluctuating polarities of these ion channel
models with the ultimate aim of helping to reveal the mechanisms that control
pain sensation.
