
* 0604229
* Inferential Methods for Quantile Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2006,04/13/2009
* Xuming He,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2010
* USD 374,543.00

While least squares regression targets the conditional mean function in a
regression model, quantile regression provides more complete information on the
conditional distribution of the response variable. It is especially valuable
when there is heteroscedasticity or general heterogeneity in the population. To
facilitate quantile regression modelling in a wider areas of applications, this
proposal aims to develop inferential procedures for quantile regression models
to account for the presence of random-effects or random censoring in the
observations. Although random-effects and censoring have been well studied under
linear models equipped with parametric, and often Gaussian, likelihoods, the
conventional inference procedures do not have straightforward extensions to the
quantile regression model when standard minimal assumptions are made on the
conditional distributions. The principle investigator aims to make focused
attempts in developing new ideas and tools to make possible appropriate
inference in quantile regression models with random-effects or with censoring.
The proposed research will build upon the recent developments in quantile
regression modelling and incorporate some innovative ideas to develop
appropriate inferential methods that are mathematically justified, mainly
through large sample theory, and statistically meaningful at realistic sample
sizes. Currently available methods for statistical inference in quantile
regression models are not well-developed to handle random-effects or random
censoring. For example, the analysis of GeneChip data in genomics would result
in inflated false discovery rates without taking the array effect as random. The
proposed research will develop new methods that preserve statistical confidence
in a wider range of quantile regression based applications. The PI will pursue
collaboration with other scientists to ensure that the methodologies under
development are valuable to researchers in the biological sciences, health
sciences, engineering, economics, and finance. The proposed activities will also
involve training of graduate students for future researchers in statistics as
well as providing selected undergraduate students with research experience.


