
* 0604670
* Monitoring Structural Changes in Dynamic Time Series Models
* DMS,STATISTICS, International Research Collab
* 07/01/2006,05/30/2007
* Lajos Horvath,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 180,960.00

Structural stability is one of the principal objects in modern time series
analysis and is of interest in fields as diverse as econometrics, geoscience,
engineering, climatology, computer science and signal processing. Clearly,
statistical analyses based on estimates derived from unstable relationships
under the false assumption of stability are meaningless and will doubtlessly
have far-reaching consequences. It is well-known that a variety of test
statistics used to detect structural changes of a certain type (ie, level
shifts) are also sensitive to other phenomena (ie, long memory). Examples are
abundant in the literature. This indicates the need to develop new and more
sophisticated procedures that not only detect existing changes but that can also
identify the specific underlying mechanism that governs the observed data.
Motivated by this need, the investigator's research is aimed at developing new
up-to-date statistical methods that allow for a deeper understanding of the
phenomenon under consideration. The framework is general enough to include
ramifications to a wide variety of applications. There are two main objectives,
econometrics and climatology. (1) One of the major concerns in econometrics is
to validate or reject the random walk hypothesis. Commonly, test statistics used
in the context have low power and are often sensitive not only to non-
stationarity but also to level shifts and long memory. New methods are proposed
that are able to distinguish between these phenomena. (2) In climatology, there
is a great controversy how to interpret weather related data such as hurricanes,
precipitation and temperatures (global warming, greenhouse effect). The
investigator proposes new methods involving the detection of multiple breaks
that will help to gain further insight.

The investigator's research is concerned with detecting time dependent changes
in environment. He believes to be able to contribute to the broad scientific
discussion by developing new and nonstandard statistical methods which will have
broad impacts in climatology and econometrics, and which will be of strategic
interest for the federal government. Many problems invite the question if a
previously assumed model is still valid and accurate or if a structural change
took place, and model assumptions, hence, have to be adapted towards a new
situation. Answering this questions certainly goes along with a demand for a
more detailed and diversified understanding of the nature of the particular
structural changes and the evolution of the competing models used to describe
them.
