
* 0604920
* Empirical Likelihood and Censored Quantile Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,04/15/2008
* Mai Zhou,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2009
* USD 199,993.00

This project is concerned with the development of statistical methodologies in
the regression analysis of censored data that can model both the average and
extreme responses. The investigators will develop a novel empirical likelihood
(EL) approach for the accelerated failure time (AFT) model and censored quantile
regression. Empirical likelihood is a recently developed nonparametric inference
method with asymptotic properties similar to the parametric maximum likelihood.
The novel EL approach uses sample points casewise and is less stringent than
previously proposed residual based empirical likelihood: the sample points are
not required to be identically distributed, and a more general form of
heteroscedasticity is permitted. An interesting application of the proposed
approach is to censored quantile regression. While quantile regression has
appeared as an alternative to the least squares with uncensored data as it
provides more complete information about the conditional distribution of the
response, its application to censored data has been limited due to the lack of
an efficient inference method, among other reasons. The proposed EL approach
will advance quantile analysis in censored regression and extend the domain of
EL inference in general.

The proposed research is of high federal strategic interest because the results
will accelerate many health, medical, and economic research projects where data
is incomplete and abnormal cases rather than the average are of interest, such
as low birth weight, high ozone concentration, cancer survival rates, or high
yield stock, among others. Traditional analyses focus on the center of the data
and implicitly assume that the results found for the average group are
generalizable to the entire patient group. However, this is usually not the
case. For example, an investigator in a survival study of cancer patients may
find that certain molecular biomarkers are prognostic factors only for those
ovarian cancer patients who die exceptionally early compared to others in the
same reference group. The quantile regression technique with the proposed
inference procedure permits the investigation of the biomarkers without
constraining their effects for different subpopulations to be same as for the
average group. Therefore, the proposed method can better inform health
professionals of the effects of physiological and molecular biomarkers on
different subpopulations and provide a useful prognostic tool for the overall
and progression free survival times.
