
* 0604666
* Joint modeling and analysis of longitudinal markers and recurrent events
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,04/12/2006
* Elizabeth Slate,SC,Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This project addresses modeling and inference for joint longitudinal and
recurrent event outcomes. Although there are a variety of models for analysis of
joint longitudinal and (single event) survival outcomes, the recurrent event
setting raises unique features that require nontrivial generalization. Among
these features is the interplay that may occur between the longitudinal and
recurrent event processes due to interventions at each event occurrence. The
investigator develops and implements a flexible class of models and associated
inferential procedures for this situation, building upon a latent class
approach. The properties of these methods are characterized relative to
alternative modeling approaches, such as generalizations of selection and shared
random effects models often used in the joint longitudinal-survival context.
Application to real data demonstrates practicality of the methods and that new
insight can be obtained.

This project addresses the situation where a series of event times is observed
for each subject under study, together with a series of readings on a quantity
(marker) that provides information about the risk for subsequent events.
Examples in the biomedical sciences include recurrent cancer and an associated
biological marker that conveys information about the risk for subsequent
cancers, and recurrent cardiovascular disease events and markers such as stress,
cholesterol or blood pressure levels. In engineering and reliability, the event
times may be machine breakdowns, with the marker being part fatigue. A context
relevant to national defense is the occurrence of terrorist acts with chatter an
associated marker. This project develops modeling and prediction methods for
this context that allow for the effects, on both the marker and event processes,
of interventions following event occurrences. In the example contexts given,
such interventions could be medical treatments, machine repairs, and changes in
defense postures, respectively. The methods combine information from both the
marker and observed event occurrence times to strengthen predictions about each.
The new methods are applied to real data to demonstrate their practicality and
that new insight can be obtained. The project also contributes to research
infrastructure by training graduate students.
