
* 0604722
* Statistical Analysis of the Filtering Models with Marked Point Process Observations: Applications to Ultra-High Frequency Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,07/11/2009
* Yong Zeng,MO,University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 94,454.00

With a new view of ultra-high frequency data, strong motivation from financial
market microstructure theory, and the powerful machinery of stochastic calculus,
this proposal studies two lines of the filtering problems with marked point
process observations. Line One has Markov signals and Line Two has long-memory
signals driven by fractional Brownian motion. For each line, the investigator
systematically develops the statistical analysis and its applications. The
investigator establishes the statistical foundations for inference: the
likelihoods, the posterior distribution, the likelihood ratio and the Bayes
factors. Typically, they are all infinite-dimensional and are characterized by
stochastic differential equations such as filtering equations. Such equations
are derived and the focus is on developing Bayesian inference via filtering for
the two models. Moreover, the investigator studies two approaches for
constructing high-performance computing algorithms for the on-line
implementation of the statistical analysis. One approach is the Markov chain
approximation method, and the other is particle filtering or sequential Monte
Carlo method. The mathematical foundations for the consistency of these
carefully-designed algorithms are established. Ultra-high frequency (or trade-
by-trade) data are widely available on increased market variables in all major
world financial markets and the filtering models are motivated from market
microstructure theory. With the filtering models and their established
statistical theory and tools, the investigator develops substantial financial
economic applications. These help market microstructure researchers to better
understand and model the real-time market dynamics, to better assess market
quality, and to better regulate financial markets.
