
* 0604931
* Measure of Dependence, Model Selection and Multiple Testing in Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2006,06/10/2008
* Kjell Doksum,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 140,001.00

This proposal considers multiple regression procedures for analyzing the
relationship between a response variable and a vector of covariates. It
introduces an approach which deals with the dilemma that with high dimensional
data the sparsity of data in regions of the sample space makes estimation of
nonparametric curves and surfaces virtually impossible by choosing procedures
whose relative variability (noise) is minimized. This is accomplished by
abandoning the goal of trying to estimate true underlying curves and instead
introducing measures of dependence that may be able to determine important
relationships between variables. These dependence measures are expressed in
terms of tuning constants that are chosen to maximize a signal to noise ratio.
More precisely, the tuning parameter is a vector which gives the window size of
local regions in the covariate space where we do local parametric fits of the
response variable to the covariates. The signal is a local estimate of a
dependence parameter which depends on the window size, and the noise is the
standard error (SE, an estimate of the standard deviation) of this estimate.
This approach of choosing the window size to maximize a signal to noise ratio
lifts the curse of dimensionality because for regions with sparsity of data the
SE is very large. It includes model selection where the variables that
contribute insignificant signals compared to their SE's are eliminated.

It is proposed to develop procedures that can be used to determine relationships
between factors in studies involving a large number of factors and complex
relationships. The proposed methodology is applicable generally without any
restrictive conditions. It involves the discovery of key relationships in
studies where there are a great number of factors that need to be screened for
their relevance. The dimension reduction and discovery techniques in this
proposal are useful in a variety of scientific and engineering contexts
including genetics and bioinformatics. In summary, it is proposed to develop
methods that will be useful in studies involving large and complex data sets
that are common in many areas including studies of health, the environment, and
finance.
