
* 0604563
* Statistical Inference for Continuous-Time Stochastic Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2006,05/31/2007
* Song Chen,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2010
* USD 205,016.00

This project considers parameter estimation and model testing for a wide range
of continuous-time processes used in stochastic modeling. They include processes
which have discontinuous sample paths, are multivariate, only partially observed
and are subject to long range dependence. Despite being wide ranging, a common
opportunity offered by these processes is that the conditional characteristic
functions are available for commonly used processes in stochastic modeling. The
investigators will develop a framework of statistical inference for stochastic
processes based on the conditional characteristic functions. They will consider
both parameter estimation and model testing by employing three modern
nonparametric tools of statistical inference: the kernel smoothing method, the
empirical likelihood and the bootstrap resampling method. Developing efficient
parameter estimators and robust test procedures for stochastic processes are the
goals of this project.

Continuous time stochastic processes defined by stochastic differential
equations have long been used to model dynamic stochastic systems arising in
physics, biology and other natural sciences. One latest surge of interest on
these processes comes from molecular biology in modeling the dynamics of
proteins as part of an effort to understand how energy transfer and conversion
happen within a biological cell. Perhaps the most eminent use of the continuous
time stochastic processes in the last two decades has been in finance following
the works of Merton (1971) and Black and Scholes (1973) which established the
foundation of option pricing theory for modern finance. Analysts and
practitioners of these continuous-time stochastic models are increasingly aware
that no matter how rich and powerful these models are for modeling a stochastic
system, their applicability will be largely limited if model parameters cannot
be estimated and the validity of the models cannot be confirmed with empirical
data. The intellectual merit of the project is in establishing a statistical
inference framework for stochastic processes commonly used in stochastic
modeling these days. The broader impacts of the proposed research are (1) being
on the cutting edge of statistics, probability and stochastic system modeling,
(2) producing opportunities for collaboration and partnerships with
practitioners from a range of disciplines, and (3) extending the educational
experience of students with an opportunity to be deeply involved with stochastic
modeling and applications.




