
* 0604488
* Further Studies on Weighted Empirical Likelihood
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,04/24/2008
* Jian-Jian Ren,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 151,892.00

ABSTRACT:

Since Owen (1988), the empirical likelihood method has been developed to
construct tests and confidence sets based on nonparametric likelihood ratio.
Studies have shown that the empirical likelihood ratio inferences are of
comparable accuracy to alternative methods. However, so far the applications of
empirical likelihood method to censored data are relatively few and are mainly
focused on the right censored data. In this context, the PI discovered in her
2001-paper that a new likelihood function, called weighted empirical likelihood
function, has the potential to facilitate the research on a broad class of
nonparametric and semiparametric statistics for various types of incomplete
data, including doubly censored data, interval censored data, and partly
interval-censored data. It is shown that weighted empirical likelihood may be
viewed as the asymptotic version of Owen's empirical likelihood function for
censored data. In the past few years, the PI's investigation shows that the
weighted empirical likelihood indeed provides a useful tool to deal with
statistical inference problems with complicated types of censored data which are
otherwise quite difficult to handle. The objective of this current project is to
further study the applications of weighted empirical likelihood in providing
solutions for several important nonparametric or semiparametric statistical
inference problems in survival analysis with various types of censored data. The
issues under consideration include: (1) extension of the weighted empirical
likelihood to deal with p-dimensional variables; (2) further applications of the
weighted empirical likelihood to estimation or model assessment problems
associated with estimating equations, profile likelihood and some important
survival models; (3) coverage accuracy of weighted empirical likelihood ratio
confidence intervals; (4) comparison with alternative methods.

Incomplete data are frequently encountered in medical follow-up and reliability
studies. Recently, statisticians are paying more attention to some more
complicated types of incomplete data, such as doubly censored data, interval
censored data, partly interval-censored data, truncated data, etc., as these
data occur in important clinical trials and scientific research. For instance,
doubly censored data were encountered in a recent study of primary breast
cancer, interval censored data were encountered in AIDS research, partly
interval-censored data were encountered in heart disease and diabetes studies,
and doubly truncated data were encountered in astronomical research. Up to now,
the statistical research on these more complicated types of incomplete data
still generally lags behind that on right censored data,mainly because it is
technically much more challenging. The expected results of this project are
better understanding of the technique of weighted empirical likelihood, and
providing solutions for several important statistical inference problems
associated with some widely used survival models in biomedical research and
epidemiological studies when observed data are right censored, doubly censored,
interval censored, or partly interval-censored.
