
* 0604939
* Monte Carlo and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods for Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,08/21/2007
* Art Owen,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 250,000.00

This project extends and improves Monte Carlo sampling techniques. The main idea
is to incorporate ideas that originated in quasi-Monte Carlo sampling into Monte
Carlo sampling. In particular this project embeds quasi-Monte Carlo sampling
into Markov chain Monte Carlo simulations, a combination that until recently was
not known to be possible. The combination can be very effective, bringing
variance reductions of over 100 fold in some problems. The project personnel are
identifying when quasi-Monte Carlo brings a large improvement in Markov chain
Monte Carlo, as well as finding new ways to combine the methods. Another area in
which this project is improving Monte Carlo sampling is in integration of
unbounded functions. There are versions of randomized quasi-Monte Carlo sampling
that attain a better convergence rate than the original quasi-Monte Carlo
sampling, at least for well behaved integrands. Unfortunately, problems with
unbounded integrands don't see much improvement. This project extends the
benefit of randomized quasi-Monte Carlo sampling to unbounded integrands by
applying a change of variable formula to bound the integrand while endeavoring
to prevent the integrand from becoming too spiky. This project is also
investigating tempering methods for speeding up the mixing of Markov chain Monte
Carlo as well as applications of Monte Carlo and quasi-Monte Carlo ideas to
problems in bioinformatics.

Monte Carlo sampling is used in just about every branch of science and
engineering. At its simplest it involves simulating a system using random number
generators, and recording what happens. In practice Monte Carlo methods are used
to solve by brute force computation some problems that are too hard to do
mathematically. Real world complications that can easily be introduced into a
simulation often make a problem too hard for exact mathematical treatment.
Quasi-Monte Carlo methods can be used to drive a simulation byt replacing the
random number sequence by very carefully chosen numbers that are much more
balanced than random numbers are. The result is often a tremendous speedup for a
given level of accuracy, or a tremendous increase in accuracy for a given
computation time. This project pushes quasi-Monte Carlo methods into simulations
that had hitherto been thought incapable of benefiting from them. Those
simulation techniques, known as Markov chain Monte Carlo, are used in many areas
including materials science, analysis of educational testing data sets,
biomedical research, robotics, computer graphics, and marketing. This project is
also looking at other ways to improve Monte Carlo methods with similarly broad
potential for benefit.
