
* 0604776
* Bayesian models and Monte Carlo strategies in identifying protein or DNA sequence motifs
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,04/07/2006
* Jun Xie,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2009
* USD 160,246.00

This project pursues new probability models and Monte Carlo strategies to detect
functionally relevant sequence motifs within protein or DNA sequence
information. Protein motifs are defined as local segments (20-50 amino acids)
that are critical for protein structures and functions. DNA motifs are referred
to as specific sequence elements (6-20 nucleotides) in the genome that bind to
transcription factors. Despite many advances, current computational tools for
aligning sequence motifs are often lack of convergence and produce too many
false positives. The investigator proposes: 1) To develop Bayesian models for
protein sequence motifs that combine distributions of amino acids with
distributions of sequence-derived secondary and tertiary characteristics. 2) To
develop a parallel tempering procedure that runs multiple Markov chains in
parallel to improve the convergence of motif alignment algorithm. 3) To develop
new probability models and statistical methods that describe modules of
transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and combine genomic sequence
information with gene expression information.

The rapid progress of the human genome project and development of
biotechnologies have created a rich source of sequence data. Making sense of
these data, however, is an ongoing challenge and in part depends on efficient
computational and statistical approaches. This proposal focuses on computational
detection of functionally relevant sequence motifs. Knowledge of protein motifs
gives indication of protein functions, and knowledge of DNA motifs provides
information for controlling gene expression. The proposed statistical and
computational approaches will help to interpret and model the biochemical
processes that regulate gene activity and the responses of cells to diverse
stimuli. The eventual applications could lead to better understanding of
diseases and drug developments.


