
* 0604639
* Advanced Bayesian Approaches for Heterogeneous Temporal Genomic MetaData
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,04/03/2006
* Yulan Liang,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2009
* USD 144,999.00

Recent genomic and proteomic data sets are so disparate and complex that not
too many studies have provided robust and sophisticated modeling for the latent
information. The principal research of the underlying project strives to make
efficient and maximal use of the generated information from heterogeneous
temporal genomic sources where the special features are present. The
investigator aims to develop, implement and validate the innovative advanced
Bayesian modeling techniques, such as Bayesian state space models for studying
the dynamics of heterogeneous temporal genomic metadata for (i) inferring and
predicting the genomic profiles associated with diseases and treatments; (ii)
estimating the important hidden biological parameters; (iii) constructing gene-
time-gene and protein-protein interaction networks and pathways for hybrid
biological systems. This should be sufficient to explain causal and probable
relations about the interactions of genes-treatments-diseases and gene-
environment. The investigator evaluates the efficacy and sensitivity of the
proposed models through detailed study of specific diseases, such as time course
of lymphocyte gene expression data from interferon-beta-1a treated multiple
sclerosis patients and multiple tissues polygenic data such as kidney and liver
data of animals sacrificed at 17 time points following administration of a bolus
dose of MPL. Graphic display of the results from each model are provided to
explore the dynamics of the modeling processes, which marks an important
intermediate goal that allows visual examination of the degrees of heterogeneity
between models. Through the research and educational activities the
heterogeneous raw temporal genomic data are converted into scientific knowledge
that advances our understanding of today's common complex diseases, biological
processes and potentially identify new modalities of treatment.

This project describes a novel area for the field of statistical genomics and
bioinformatics, which is driven by the over-availability of a variety of
heterogeneous temporal genomic data and methodologies. Through the research and
teaching activities, systematic understanding and overall knowledge is generated
for efficient data exploration methodology, primarily contributing to the areas
of statistics and computer science. If fully successful, its contribution to the
fields of biology, pharmaceutical sciences, and medical sciences could be
invaluable, potentially speeding up research, diagnosis, drug development, and
medical decision making ultimately improving human and other life.
Biomedical/genomic applications of the developed methodologies would support
biologists and medical researchers to better understand the underlying causes of
diseases, the risks and offer a more powerful diagnostic tool and predictive
treatment and provide customized solutions to genomic data analysis. Both the
theoretical and the practical foundations of the activity will make an impact on
higher education, especially in training the current and next generation of
statisticians and computational scientists to tackle challenges involved in the
human genome research. The techniques developed in this project are be used to
augment and develop related courses and made available on the internet for
outreach at large.
