
* 0604736
* Statistical Problems in Detectability
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2006,07/13/2006
* Xiaoming Huo,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 94,998.00

The PI will study statistical problems in detectability, which is to answer
whether a detection problem is solvable for a given data set (e.g., an imagery).
There will be two major components: (a) what is the fundamental threshold to
determine when a detection task is doable, and (b) when a detection problem is
solvable, what is the adequate order of computational complexity to solve it.
Based on the current state-of-the-art, the PI proposes to derive more accurate
results, and to compare different formulations and their influence on the theory
of detectability. The proposed works have three main thrusts. (1) Limit
distributions of the test statistics at the asymptotic rate of detectability
will be derived. This will advance the detectability theory. (2) Application-
driven models will be adopted in the detectability theory. In many cases, these
application-driven models are complex, and the adaptation and the possible
generalization of the detectability theory are not trivial. (3) Influences of
different statistical formulations on the theory of detectability will be
characterized. The proposed works are rooted in two of PI's prior works: (1) the
project of multiscale geometric detection (MGD), which derived the asymptotic
rate of detectability for detecting a range of geometric objects, and (2) the
project of multiscale significance run algorithms (MSRA) and the consequent
results on limit distributions. In the second project, after knowing the
asymptotic rate in MSRA, the limit distribution of the test statistic is derive
(in a simpler situation), so that the detectability right at the asymptotic rate
is characterized. The limit distribution also explains the robustness of the
detection algorithm that have been demonstrated in simulations.

Detection is a fundamental problem in many image processing applications. Some
applications include (1) particle detection in cryo-EM images, which plays an
important role in automated reconstruction of a molecular structure, (2)
automatic target recognition (ATR), which has many military and civil
surveillance applications, and (3) crater detection in geomorphology, which is
utilized in extraterrestrial mapping and planetary chronological research.
Proposed theoretical problems are fundamental in these applications. Graduate
students will get involved.
