
* 0605141
* Bayesian Analysis of Shapes and Curves with Applications in Structural Bioinformatics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2006,08/31/2006
* Scott Schmidler,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2007
* USD 39,870.00

This research involves development of new probabilistic and Bayesian
statistical models for the analysis of three-dimensional structures of
biological macromolecules. A secondary focus is the development of statistical
methods for characterizing the biomechanical behavior of molecules under applied
forces such as arise in the study of cellular proteins (e.g. molecular motors)
and in problems of bioengineering (e.g. nano-scale sensing") and materials
science (e.g. smart materials and biologically inspired materials). The emphasis
is on comparative modeling and classification of protein structures and protein
force-response curves. Stochastic models of three-dimensional shapes are
explored motivated by the difficulties in quantitative comparison of complex
structural information of proteins. Bayesian techniques are developed for
unsolved problems of matching unlabeled point sets using extensions of
techniques from the area of statistical shape analysis. Computational algorithms
for making these techniques practical for high-throughput searching by
biomolecular scientists are also a major focus of this research, and several
directions are developed involving exact algorithms, Monte Carlo sampling
techniques, and rapid approximations based on geometric algorithms. A second
component of this research involves Bayesian models for errors-in-variables
regression and functional data analysis techniques for force-extension curves
measured on single molecules. The development of Bayesian hierarchical random-
effects models for functional data analysis, along with development of efficient
algorithms for Bayesian computations, is carried out.

This statistical methodology research is of broad applicability, but all work is
clearly motivated by and directly relevant to significant interdisciplinary
applications in biomedical science and biomolecular engineering. The research
constitutes important advances in stochastic modeling for applications in
computational biology, bioinformatics, and computational chemistry, and will
provide both unified theoretical frameworks and practical data analysis
techniques and software tools for scientific researchers and engineers involved
in these areas. Such advances will be important to statisticians working in this
area, as well as domain scientists in need of new methodology and tools for data
analysis and predictive modeling.


