
* 0605041
* Statistical Inference under Subjective and Not-Fully-Quantifiable Information on Experimental Units
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2006,06/12/2006
* Steven MacEachern,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

In many scientific investigations, there is a wealth of subjective information
about experimental material--which agricultural plots are more fertile, which
patients are healthier, etc.--that is difficult to quantify as a formal,
numerical variate for further use in statistical analysis. Currently,
statistical science is unable to effectively exploit this information. This
research develops a body of techniques that allow one to recover the bulk of
this information and to use it in a fully objective fashion. Importantly, the
same mathematical techniques that apply to recovery of subjective information
also allow one to exploit ``lesser quality'' covariates which may be subject to
substantial measurement error or other biases. These lesser quality covariates
are used to create an artificial stratification among the potential experimental
units before their responses are measured. The body of work that underlies these
techniques is known as ranked set sampling. The current status of ranked set
sampling provides a theoretical foundation under very strong assumptions, such
as perfect ranking or other precisely specified probability and judgment ranking
models. Even a small departure from these assumptions may result in inconsistent
estimators that contain substantial bias, even asymptotically. There are
reservations within the research community regarding the use of ranked set
sampling when either the cost recruiting a unit for a study is substantial or
when the number of available experimental units is limited. In these situations,
it is desirable to use all available experimental units to perform the
experiment. To alleviate these concerns, this research looks at ranked set
sampling from a different perspective and identifies three areas where the
current state-of-the-art ranked set sampling is either not appropriate, performs
poorly, or cannot be used in a satisfactory general fashion. These areas are (i)
the use of ranked set sampling in the design of experiments, (ii) the
development of low- and medium structure parametric estimation under minimal
judgment modeling assumptions, and (iii) the development of models for the
ranking process.

This research will have a substantial impact on statistical analysis, on several
established areas of scientific research, on the quality of life of the U.S.
populace, and on the scientific infrastructure of the country. The research,
through the mechanisms described in the preceding paragraph, will allow
researchers to squeeze more information out of their experiments with novel
statistical analyses. The flip side of squeezing more information out of an
experiment is the ability to obtain a given amount of information with a smaller
experiment. The research will develop better designs to perform experiments,
impacting a wide variety of disciplines. As a prime example, with the new
designs, a clinical trial, used to establish the benefits of a new drug, will
require a smaller number of subjects. The cost of the trial will be reduced and
the trial will be completed in a shorter time span. The triple benefit of a
smaller, cheaper and quicker trial will expedite the development and approval of
new drugs, including those for terminal diseases, such as cancer. In addition to
economic benefits, there is the ethical benefit of moving promising new
therapies through the development process as quickly as possible, without
sacrificing current safeguards in the approval process. The scientific
infrastructure of the country will be enhanced by the increased collaboration
between statisticians and medical researchers, and by the rigorous training of
graduate students. Particular emphasis will be given to the training of women
and minorities in the mathematical sciences.
