
* 0605167
* Frechet differentiation of functions of operators with application in functional data analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2006,04/19/2006
* Frits Ruymgaart,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2008
* USD 37,468.00

This research deals on the one hand with a statistical problem in functional
data analysis and on the otherwith a mathematical tool from perturbation theory
that might also be of independent interest. More specifically the statistical
problem concerns the limiting distribution of properly defined functional
canonical correlations and their corresponding canonical variates. Functional
canonical correlations are of interest in their own right, but may also help
organize high-dimensional data sets. The mathematical tool to be derived is the
Frechet derivative of an analytic function of a compact, nonnegative, Hermitian
operator (in the sense of functional calculus), tangentially to the space of all
compact Hermitian operators. This Frechet derivative allows one to obtain, for
instance, the asymptotic distribution of a function of the covariance operator
by applying the ensuing delta-method. This type of result provides the major
ingredient for deriving the aforementioned asymptotic distributions. In practice
the theory applies to data that are independent copies of a certain infinite
dimensional signal. A well-known instance of such a signal in the literature is
the gait example where one part of the signal represents the variability in the
knee angle cycle and the second part that in the hip angle cycle. Canoncial
correlations and their corresponding canonical variates may capture a
significant part of the relation between the two cycles. When applied to this
example the proposed research should lead to the asymptotic distributions of
these objects and in particular to confidence intervals for the canonical
correlations.
