
* 0605434
* Optimal Design of Experiments for Correlated Observations
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,05/27/2009
* Zhengyuan Zhu,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 218,961.00



ABSTRACT:

Much research has been done on the optimal design of experiments for independent
observations, while for correlated observations there are still many challenging
problems that remain to be solved. The investigators develop optimality criteria
which quantify the uncertainty for complex models of correlated observations,
including spatial Gaussian and non-Gaussian random field models and extreme
value processes. Algorithms based on newly developed optimization techniques and
extensions of design measures to correlated observations are investigated as
well. The intellectual merit of the research is new theory, methodology, and
computational techniques for design, in particular spatial and space-time
designs where the correlations between observations cannot be ignored. This
includes theories for quantifying uncertainties in spatial prediction, design
algorithms using quadratic and semidefinite programming, and novel ways of
defining design measure for correlated observations and their application in
space-time design.

In many applications, data are collected from a network of monitors in space and
time to make predictions. The investigators study the problem of how to
optimally place the monitors so that one can have the most accurate prediction.
The direct motivation of this work is from environmental science, where networks
are used to monitor the pollutants. Air pollution is known to be associated with
human health, and the methods developed in this proposal can help researchers
quantify the uncertainties in the pollution estimates, which may contribute to
better understanding of the association between pollution and human health. In
particular interactions with EPA researchers may lead to improved monitoring of
atmospheric pollutants. The investigators also intend to study possible
applications to Project BioWatch, which provides an early warning system for
bio-threats. The impact of this research is not limited to the environmental
science, as the methods and algorithm are in principle applicable to many other
fields such as climatology and chemical kinetic models.


