
* 0605102
* High Dimensional Bayesian Model Discovery, Inference and Prediction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,04/28/2006
* Edward George,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,634.00

This research is concerned generally with new methods for regression analysis in
high dimensions, where the number of parameters is very large compared to the
number of observations. The first part of this research focuses on the
development and application of methods that identify and draw inference about
low dimensional structure in this setting. For this purpose, the investigator
further develops a new nonparametric effects model called BART (Bayesian
Additive Tree Models) that uses a dimensionally adaptive dynamic random basis of
trees. In particular, BART opens up a variety of new ways to perform variable
selection followed by model selection. As opposed to traditional variable
selection methods that rely on a preselected parametric model class, these new
methods will select variables before the selection of a model, thus eliminating
a major limitation of previous methods. The second part of this research focuses
on the development of new Bayesian procedures for predictive density estimation
in multiple regression. The minimaxity of such density estimates under Kullback-
Leibler loss are established for various classes of scaled superharmonic priors.
Based on these estimates, the investigator further develops minimax multiple
shrinkage predictive density estimates that exploit variable selection
uncertainty to achieve risk reduction.

The discovery of structure in complex settings and the prediction of future
uncertain events are fundamental statistical challenges in most areas of
academic research including business, the hard and social sciences, medicine,
humanities, computer science and engineering. By modeling and predicting
economic conditions, the economist can better direct the economy; by modeling
and predicting climate changes, the scientist can better manage the environment;
by modeling and predicting health care needs, the policy analyst can better
allocate resources to meet demand. This research develops brand new procedures
that establishes high dimensional model discovery and predictive estimation as
highly visible and valuable areas of theoretical and methodological research,
one that will attract the brightest students and the wisest seasoned scholars.
This will entail broad dissemination of the work in pinnacle journals, through
public lectures around the world, and through new collaborations with colleagues
and graduate students. To further facilitate the use of these new methods, the
investigator will continue to create and make publicly available open-source
software implementations along with full documentation and examples.


