
* 0605132
* Long Memory Time Series Modelling: Computational and Statistical Efficiency, Nonstationarity/Noninvertibility and Goodness of Fit
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2006,02/28/2006
* Willa Chen,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2010
* USD 116,292.00

In view of the rapid expansion of the application of long memory models and
growing interest in high frequency data, the research plan of this project
stresses both statistical and computational efficiency in modern long memory
modelling. The goal is to develop statistically sound and computationally
efficient methods for long memory time series in estimation and goodness-of-fit
testing. To reach this goal, the investigator focuses on the three lines of
research. The first line of research concerns the semiparametric estimation of
memory parameter of nonstationary time series. Nonstationarity is a very common
feature in economics, finance and network traffic data. Our goal is to develop
estimators that allow nonstationarity in series and retain the same efficiency
as the stationary case without compromising the computational efficiency. The
second line of research focuses the estimation of a full parametric long memory
model, namely ARFIMA which is potentially noninvertible. In practice, time
series are often differenced one or more times to induce stationarity. Sometimes
overdifferencing may occur. The investigator considers both frequency and time
domains MLE and derives the asymptotic properties for them. The investigator
also provides an efficient algorithm to evaluate the likelihood function so that
the exact MLE can be applied on a large data set. The availability of high-
frequency data on returns of financial assets has intrigued a great amount of
research in volatility modelling. In the last line of research, the investigator
extends a few statistical procedures which were previously developed for the
linear processes to stochastic volatility models. The investigator proposes a
class of goodness-of-fit tests for stochastic volatility models. These tests are
periodogram-based statistics that not only circumvent the computation of fitted
residuals but also can be evaluated via the fast Fourier transform algorithm.
Furthermore, they are asymptotically normal under the null and consistent
against a wide class of alternatives. Lastly, the investigator studies the
relation between two or more long memory stochastic volatility series, a
relationship called fractional cointegration. The investigator proposes an
estimator for the cointegration parameter and derives its consistency. The
investigator studies the finite sample properties of the proposed procedures
through simulation studies.

This research is motivated by the emerging trend to analyze high frequency time
series including economic and financial data. The proposed methods not only
provide practitioners feasible statistical procedures in modelling time
dependent data across a number of disciplines, but also lead a direction of
future research in time series toward computational efficiency. The up-to-date
developments in the research plan will be modified and transform into the
applied time series course for the new coming online graduate program which will
be launched in year 2006 by the Department of Statistics for serving the higher
education needs of professionals who work in industrial statistics,
biostatistics and statistical teaching, including minorities, women and older
students with families and full-time jobs. The programs can help students,
especially those who might otherwise not be able to do so, achieve their goals
of personal enrichment and career advancement.
