
* 0606577
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Learning and Object Oriented Data Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,04/18/2006
* James Marron,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 250,834.00

This research is in the related areas of Statistical Learning and Object
Oriented Data Analysis (OODA). There are major challenges in these areas that
are addressed by a team of researchers, who bring different but complementary
skill sets to explore. Statistical Learning is widely recognized as a very
active area of interdisciplinary research, which lives between statistics,
computer science, and optimization. With state-of-art optimization tools, this
research offers a set of new approaches for statistical learning, including new
penalties for regularization, further developments of large margin classifiers
both theoretically and numerically, as well as nonparametric-based probability
calibration for hard margin classifiers. In addition, new visualization and
analytical tools for ``High Dimension-Low Sample Size'' (HDLSS) data are
developed. Such development is extremely important since HDLSS has become a
common feature of data encountered in many divergent fields such as medical
imaging and micro-array analysis for gene expression but is outside of the
domain of classical statistical multivariate analysis. OODA is a generalization
of the recently very productive area of Functional Data Analysis (FDA). In FDA,
curves are data points and variation in a family of curves is the focus of
analysis. OODA extends this notion to populations where the data points are more
complex objects, such as images, shape representations, and even tree-structured
objects. The proposed research offers a set of new tools for FDA, including
exponential family functional principal components analysis (PCA), robust
functional PCA, curve discrimination, and forecasting and dynamic updating of
time series of curves. Proposed research will also advance OODA for data on
smooth manifolds and tree-structured objects.

The main application area of the research is in health and medicine and civil
infrastructure. The research is motivated by and will have beneficial impacts on
cancer research, medical imaging, call center management, and network traffic
modeling. However, the developed statistical methods will be useful in fields
far beyond those motivating this research, such as demography/epidemiology,
financial economics and spatial-temporal modeling. The team consists of a good
mix of well established senior researchers and young junior researchers. Strong
mentoring at several levels is an important component of this project. First,
there is strong training of graduate students, in these exciting new research
areas, with the goal of giving them the background, and skills needed to start
their own research careers. Second, there is strong mentoring of the junior
researchers, by the more experienced members of the research team. In addition
to working closely together on research projects, the junior researchers will
learn the skills of advising PhD students, through joint supervision together
with the more senior members. The team continues to disseminate the research
results quickly and broadly through collaborative work, academic presentations,
and journal publications. Web pages are created to enable quick access to user-
friendly and accessible software implementations of new methods as well as
technical reports and relevant references.
