
* 0624239
* Dimension Reduction for Stochastic Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2005,06/26/2007
* Randall Eubank,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 146,721.00

Traditional multivariate statistics focuses on the analysis of data that are
vectors of finite length. However, modern data collection methods are now
frequently returning observations that should be viewed as the result of
digitized recording or sampling from stochastic processes. These types of data
occur in the context of functional data analysis (where the observation process
has a one dimensional index set), image analysis and spatial statistics, for
example, and arise from every aspect of the modern world. Our ability to process
and to make use of such data directly affects the way in which scientific
inquiries are conducted and practical problems are solved. Goals for analyzing
this type of high dimensional data include the detection of structure and
dimensionality reduction and these are the issues that will be addressed in the
proposed project. Specifically, a number of topics will be investigated
concerning dimension reduction for data from stochastic processes including i)
canonical correlations analysis for two or more processes, ii) mixed models
methods for analysis of data from multiple processes, iii) inverse regression
and iv) varying coefficient models. The unifying theme in all this work is the
use of reproducing kernel Hilbert space methods to formulate both the problems
and their proposed solutions.

With fast progressing modern technology in fields such as medicine,
environmental science, and homeland security, the data collected in those fields
today are frequently curved or spatial data, and may be even more complicated in
terms of scope and structure. Traditional statistical methods were created to
primarily deal with low-dimensional data, and are not suitable for the high-
dimensional or ``functional'' nature of the data described above. This research
is aimed at addressing a number of fundamental issues in the emerging branch of
modern statistical data analysis that deals with high-dimensional data. The
results to be obtained will not only potentially impact high-dimensional data
analytic methodology across a myriad of disciplines, but will also provide a
theoretical foundation and directions for future statistical research.


