
* 0638468
* Nonparametric Curve Estimation: Theory and Practice
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2006,08/29/2008
* Sam Efromovich,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 176,144.00

ABSTRACT

The proposal focuses on developing statistical theory, methodology and methods
of data-driven nonparametric curve estimation motivated by and tested on
biological, psychological, medical, and environmental applications, with the
main aim to bridge the asymptotic theory and applications. The main intellectual
objectives are: (i) For models with indirect observations (like censored and
biased regression, hidden components, modeling of time series in the presence of
nonparametric trend and volatility) develop the theory of sharp minimax
estimation as well as of mimicking of oracles that know direct observations
and/or nuisance functions unavailable to the statistician; (ii) For controlled
experiments, develop the theory, methodology and methods of sequential sampling
and estimation for the case where optimal (under more common criteria) solution
depends on estimated and/or nuisance functions; (iii) Develop the theory and
methods of a local aggregation of wavelet estimates. Practical problems include
the study of municipal wastewater treatment plants, modeling of levels of
contaminants and residual disinfectants in Albuquerque water basin, analysis of
drinking patterns and behavior change initiation during pregnancy, study of
temporal and spatial structures of plants in Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge,
learning machines for recovery magnetic resonance images and the analysis of
satellite data.

The primary focus of this research is to develop, in collaboration with Sandia
and Los Alamos National Laboratories as well as with the UNM Medical and
Engineering Schools, algorithms and software for statistical learning and
adaptive estimation motivated by and tested on the following environmental,
medical and biological applications: Statistical modeling of temporal and
spatial structures of plants in Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge which will
allow to study global weather changing; The study of municipal wastewater
treatment plants; Modeling and analysis of change points in levels of
contaminants and residual disinfectants in Albuquerque water basin with
applications to a homeland security drinking water monitoring; Learning machines
for recovery magnetic resonance images and the analysis of environmental
satellite data including temperature and humidity; Analysis of drinking patterns
and behavior change initiation during pregnancy which reduces likelihood of
relapses. The broader impact of the research is defined by well--understood
applications that will benefit the society and help students and a broader
audience to understand the importance of mathematical sciences. The impact will
be based on the following proposed activities: (i) Graduate students will
participate in the research; (ii) To promote learning, scientific seminars will
be held for undergraduate and graduate students, and talks by the proposer and
the students will be presented during the UNM mathematical awareness weeks for
high-school students. (iii) To broaden participation of under-represented
groups, regular presentations will be held at outreach seminars conducted by the
UNM Gallup and Valencia campuses. (iv) The developed software will be freely
available. Medical, environmental and biological findings, benefiting the
society, will be published in not-technical journals.
