
* 0645676
* CAREER: Asymptotic Statistical Decision Theory and Its Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2007,02/05/2013
* Huibin Zhou,CT,Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Asymptotic equivalence, one of the most important statistical contributions of
Lucien Le Cam, is a theory to build the connections among various statistical
models. If two models are asymptotically equivalent, all asymptotically optimal
statistical estimators can be carried over from one model to the other. A basic
principle of establishing asymptotic equivalence is to approximate a complicated
statistical model by a more tractable one. The Gaussian location model is a
tractable model that captures the essence of a number of statistical settings.
The investigator studies explicit and practical procedures to convert a general
nonparametric estimation to a Gaussian regression, using improved quantile
coupling inequalities and new variance stabilization transformations. Other
statistical problems are better understood by relating them to Poisson process
models. The investigator studies infinitely divisible approximation to density
estimation and its connection to nonparametric edge estimation and
classification. The investigator is also proposed to study a long-standing issue
in this area -- asymptotic equivalence theory for unbounded loss, and to study
the asymptotic equivalence theory for multiple comparisons, functional data
analysis and long memory models.

The project would help statisticians in many areas such as robust nonparametric
estimation, machine learning, multiple comparison, functional data analysis,
long memory models and generalized linear models, to understand and appreciate
the simplification of Le Cam's theory and use it as a guidance to produce new
theory and methodologies. The models the investigator is studying can be used in
signal and image processing, calling data analysis, detection of bioweapons use,
Genomic research, disease prevention, etc. The project will integrate research
and education by teaching courses on decision theory, by organizing seminars and
workshops to disseminate and preserve Le Cam's theory, and by advising graduate
students working on this topic. The investigator will serve as the Diversity
Coordinator for graduate student admissions in the Yale Statistics Department,
and will seek to attract women and minorities to do research on the grant.


