
* 0704337
* High-dimensional statistical learning and inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2007,05/09/2011
* Jianqing Fan,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 920,001.00

The challenge of high-dimensionality characterizes many contemporary statistical
problems arising from many frontiers of scientific research and technological
development. In high-dimensional statistical research, low-dimensional
structures, which entail sparsity under suitable parametrization, are needed to
be explored in order to circumvent the issue of noise accumulation with
dimensionality. This proposal intends to confront a number of important high-
dimensional statistical problems from genomics, machine learning, health
studies, economics, and finance. These include various emerging issues from the
analysis of microarray data such as normalization, significance analysis, and
disease classification; variable selection and feature extraction from high-
dimensional statistical learning; sparse classification and clustering from
high-dimensional feature spaces; high-dimensional covariance matrix estimation
for asset allocation and portfolio management; sparse covariance estimation for
spatial and temporal studies and genetic networks. All of these problems have
their distinguished characters from the context of their applications, but
nevertheless share similar challenges with high dimensionality and admit
features of sparsity. These emerging problems of high societal impacts will be
confronted via developing new statistical methods to address the features and
challenges associated with high-dimensionality, from statistical computation,
feature selection, to noise reduction. At the same time, the PI also intends to
provide fundamental understanding, via asymptotic analysis and simulation
studies, to these problems and their associated methodologies that push theory,
methods, and computation forward.

Thanks to technological innovation, the availability of large-scale and complex
data are widely available nowadays in many contemporary scientific problems.
High-dimensional statistical models are required to address these scientific
endeavors. The challenges of high-dimensionality arise from diverse fields of
sciences and the humanities, ranging from genomics and health sciences to
economics and finance. In these fields, variable selection, feature extraction,
sparsity explorations are crucial for knowledge discovery. In this proposal, we
propose to develop cutting-edge statistical theory and methods to address these
problems from genomic studies, machine learning, health science, economics, and
finance. The proposed techniques and results will not only help researchers to
solve emerging problems in their disciplines, but also have strong impact on
statistical thinking, methodological development, and theoretical studies.


