
* 0704130
* Model diagnostics under long memory, and for spatial data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,03/24/2009
* Hira Koul,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 242,741.00

A discrete time stationary stochastic process is said to have long memory if its
auto-correlations tend to zero hyperbolically in the lag parameter, as the lag
tends to infinity. Physical and social sciences are full of real data examples
that exhibit this behavior in the presence of conditionalheteroscedasticity and
where regression functions are nonlinear and non-smooth. The first part of the
proposal focuses on developing useful and optimal lack-of-fit tests for fitting
a nonlinear and non-smooth parametric regression function in the presence of
heteroscedastic and long memory moving average (LMMA) errors, and when designs
are either non-random or LMMA. It is further proposed to construct useful and
optimal tests for testing the equality of two or more regression functions
against one or two sided alternatives, when the error and the covariate
processes follow some LMMA models. The second part of proposal is concerned with
developing robust inference for a first order quadrant autoregressive process, a
process that is a unilateral autoregressive process in the plane. P.I. proposes
to provide a class of minimum distance tests for fitting a parametric first
order quadrant autoregressive process. In addition, assuming such a model is
valid, P.I. proposes to develop asymptotically distribution free tests for
fitting an error distribution. A data set is said to have long memory if an
association between distant observations is slowly decaying but persistent, as
the distance between observations increases. A data set observed over a period
of time is called a time series. A heteroscedastic time series is one where the
conditional variability of an observation at the current time, given the past,
depends on the past. Such data often arises in economics, finance, hydrology,
and physical sciences. In particular, an important example of long memory
heteroscedastic time series is the volatility of spot returns. Part of the
emphasis of the proposal is on developing optimal inferential procedures in a
class of non-smooth non-linear heteroscedastic time series models. Practical
modelling of numerous agricultural and environmental phenomenon involve spatial
correlations. A useful model for analyzing spatial correlations is a unilateral
autoregressive time series, also known as a first-order quadrant autoregressive
process. This type of processes is especially appropriate when there is an
evidence of a spatial movement over the plane in one direction, such as with
environmental pollutants transported by winds or ocean currents, or with the
spread of a disease. A model where certain fractional differences of a spatial
time series are first-order quadrant autoregressive has been found useful in
modelling the slow decay of correlations between yields in two dimensional
agricultural field trials. Part of the focus of this proposal is to develop
useful and robust inference procedures for the underlying parameters in these
models with applications to agriculture and environmental science.
