
* 0704621
* Collaborative Research: Model-Based and Model-Free Dimension Reduction with Applications to Bioinformatics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,06/04/2007
* Bing Li,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 260,000.00

This proposal is focused on sufficient dimension reduction (SDR), which
comprises methods for reducing the dimension of the predictor vector X in
reference to the response Y in regression or classification problems. In the
last 10 to15 years a variety of SDR methods have been developed that do not
require a regression model and that exploit the conditional moments of X given
Y. These methods have accrued a striking record of successful applications and
have led to a variety of techniques. The investigators propose to introduce
inverse reductive models that describe the stochastic structure of X given Y,
and not Y given X as in traditional regression. Preliminary results indicate
that this will lead to significant advances in theory, methods and applications.
Reductive models provides a unified perspective linking traditional methods such
as principal components and various recent model-free inverse methods. In
addition, reductive models can provide information bounds, which make it
possible to evaluate and improve upon the performance of existing model-free
methods in recognizable contexts.

High-throughput technologies produce massive amounts of complex and
interconnected data. More than ever before, understanding experimental evidence
and exploring scientific hypotheses require methods to meaningfully reduce high-
dimensional data. This is particularly the case for contemporary genomic
sciences. Sequencing techniques, alignment algorithms, microarrays and other
emerging experimental technologies generate information on genomes, myriads of
novel functional elements within them, patterns of simultaneous expression for
the thousands of genes they contain, and patterns of evolution across related
species. The need to handle this growing body of information has spun a whole
new discipline, Bioinformatics, at the very heart of which are indeed data
reduction methods. In this proposal the investigators plan to study a class of
inverse reductive models that unify and improve on existing dimension reduction
methods, and that are capable of handling situations where the number of
variables far exceed the number of subjects. Such situations are typical for
genomic applications, and are difficult or impossible to study using existing
methods.
