
* 0705968
* Advances in Variable Selection with Grouped Predictors
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2007,06/08/2007
* Howard Bondell,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 139,999.00

This project develops variable selection procedures in the context of grouped
predictors, where the grouping structure can be either known or unknown. Known
grouping structures include the case of Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) models
where multiple `dummy' variables represent a single factor, or in nonparametric
regression using basis functions. In these situations, it is desired to either
include or exclude the entire set of variables as a group. Unknown grouping
structure occurs when there are underlying clusters of predictors that have a
combined effect on the response, such as a set of genes sharing a common
pathway. This research addresses the issue of variable selection under both
known and unknown grouping structures, while simultaneously addressing
additional goals specific to the problem at hand. The first component of this
project is combining `supervised clustering' and variable selection into a
single step to facilitate the identification of important predictive clusters
when the underlying grouping structure is unknown. Secondly, for the known
grouping structure, this project develops penalization techniques to perform the
grouped selection while additionally allowing for the enforcement of
hierarchical constraints. The third component of the project is the development
of a technique to perform the typical pairwise comparison post-hoc analysis in
ANOVA within the factor selection process. All three components are developed in
a penalization framework by appropriate choices of the penalty.

With the abundance of information now available in all scientific fields, it can
be an overwhelming task to decide on which of the massive number of possible
characteristics, or variables, are important. Therefore, it is essential to
develop techniques to perform variable selection. It is often the case that
there is an underlying group structure that the scientist would like to discover
as well. One common example occurs in gene expression studies, in which
classification of patients into disease subtypes based on their gene expression
profile is a major focus. Among the thousands of genes in a gene expression
study, there is only a small fraction of them that are actually useful
indicators of disease status, and many of the genes can be combined into
functional groups. The investigator's research is particularly geared toward
enabling the accomplishment of these types of multi-faceted analyses, such as
finding the relevant genes while also identifying the group structure. A general
theme of the research is that appropriately designed statistical procedures can
achieve multiple objectives simultaneously and in an integrated fashion. The
importance of the variable selection problem across all disciplines, and the
investigator's collaborations with medical researchers and other scientists
allows the results to be readily disseminated into the applied research
community where it can be used to improve the quality of life.


