
* 0705209
* Regularization and Optimization for High Dimensional Regression and Classification with Biological Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,05/18/2007
* Chunming Zhang,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 180,001.00

The investigator develops new regularization and optimization techniques for
high dimensional data that arise from frontiers of biological, medical and
scientific research. Four interrelated research topics are proposed for
investigation. First, the functional sparse inference for functional magnetic
resonance imaging data in neuroscience is proposed for more accurate
localization of brain areas in response to the time-varying stimuli. Second, the
investigator develops curvature-based shape analysis for high-dimensional space
curves with applications to comparing biological shapes, detecting key
anatomical regions which exhibit shape difference, and classifying functional
data objects. Third, the investigator studies unified theory and methodology for
regularized parametric and nonparametric estimators under a general class of
loss functions. Fourth, a high-dimensional pseudo logistic regression and
classification approach is proposed which simultaneously combines the strengths
of both support vector machine and traditional logistic regression.

High-dimensional data sets and streams arising from bioinformatics, environment,
financial markets, and signal and image processing pose numerous challenges to
conventional statistical methods. A major goal of the proposal is to make
methodological and theoretical contributions to the important and challenging
regularization approach in the analysis of high-dimensional data, like spatio-
temporal fMRI brain images, functional data objects and gene expression
profiles. These new developments allow scientists to analyze high-dimensional
data with efficient dimension reduction and increased interpretability. In
addition, the investigator will integrate new computational tools and
mathematical theories with those in sciences and engineering. Dissemination of
these developments will enhance new knowledge discoveries and prudent policy
making, and strengthen interdisciplinary collaborations. The research will also
serve an educational purpose through multi-disciplinary courses on the
contemporary state-of-the-art data mining and machine learning, and benefit the
training and learning of undergraduate, graduate students and underrepresented
minorities.
