
* 0705532
* Collaborative Research: Generalized Variable Selection With Applications To Functional Data Analysis And Other Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,05/16/2007
* Ji Zhu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 84,940.00

When variable selection is performed in situations where the number of
predictors is significantly larger than the number of observations, one
generally assumes sparsity in the regression coefficients, i.e., most of the
coefficients are zero. However, there turn out to be many practical applications
where, rather than the parameters being sparse, certain predefined functions of
the parameters are sparse. This is referred to as Generalized Variable Selection
(GVS). Specifically, the investigators study four important applications of GVS
in areas as diverse as functional regression, principal component analysis (both
standard and functional), multivariate non-parametric regression, and
transcription regulation network problems for microarray experiments.

The investigators have direct connections in many fields outside statistics such
as Biology, Finance, Manufacturing, Marketing, Medicine and Physics. The
investigators believe that statisticians can, and should, make important
contributions in all these areas. With the advent of new technologies, such as
bar code scanners and microarrays etc., enormous data sets are becoming
increasingly common in these and many other fields. Such vast quantities of data
have made it important to develop statistical methodologies that can produce
sparse and interpretable solutions. The investigators aim to systematically
develop software to implement the proposed methods through free software
packages, like R, and then make them readily available and publicize them in all
these fields. The investigators believe that, because of the interpretive power
of their proposed methods, once the software is available, it will be widely
utilized.


