
* 0705288
* Function estimation under shape constraints and detection of thresholds in nonparametric and semiparametric problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,04/18/2007
* Moulinath Banerjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 185,476.00

The proposed project deals with methodology and inference strategies for
nonparametric and semiparametric problems exhibiting non--standard asymptotics,
problems where estimators converge at rates different from the usual rate
(square root of the sample size) and/or have non--Gaussian limit distributions.
The two core areas of investigation are: (A) Estimation of functions under shape
restrictions, and (B) Estimation of an appropriate ``threshold'' in the domain
of a function where sharp and potentially substantial changes occur. Part of the
emphasis in shape--restricted inference will be on maximum likelihood/least
squares based procedures and in particular, the construction of confidence sets
for quantities of interest (like a regression function, a hazard function etc.)
by inversion of residual sum of squares or likelihood ratio statistics. This is
in light of initial exploration for monotone function models where such
statistics are seen to exhibit asymptotically pivotal behavior, which
facilitates inference, since nuisance parameters need not be estimated from the
data. Shape constraints of interest are monotonicity, unimodality and
convexity/concavity, and often a combination of such features. Smoothing under
shape constraints will also be investigated in some of these problems, since
smoothing typically yields faster rates of convergence and provides automatic
estimation of derivatives of functions, which are often of interest, for example
in economics. On the threshold estimation front, two main areas will be
explored. The first is change--point estimation, where there is a jump in the
value of the function of interest or in the value of the derivative, with the
focus being on design issues: how to design the sampling mechanism, given a
fixed budget (of points that can be sampled) so as to entail precise detection
of the jump. The second area concerns studying appropriate notions of a
threshold for smooth functions that show rapid change over a short domain. One
such notion can be formulated in terms of a function with a finite number of
discontinuities that is used simply as an approximation, or a working model for
the true function. The discontinuities of the best fitting working model provide
a natural description of a threshold. Split--point estimation, as this is known,
turns out to be radically different from change point estimation, in light of
some initial work and will be investigated in more detail.

The proposed research will have diverse applications, ranging from disciplines
in public health like biomedical studies and epidemiology to topics in the
social sciences (economics) and the physical sciences (astronomy). Shape
restrictions, for example, show up naturally in the analysis of productions of
firms/companies (economics), the study of the risk of succumbing to illness or
infection with age (biomedical research/public health), and problems associated
with the detection of dark matter in galaxies, solutions to which can shed light
on the future evolution of the universe (astrophysics). The P.I. is actively
involved in collaborations with econometricians, epidemologists and astronomers:
the research emanating from this grant will therefore have strong
interdisciplinary flavor and will address many real scientific questions of
interest. On the threshold estimation front, statistical methods for split point
detection are of importance, since split points have been used as a measure of
threshold by ecologists in the development of pollution control standards. The
problems related to change point detection will be applied to detection of
stress thresholds in engineering systems. The statistical methodology to be
developed will be circulated to the statistical community in academia and
industry through free software packages. On the educational front, some of the
research material in this proposal will be incorporated in advanced courses at
the graduate level and an interdisciplinary seminar series. Some projects will
also serve as dissertation topics for Ph.D. advisees and will therefore play an
important role in the training of future statisticians.
