
* 0705261
* Collaborative Research: GOALI Statistical Methods for Modern IT Systems
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,06/08/2007
* C. F. Jeff Wu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2011
* USD 259,942.00

Motivated by real problems in the IT industry like data center/supercomputer
thermal management and simulations of business operations, the investigators aim
to develop a set of novel statistical methods for the experimental planning,
modeling, and optimization of modern IT systems. Specifically, they propose new
modeling techniques for IT systems with high-dimensional responses, with spatial
and temporal responses, or with a large number of configuration variables, and
for the experimental planning and optimization of business operation
simulations. The investigators bring together expertise in computer modeling and
experiments, latent variable and structural equation models, modern
optimization, and design of experiments. Their research will bridge the gap
between statistical practice in academe and industry. They will use challenging
real-world problems at IBM to motivate and develop new methodologies, and in
turn test them on real data for improvement. Its intellectual merit lies in the
development of a general methodology for designing, modeling, and optimizing IT
or other systems which exhibit similar traits to those described above. It can
lead to major advances in multivariate statistical modeling, stochastic process
modeling, statistics-aided stochastic optimization, optimization-aided design
search, and space-filling designs. It is conceivable that the methodology can be
incorporated into publicly released software, thus directly benefiting
practitioners and researchers.

Many new IT systems like supercomputers, data centers, and storage systems have
been invented to accommodate different business and personal needs. A recent
trend in the IT industry is the integration of the traditional business in
hardware with enterprise IT services like web hosting, data storage, and high-
performance computing. The proposed work is expected to have broad-based impacts
on the designing, monitoring and management of complex systems in general. It
can be applied to a variety of problems like power systems and aircraft engine
combustors. It can also benefit large-scale computer modeling for climate
change, reaction to natural crisis, and the spread of pandemic diseases like
bird flu and SARS. Specifically, the developed methods can improve the thermal
management and cooling efficiency of electronic systems, which is a pressing
issue faced by many US industries today. The team is committed to education and
dissemination of the new methodology to make a long-term impact. They plan to
infuse research outcomes into coursework. The proposed education plan will
result in rigorous training of a diverse group of students with solid background
in statistical methods, decision-making under uncertainty, and computational
modeling, who will meet a critical need of IT and other high-tech industries.
They are committed to creating a diverse environment in their research groups in
terms of race, gender and national origin.
