
* 0706870
* Hierarchical models for Large Geostatistical Datasets with Applications to Forestry and Ecology
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2007,06/06/2007
* Sudipto Banerjee,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 253,511.00

This proposal lays down a comprehensive framework for carrying out statistical
inference on point-referenced spatial data that are available from a large
number of locations. Statistical theory is used to develop mathematically formal
but computationally feasible methods that can have a broad range of
applications. Hierarchical models implemented through Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods have become especially popular for spatial modelling, given their
flexibility and power to fit models that would be infeasible with classical
methods as well their avoidance of possibly inappropriate asymptotics. However,
fitting hierarchical spatial models often involves expensive matrix
decompositions whose computational complexity increases in cubic order with the
number of spatial locations, rendering such models infeasible for large spatial
data sets. This computational burden is aggravated in multivariate settings with
several spatially dependent response variables and also when data is collected
at frequent time points and spatiotemporal process models are used. The
investigators propose a class of models based upon a stochastic process that
results from projecting the original process onto a lower-dimensional subspace.
The investigators term these models as predictive process models and propose to
explore their theoretical properties. The long-term goal of the PI is to develop
a full suite of statistical methods that estimate spatial models in a wide
variety of experiments in forestry and ecology. A recurrent underlying theme of
the proposed methods that distinguishes it from existing methods is that the
modeler does not need to sacrifice richness in modeling as a compromise for the
large datasets. This resolves the statistical irony that large datasets are
precisely where statistical estimates of rich association structures are
permissible. The emphasis is on models that can be executed even with moderately
powerful computing tools and so would be accessible to a large number of
researchers.

With the increasing popularity and availability of spatial referencing
technologies such as Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Global
Positioning Systems (GPS) that can identify geographical coordinates with a
simple hand-held device, scientists and researchers in a variety of disciplines
today have access to large amounts of geocoded data. The broader impact of the
proposed methods is best assessed by connecting the outcome of this research
with the widely recognized impact of GIS on human society. From identifying
spatial disparities in health standards to more precise weather predictions, GIS
technology is used today in almost every sphere of society. By redeeming the
investigators from using ad-hoc and qualitative methods that often bring out
spurious stories, the proposed methods can have far reaching beneficial effects
in environmental research that potentially touch unexpected corners of society.
Consider a situation where an ecologist is unable to recognize critical
symbiotic relationships between multiples species, due to inadequate models.
Mathematical formalism, for all its complexities, minimizes such errors arising
from qualitative techniques currently prevalent in forestry and ecological
analysis. Such and several other scientific problems require formal spatial
analysis, harnessing the full power of the information that large datasets
carry. They include, but are not limited to, public and environmental health,
meteorology, engineering, geosciences and so on, where the fundamental goal is
the same: use new findings that will help improve human society.


