
* 0706755
* Development of Stochastic Approximation Monte Carlo Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2007,05/24/2007
* Faming Liang,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 140,000.00

During the past five decades, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods have been
developed as a versatile and powerful tool for scientific computing. However, as
known by many researchers, conventional MCMC methods are prone to get trapped in
local energy minima in simulations from a system with a rugged energy landscape,
rendering the simulations inefficient. To overcome this difficulty, the
investigaor and his collaborators recently proposed a non-Markov chain Monte
Carlo algorithm, the so-called stochastic approximation Monte Carlo (SAMC)
algorithm. Extensive numerical results show that SAMC can outperform its MCMC
competitors for many hard computational problems, such as molecular structure
prediction, phylogenetic tree reconstruction, and complex model selection
problems. This project continues to develop SAMC in both theory and methodology.
First, SAMC is generalized by allowing some statistical smoothing techniques to
be used in iterations to improve its efficiency. A rigorous theory is
established concerning the convergence and asymptotic behavior of the
generalized algorithm. Second, SAMC is generalized by changing its current
discrete setting to continuous one. The resulting algorithm is particularly
suitable for solving marginal density estimation problems. Third, SAMC is
further improved by making use of some techniques developed in evolutionary
computing. Preliminary results show that the performance of SAMC can be
significantly improved by the new developments.

This project provides some advanced computational methods, which can play an
important role in solving some hard scientific problems, such as molecular
structure prediction, phylogeny analysis, genetic network inference, machine
learning, and VLSI design. Successful computation to these problems in turn
enhances people's understanding to them. This project has broader impacts in
both communities of statistical theory and scientific computing. The research
results are disseminated to these communities via PI's direct collaboration with
researchers in other disciplines, conference presentations, books, and papers
published in academic journals. This project has also significant impacts on
education through direct involvement of graduate students and incorporation of
results into undergraduate and graduate courses.


