
* 0706518
* Reduction of Infinite Data Dimension via B Spline Smoothing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,03/24/2009
* Lijian Yang,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 221,525.00

This research project develops B spline smoothing methods for: (1) reducing
dimension in machine learning and (2) non- and semi parametric GARCH volatility
model, with fast computing and explicit formulae. Asymptotically simultaneous
confidence band are provided for all nonparametric estimation. The proposal aims
to develop the underlying theory as a crucial guide to practical implementation.
For dimension reduction in machine learning, the focuses are on the generalized
additive model (GAM) and the single index model (SIM), with dimensions tending
to infinity. For dimensions from low to moderately high (400-D), spline-
backfitted kernel smoothing procedure for additive model and direct spline
smoothing procedure for SIM are theoretically reliable, intuitively appealing
with extremely fast computing. The current project extends these procedures to
GAM and SIM with dimension going to infinity, preserving the theoretical,
intuitive and computing benefits. The investigator also studies B spline
smoothing algorithms for non- and semi- parametric GARCH model, achieving the
same asymptotics as kernel smoothing. As typical applications of GARCH model
involve sample sizes from thousands to millions and equally large number of
lagged values, B spline smoothing can compute in seconds what kernel smoothing
would need days. Thus the proposed methods satisfy both theoreticians and
financial analysts.

In the age of information overload, researchers in nearly all areas of
biological, medical, physical and social sciences are routinely confronted with
large data sets. With tens of thousands of characteristics called variables or
features, these large data sets are treasure troughs of valuable scientific
information. The methods developed by the investigator are powerful new tools
for drawing such useful information out of large data sets. Typical examples of
such data include but are not limited to, environmental and global change
studies, high frequency financial data, state and federal demographic surveys,
federal biometric database, etc. Codes written in free software R are made
publicly available for wide dissemination. Practitioners from industry and
government can analyze their own large data sets with these user-friendly
modules, in real time, with confidence and precision. A distinctive feature of
the project is the active integration of cutting-edge research with the
education and training of graduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups. This is consistent with the education goal of NSF and
fulfills NSF's commitment to the principle of fostering diversity in science.


