
* 0706724
* Statistical Modeling with High-dimensional Data: Variable Selection and Regularization
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,05/18/2007
* Ming Yuan,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2010
* USD 101,953.00

With high-dimensional data parsimonious models are preferred because they are
much more interpretable and at the same time reduce prediction errors.
Regularization is also an essential component in most modern developments for
data analysis, in particular when the number of predictors is large. Non-
regularized fitting is guaranteed to give badly over-fitted and useless models.
The investigators take a regularization approach to the variable selection
problem in high-dimensional statistical modeling such that the resulting model
enjoys excellent prediction accuracy and at the same time has a sparse
representation. In particular, the investigators develop: (1) new fused variable
selection methods in proteomics data analysis which has been a revolutionary
cancer diagnostic tool; (2) a novel kernel logistic regression model which
automatically adopts a support-vector representation; (3) several new techniques
for performing simultaneous variable selection in estimating multiple quantile
regression functions. The investigators also study the theory of these new
variable selection techniques. Efficient algorithms and software are developed
for public use.

Modern scientific innovations allow scientists to collect massive and high-
dimensional data. It is critical in scientific investigations to extract useful
information from the huge amount of data. For this reason, variable selection
and dimension reduction play a fundamental role in high-dimensional statistical
modeling. Variable selection problems arise from a wide range of fields, machine
learning, drug discovery, biomarker finding, genetics, proteomics, brain imaging
analysis, financial modeling, environmental sciences, to name a few. The
research project aims to develop state-of-the-art statistical tools that help
researchers in various fields to analyze their data.
