
* 0706963
* Collaborative Research: Nonparametric Methods for Emerging Technologies in Bioinformatics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2007,09/04/2009
* Huixia Wang,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 179,798.00

The proposed research targets two important statistical problems in protein and
gene expression microarray experiments: (I) quantification of the protein lysate
arrays, an emerging technology for directly measuring protein contents of
different lysed tissue samples simultaneously; (II) modeling probe level gene
expression data, in particular, the exon tiling arrays to detect alternative
splicing, which is an essential process resulting in much of the human
diversity. The investigators provide a statistical framework that allows for
unknown regressor values in a nonparametric regression model, with applications
to the quantification of protein lysate array data. The investigators also
develop a quantile regression approach for mixed-effect models that are
appropriate for detecting treatment and/or interaction effects without
parametric distributional assumptions on the model. The investigators propose to
make use of information across genes to enhance performance of the inferential
methods in small sample problems. The new principles developed in the proposal
are statistically interesting beyond their direct applications to gene and
protein expression data.

Findings from the Human Genome Project highlight the intricacy of interactions
between cell regulation, proteins and genes. It is generally understood that
biological functions and biological activities are controlled by subsets of
genes interacting with proteins in a highly controlled manner. High throughput
technologies such as microarrays are valuable for studying a large number of
biological components simultaneously. In particular, the protein lysate and exon
tiling arrays have begun to show their important roles in cancer study and other
biomedical research. However, sound conclusions from these technologies depend
on appropriate statistical analysis of the proteomic and genomic data. The
statistical methods developed in the proposal are timely and important for
proper quantification of the protein lysate arrays and for detecting alternative
splicing through the exon tiling arrays. The nonparametric approach proposed is
especially appealing due to its flexibility and adaptivity in modeling probe
level gene expression data as well as protein lysate array data.


