
* 0706919
* Sufficient Dimension Reduction for Missing, Censored, and Correlated Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2007,08/24/2007
* Lexin Li,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 119,900.00

This proposal aims to develop new theory and methodology for sufficient
dimension reduction (SDR). In particular, the research focuses on biostatistical
problems which commonly include missing data, survival data, and longitudinal
data analysis. The proposed methodology can effectively transform a high
dimensional regression problem to a low dimensional projection, retain full
regression information, and impose few or no probabilistic models. There are
three components to this research. First, the investigator proposes a family of
augmented inverse probability weighted SDR estimators when predictors have
missing observations. This new approach allows a more general missing data
mechanism than the existing solution and permits more flexible regression forms
beyond the homoscedastic linear model. The second component of the research
targets SDR for survival data, where the response of time to death or disease
recurrence is subject to censoring. Viewing the censored response as a specific
type of missing data, the investigator integrates an inverse probability
weighted estimation strategy with a variety of SDR methods. Thirdly, the
investigator studies a type of longitudinal data where measurements for all the
study subjects are collected at the same scheduled time points. Both a
population foundation and the associated estimation procedure are developed. All
three components center around commonly encountered biostatistical problems and
the development of the three components are interrelated.

Modern technologies have pushed the frontier of science with the capability of
generating and collecting data in large quantity and high dimensionality.
Examples of large high dimensional data sets arise in a great number of research
areas, such as environmental studies, human health and medical research, and
homeland security. Sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) methodology effectively
transforms a high dimensional data problem to a low dimensional one.
Consequently, SDR allows many existing analytical methods, which used to be
hindered by the curse of dimensionality, to now work for the high dimensional
problems. In addition, informative visualization of the data often becomes
possible after dimension reduction, facilitating both the understanding and the
analysis of the data. By developing new theory and methodology for missing,
censored, and correlated data, the investigator's research extends the boundary
of SDR to biostatistics as well as other disciplines such as econometrics,
finance and bioinformatics. The impact of this research is anticipated to be
widespread, due to the prevalence of the high dimensional data and the urgent
demand for effective analytical tools to tackle those problems.


