
* 0706771
* Corrected Brownian Approximations and Hybrid Bootstrap Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,07/29/2009
* Robert Keener,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 149,991.00

Brownian motion approximations have been developed to estimate probabilities and
expectations that arise in boundary crossing problems in discrete time. The
proposed research derives correction terms to improve the accuracy of these
Brownian approximations in various settings. The hybrid bootstrap is a new
resampling method used to set confidence intervals. It is particularly relevant
and appropriate when an experiment provides limited information about the
parameter of interest, but substantial information about nuisance parameters.
Three applications are considered: estimating the signal in a signal plus noise
Poisson model of interest in high energy physics; estimating the location of a
quantitative trait loci on a strand of DNA with data from a back-cross or inter-
cross design; and estimating new parameters after sequential change point
detection.

Two different topics are considered for this project. The first concerns
Brownian approximations. The specific goal is to derive correction terms to
improve these approximations for a class of boundary crossing problems in
discrete time. Brownian and diffusion approximations have been a major tool in
stochastic modeling, with applications to diverse areas including sequential
analysis in statistics, queuing theory for industrial and networking
applications, and options pricing in finance. New methods to improve the
accuracy these approximations should have broad value. The other topic concerns
the hybrid bootstrap approach to interval estimation. Bootstrap methods in
statistics use computer simulation to help a researcher assess the precision of
an estimator. Hybrid bootstrapping is a modern variant of this approach which is
particularly relevant in situations where the experiment provides limited
information about the parameter of interest. Three specific applications are
being studied. The first concerns experiments in physics in which a new particle
or phenomenon, if present, will increase the rate of events, counted in the
course of the experiment. A second application concerns modern genetics, trying
to estimate locations for loci on a strand of DNA associated with a quantitative
trait of interest. The final application arises in situations where a process of
interest is monitored to detect changes. Industrial processes are often tracked
since changes are often associated with production problems that should be noted
and fixed as soon as possible to improve quality and output. Networks are often
monitored for similar reasons, and financial series may be monitored for a
variety of reasons. The hybrid bootstrap should be useful for new parameters
describing process evolution after the change point.
