
* 0706108
* Collaborative Research: Penalized Methods for Variable Selection and Estimation in High-Dimensional Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Jian Huang,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 45,000.00

This project studies penalized methods for variable selection and estimation in
high-dimensional models. A general approach for fitting high-dimensional models
is to use regularization penalties. Several important penalized methods for
variable selection and estimation have been proposed, but the properties of
these methods have not been systematically studied. To apply the methods in
scientific investigations, it is important to understand their properties. In
particular, it is important to know under what conditions, the methods correctly
select the important variables and estimate their effects in an efficient way.
Standard methods for evaluating a statistical procedure assume that the number
of variables in a model is fixed and much smaller than the sample size. This
formulation is not applicable to high-dimensional models. The problem of
analyzing high-dimensional models presents novel and challenging theoretical
questions in mathematical statistics. Current variable selection methods using
penalties assume a known form of the statistical model, which can be a
misrepresentation of the reality. It is important to investigate what happens if
a parametric model is misspecified or if no parametric assumptions are made
about the model. In particular, it is important to know whether there are
conditions under which penalized methods select variables correctly despite
misspecification and under what conditions misspecification causes them to yield
misleading results. It is also important to extend the penalized methods to
nonparametric and semiparametric models.

High-dimensional data arise in many important applications, notably biological
and biomedical investigations. With rapid advances in biotechnology, more and
more large data sets are being generated. The identification of statistically
and biologically significant patterns from high-dimensional and noisy data sets
is a major challenge. The investigators apply the proposed research to genome-
wide association (GWA) analysis, detection of copy number variation (CNV), and
analysis of censored survival data with gene expression profiles. GWA analysis
and detection of CNV enable the identification of genes and pathways responsible
for the development and progression of a disease, such as many forms of cancer.
Correlating a gene expression profiles with survival is useful, because survival
is perhaps the most important clinical endpoint in many cancer studies. The
development of statistical methods that can deal with high-dimensional problems
in estimating the relationship between clinical outcomes and genetic and genomic
data contribute to better understanding of the genetic basis of diseases, better
diagnoses, and better survival prediction.


