
* 0706082
* Statistical Analysis of Image Restoration and Its Applications in Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,09/10/2008
* Peihua Qiu,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 140,000.00

Image analysis is an interdisciplinary research area with broad applications.
One major focus of this project is on image deblurring when an observed image
has both pointwise noise and spatial blur and when the blurring mechanism is
unknown, which is often referred to as the blind image deblurring problem. In
the statistical literature, little existing discussion can be found on image
deblurring. In the applied mathematics and computer sciences literatures,
existing image deblurring methods assume that the blurring mechanism, described
by a point spread function, either is completely known, or follows a parametric
model with one or more unknown parameters, or satisfies various conditions some
of which are too restrictive to satisfy in applications. This project proposes
alternative approaches to the blind image deblurring problem without imposing
restrictive assumptions on the point spread function. The major idea is to
estimate the point spread function from an observed test image or portions of an
observed image with simple image structure, and then to restore true images
using the estimated point spread function. If test images or portions of an
observed image with simple image structure are not available, then the
investigator suggests using the above idea locally, based on the observation
that a true image can be well approximated by a simple structured one in a local
neighborhood. Such local deblurring procedures allow the blurring mechanism to
vary over location. In recent years, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is widely
used for demonstrating pathological or other physiological alterations of living
tissues. Due to movement of the imaged object and many other reasons, observed
MRI images usually contain various contaminations, among which spatial blur and
pointwise noise are most common. Right now, people usually use existing image
deblurring techniques to deblur MRI images of individual 2-dimensional (2-D)
slices of the imaged object slice by slice. This project suggests treating 2-D
MRI images of different slices as profiles of a 3-D image and deblurring the 3-D
image directly, after generalizing the proposed 2-D deblurring methods to 3-D
cases, which would greatly improve the quality of the restored MRI images. This
project also suggests using observed data in both frequency domain and spatial
domain, and making use of their major strengths.

This project would have broader impacts on the society through its impacts on
the progress of image deblurring techniques. Proposed deblurring procedures
should greatly improve the quality of restored MRI images, which should help
people better understand living tissues and neural activities of humans and
other animals and diagnose various diseases more accurately. Besides MRI and
functional MRI, image deblurring is used widely elsewhere. For instance, it is
used in machine recognition of handwriting, including machine reading of postal
addresses, bank checks, and so forth. It is also used in preprocessing satellite
images and various other images in medical sciences, meteorology, oceanography,
military, space communication, etc. Therefore, this project could have a
positive impact in all these areas. This project would also contribute to the
development of human resources in science and engineering through its
educational activities. For instance, the investigator will offer an advanced
topics course on image analysis, from which graduate students from various
departments will get systematic training in all aspects of scientific research.
A web page will be created at the end of this project to include all computer
programs and research results so that other researchers can easily download and
use them. A Ph.D. student of the investigator is currently writing his thesis on
image processing. All these educational activities should have a great impact on
the popularity and further development of the related research areas.
