
* 0706949
* Statistical Graphics Research in Association with GGobi
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,04/09/2009
* Dianne Cook,IA,Iowa State University
* Continuing grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 319,999.00

This research develops methods for interactive graphics, and makes them publicly
available in the open source project, GGobi, freely available at
http://www.ggobi.org. The development focuses on three areas: building the
infrastructure; developing new methods for interactive facetting, tours and
logical linking; and disseminating the research. Infrastructure development
includes making the the data pipeline underlying GGobi more modular, improving
the communication between GGobi and R, and adding more drawing primitives to
facilitate map drawing. GGobi's capacity for handling categorical variables and
large data is also expanded. The new methods development is driven by challenges
provided in the analysis of multivariate longitudinal and spatio-temporal data.
The project pays careful attention to disseminating the work, maintaining
stability, portability and extensibility of GGobi, developing curriculum
material and video demonstrations, and holding a yearly users and developers
meeting.

This research extends an open source software project, called GGobi, which
provides interactive plots to explore and discover hidden or unexpected
structure in high-dimensional data. High-dimensional data arises in many, many
real-life situations. For example, in environmental studies where weather
balloons, or remote instruments mounted on satellites, measure variables such as
temperature, humidity, wind speed, wind direction, and pressure at many
locations on the globe, to study global warming. Each individual variable might
not reveal much. Interactive graphics helps to piece together these multiple
variables, to investigate different weather patterns, and discover the impact on
local climate patterns. Other examples include studying the characteristics of
images as might be used in homeland security applications, and exploring
individual trends in longitudinal studies of health records or education
achievement. The research pursued under this grant will extend the software to
incorporate geographic maps, new methods for plotting categorical variables, and
dealing with large amounts of data. As an open source software project a lot of
energy is put into disseminating the work to the general community. The software
is available freely so that it can be used by anyone with their own data, and
that instructors can incorporate the software into their college-level classes.
A web site with documentation and tutorials with demonstration movies is
maintained at http://www.ggobi.org.


