
* 0706192
* Empirical Likelihood for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2007,04/13/2009
* Nicole Lazar,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 145,051.00

Empirical likelihood (EL) is a non-parametric analog of standard parametric
likelihood, which has gained in popularity since its introduction in the late
1980s. Versions of EL have been shown to apply to linear models, generalized
linear models, survival data and more. Furthermore, EL inherits many of the
asymptotic properties and behaviors of ordinary likelihoods and is also
connected to other popular procedures such as the bootstrap. All of these facts
make it an attractive alternative to parametric methods. It is more robust,
since it makes fewer assumptions (typically only assumptions on the first two
moments or on the specific functionals that are being estimated), yet the
theoretical performance is equal to that of standard techniques which posit
distributional assumptions on the observations. To date, there has been no
extensive work exploring the usefulness of EL in the context of longitudinal
data. This, in spite of the fact that longitudinal data are prevalent in
medicine, psychology, epidemiology, and social sciences more broadly. A popular
family of models for longitudinal data is that of generalized estimating
equations (GEE), which can also be fit into the framework of EL, creating a
natural extension that would combine these two constructs. Comparison with other
widespread approaches, for instance the generalized method of moments and the
quadratic inference function, is then possible. In the current work the
investigator builds EL for longitudinal data settings, compares its performance
to existing methods, and develops diagnostics for evaluating the sensitivity of
the inference to the specific sample on which it is based. Longitudinal data -
collected on the same individuals over time - are important in many medical and
biological applications. For instance, in studying the effectiveness of a new
treatment for cancer, medical researchers need to follow patients over time and
compare their survival rates to the survival rates of patients receiving an
existing treatment. It is therefore critical to have good statistical models for
longitudinal data, models that will take best advantage of the information
available from these types of studies. In this project, the researcher develops
a class of models based on "empirical likelihood." Empirical likelihood models
make minimal assumptions about the data and are therefore very flexible,
general, and robust. At the same time, they inherit many of the important
mathematical properties of standard statistical techniques, which make much
stronger assumptions that are unlikely to be met in many real-life situations.
The investigator also compares the class of empirical likelihood models to
existing methods for the analysis of longitudinal data and establishes
conditions under which the new models are expected to perform better.
