
* 0706935
* Bayesian Analysis for Studies of Gene-Environment Interaction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,04/30/2008
* Bhramar Mukherjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 134,451.00

ABSTRACT In case-control studies of gene-environment association with disease,
when genetic and environmental exposures can be assumed to be independent in the
underlying population, one may exploit the independence assumption in order to
derive more efficient estimation techniques than the traditional logistic
regression analysis. Many of the classical results for case-control analysis,
which assume the covariate distribution to be non-parametric, do not hold under
a constrained space of exposure distributions. However, the gain in efficiency
of modern retrospective methods comes at the cost of lack of robustness, since
large biases are introduced in the retrospective estimates under violation of
the gene-environment independence assumption. The main goal of this research
proposal is to find natural analytical tools to solve the model specification
dilemma of modern retrospective analysis of studies of gene-environment
interaction, under some commonly used epidemiological designs. Using the
profile-likelihood framework developed by Chatterjee and Carroll (2005,
Biometrika), the investigator proposes a Bayesian approach that incorporates
uncertainty regarding the assumed constraint of gene-environment independence in
a natural data adaptive way. The proposed shrinkage estimator, conceived from a
Bayesian standpoint, is designed to maintain attractive efficiency properties,
without relying on unverifiable model constraints. Theoretical properties of the
proposed estimator are studied under varying scenarios of gene-environment
association. The investigator considers both empirical Bayes and hierarchical
Bayes methods to relax gene-environment independence assumption. The proposal
explores the connection of the Bayesian approaches to an alternative random-
effects model. The methods are extended beyond the commonly used unmatched case-
control study design to two-phase and family-based studies of gene-environment
interaction.

Two scientific streams are currently playing extremely important roles in
clinical medicine and public health: the molecular biology approach with an
emphasis on genetics, and the quantitative approach with an emphasis on
epidemiology. The developments in these areas jointly are making fundamental
contributions to the study of etiology, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of
complex diseases. Phenomenal advancement of medical science and genetic
technology is giving rise to many complex design and analysis issues which
statisticians and epidemiologists have never confronted before. This proposal
lies in that new interface of human genetics, epidemiology and statistics. Case-
control studies are being increasingly used for studying the association between
a disease and a candidate gene. However, except for some rare diseases, such as
Huntington or Tay Sachs disease which may be the result of a deficiency of a
single gene product, most common human diseases have a multifactorial etiology
involving complex interplay of many genetic and environmental factors. By
identifying and characterizing such complicated gene-environment interactions
through clinical and epidemiological studies, one has more opportunities to
understand the genesis and etiology of complex diseases and to develop targeted
intervention strategies for high-risk individuals. The proposal presents robust
and efficient statistical techniques to investigate the synergism between gene
and environment in studying complex diseases. The high-performance computing
tools developed in the proposal makes it feasible to use the methods in large-
scale applications such as genome-wide association studies.




