
* 0706041
* Statistics and Information Theory
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2007,03/24/2009
* Bhaskar Bhattacharya,IL,Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2011
* USD 118,213.00

This research enhances statistical inference by applying techniques from
information theory, makes new developments and gains new insights into many
existing methodology. Specifically, this project concentrates on the following
topics. (1) In the context of incorporating historical data when analyzing
current data, often optimal posterior data analysis uses power priors; however,
the suggested value of the optimal power has been called 'highly skeptical'
(Ibrahim, et al, 2003, JASA) and when multiple historical data sets are present,
no optimal set of powers is known. PI solves this by framing the optimization
problem differently and using tools from the duality principles of optimization.
For the multiple historical data sets, this project introduces different
criteria motivated by different objectives, which will be studied and compared.
(2) PI investigates the efficiency of the optimal solutions of (1) under
constraints involving divergence between densities and with emphasis on `no loss
of information' between input information and output information. (3) PI
investigates the Neyman-Pearson testing rule in the context of information
theory with emphasis on finding the type I and type II errors. Finding these
errors is extremely helpful when only asymptotic tests are available. Results
are applied to testing the effect of dose using a logistic regression model with
several covariates, which has an asymptotic chi-square distribution with 1 d.f.
(4) New methods are developed for variable selection in regression by
considering projection from the full model subject to constraints that limit the
search to only those which are within a certain 'divergence' from a given model
(e.g., intercept only). One of the merits of this procedure is that it is
simpler to use and avoids the complicated Bayesian calculations. (5) PI
investigates the asymptotic behavior of an I-projection when the constraints are
any convex sets C. Haberman (Annals of Statistics, 1984) has considered the
asymptotic properties of an I-projection when the constraints are moment
equalities; however, those results do not extend directly when other types of
constraints are involved (e.g., moment inequality, constraints with divergences,
etc.). This research emphasizes on the dual optimization problem and its
asymptotic properties, through which a connection is made to the primal problem.
Estimation of a functional, including its confidence interval, will also be
considered. (6) PI introduces the concept of pseudo-divergence, where a nuisance
parameter is replaced by a consistent estimator into the criterion to be
optimized. The asymptotic properties of the estimator of the parameter of
interest is investigated. (7) PI applies information theoretic approach in
multinomial response models where logarithmic penalty functions are commonly
used to determine optimal prediction under a given model. This research would
enable one to construct models with built-in inequality constraints on
parameters, which would be very useful in model selection.

The intellectual merit of the project is that using information theoretic
techniques new aspects of statistical inference procedures have been developed.
In this project new optimal distributions are presented in posterior data
analysis and they are shown to be highly efficient, the error rates in
hypothesis testing are found for small sample sizes, new strategies for model
selection are demonstrated, the asymptotic distribution of the I-projection for
general convex sets is derived and the concept of pseudo-divergence is
introduced where the asymptotic distribution of the estimator of the parameter
of interest is found. The broader impact of the project is that the results are
directly useful in many areas including actuarial science, product reliability
and manufacturing, Bayesian prior selection, econometrics and finance, health
and medicine. The proposed activities involve training of graduate students in
statistics as well as providing selected undergraduate students with research
experience.
