
* 0706700
* Theory and Methodology for Semiparametric Linear Models with Censored Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,03/23/2009
* Bin Nan,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 172,678.00

Instead of modeling the hazard function for censored survival data as the famous
Cox model does, modeling the survival time directly by certain transformation
becomes increasingly appealing to practitioners because it postulates a simple
relationship between the response variable and covariates with easily
interpretable parameters. As a special example, the semiparametric accelerated
failure time model that transforms the failure time by logarithm has been
studied extensively in the past decade. Existing challenges for those
semiparametric linear transformation models include semiparametric efficient
estimation, asymptotic theory with more realistic conditions that may lead to
good properties for survival time prediction, a measurability issue in the
stochastic integral formulation for the outcome-dependent weighted estimating
methods, and high-dimensional data analysis. The investigator proposes new
methods to tackle those emerging issues in the semiparametric linear
transformation models. Asymptotic theories will be proved by using the modern
empirical process theory. Numerical implementations of all the proposed methods
will be based on either those well developed algorithms for discrete estimating
functions or the Newton-Raphson method for smooth objective functions in which
the infinite-dimensional parameter is approximated by a smoothing estimator. To
enhance the predicting ability, more flexible transformations are considered for
problems with high-dimensional data. Penalized method will be investigated in
order to obtain simultaneous variable selection and survival time prediction.

Statistical models considered in this project have important applications in a
wide spectrum of disciplines such as biology, medicine, health studies, and
engineering. The proposed research is particularly motivated by the multi-cohort
study for the women's reproductive life staging in which the prediction of age
at menopause is of major interest, and by the Michigan ovary cancer and lung
cancer studies that look for relevant genes and good models for predicting
patients' survival using gene expression data. It will provide methods that use
data more efficiently and yield more precise prediction. It will also allow the
investigator to add more thorough statistical results to the courses of advanced
survival analysis and semiparametric models for graduate students. The proposed
research activities will motivate graduate students to become independent
researchers who are able to engage in fundamental statistical research.


