
* 0706857
* Estimation of Analytic Surfaces with Applications to Nanoparticle Characterization via Surface Waves
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2007,08/01/2007
* Richard Charnigo,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 249,999.00

This three-year project advances the statistical field of functional data
analysis by rigorously developing a new compound estimation paradigm for
simultaneously estimating a mean response and several of its derivatives from
noisy data. A hybrid between local modeling and global modeling, compound
estimation circumvents the difficulties associated with local averaging (e.g.,
kernel), local modeling (e.g., local regression), and global modeling (e.g.,
spline) approaches. These difficulties include: the empirical disparity between
asymptotic theory and finite-sample performance in local averaging; the
pointwise character of local modeling, along with the incompatibilities between
mean response estimates and derivative estimates in that setting; and, the
unrealistic assumptions tacitly imposed in global modeling, such as there being
three nonzero derivatives with discontinuities in the third derivative. Compound
estimation is particularly promising for problems in which physical phenomena
are described by differential equations, problems in which modeling velocities
and accelerations is of scientific importance, and pattern recognition problems
in which features of higher-order derivatives can be exploited for
classification. One such pattern recognition problem has remained an outstanding
challenge in nanoscale engineering: can the configuration of nanosize metallic
particles, agglomerates, and structures on or near a surface be inferred from
surface wave scattering data? If so, then a major hurdle to building real-time
diagnostic tools in nanoscale engineering can be overcome, thereby advancing
future nanomanufacturing efforts. Compound estimation offers a solution to this
pattern recognition problem, as mean response estimates and derivative estimates
from surface wave scattering data can be employed to objectively determine the
most plausible configurations of nanosize particles. Although there is a wealth
of underlying mathematics, the principal motivation for compound estimation is
practical: to provide tractable yet realistic descriptions of the possibly
complicated relationships among variables of scientific interest. Many
applications are envisioned, including studies of: human growth and development
patterns in biology; temporal trajectories for infectious disease incidence in
public health; dose-response relationships for pharmacological treatments in
medicine; stock market and gross domestic product trends in economics; and, the
behavior of nanosize particles in engineering. This three-year project gives
particular attention to the last application, both to guide the development of
compound estimation and to address an important scientific problem in its own
right. There is a crucial need for advanced instrumentation allowing real-time
on-line diagnostics of chemical and physical processes in nanoscale engineering;
compound estimation, through its solution to a pattern recognition problem, can
help to create the "eyes" and "brain" for such diagnostics.

Theoretical and methodological developments in compound estimation, along with
empirical findings, will be published in appropriate venues and presented to
local, regional, and national audiences. User-friendly software will be made
freely available online. This project will positively impact graduate and
undergraduate education at the University of Kentucky, through both the direct
involvement of five students during its three-year course and its visibility to
incoming or prospective students as an example of exciting multidisciplinary
research. Finally, the investigative team's connections with the Appalachian
Math and Science Program and the Umbrella Program on Nanoscale Engineering will
be utilized to raise undergraduate and high school student awareness of and
appreciation for statistics and applications.


