
* 0706842
* Semiparametric and Nonparametric Methods of Model Selection and Model Checking for Correlated Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,05/11/2009
* Lan Wang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 124,978.00

Model selection and model checking are fundamental to statistical analysis. The
main objective of model selection is to identify parsimonious well-fitting
models in order to balance the increase in model fit against the increase in
model complexity; and that of model checking is to assess or test the validity
of a proposed model. An enormous amount of literature is available for
independent data in this research area. For correlated data, however, there
exists only fragmented work and the asymptotic theory is largely undeveloped,
mainly due to (1) the lack of a rich class of models such as multivariate
Gaussian for the joint distributions of the responses, (2) the complexity of the
joint likelihood even when such a multivariate family of distributions is
available. These obstacles make it extremely challenging, if not impossible, to
apply existing model selection and model checking procedures that were developed
for independent data or based on full likelihood. This project addresses this
challenge by developing a set of semiparametric and nonparametric tools for
model selection and model checking for correlated data, including model checking
procedures based on moment conditions via the recently developed quadratic
inference function and rank-based estimation equations; data-driven model
checking procedures that allow for flexible alternative and increase general
power performance. The large sample theory and practical performance will be
investigated in depth in this project. Also on the agenda are related research
issues, such as the characterization of rank regression under possible model
misspecification and the theoretical robustness properties of rank-based model
selection algorithms.

Correlated data frequently occur in many fields, such as biomedical and health
sciences, economics, social sciences and environmental studies. This work will
greatly enhance the available methodologies and theories for model selection and
model checking. The investigator will develop computational packages that can be
easily implemented by statisticians and scientists. This project will provide
scientists with new and flexible tools for analyzing high-dimensional correlated
data. Education will be an important component. The research results will be
incorporated at different levels of statistical courses. Undergraduate and
graduate students, especially those from underrepresented groups, will be
encouraged to participate in this research project.
