
* 0706971
* Inference for Contour Sets
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,09/10/2008
* Wolfgang Polonik,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2011
* USD 253,419.00

The central objects of this project are contour sets or level sets. These are
sets on which a function, such as a regression function or a probability
density, exceeds a given threshold. The development of methodology allowing to
draw statistical inference about contour sets is the main objective of this
project. In one of the subprojects the investigator is developing confidence
regions for contour sets using plug-in estimates based on kernel estimation.
These methodological developments are supported by large sample theory showing
that the proposed confidence regions are (asymptotically) valid, meaning that
they hold the pre-specified confidence level. Two approaches for the
construction of confidence regions will be considered. One is based on the
bootstrap methodology, and the other is based on large sample distribution
theory for plug-in level set estimates. As for the latter it is shown that the
L1-distance between the plug-in estimate and their theoretical counterpart is
asymptotically normal when standardized appropriately. In another subproject the
investigator is analyzing related novel algorithms for the computation of
contour set estimates in high dimensions that have been developed in the
literature recently. The focus here is practical applicability.

In the sciences, contour sets are well-known via contour plots that come with
almost every scientific software package. Such contour sets are crucial for
drawing scientific conclusions in many fields of application. These fields
include astronomical sky surveys, flow cytometrie, detection of minefields,
analysis of seismic data, image segmentation, as well as anomaly or novelty
detection including intrusion detection, detection of anomalous jet engine
vibration, medical imaging and EEG-based seizure analysis. The contour sets used
in these applications usually depend on observed data. In other words, these
sets are random objects, and consequently a statistical analysis of these sets
is desirable or even necessary, in order to quantify scientific conclusions. The
development of methodology for such a statistical analysis is one of the main
topics of this project. No such methodology exists so far, although its
availability shows the clear potential to have an immediate impact in many of
the fields of application mentioned above. The importance of a statistical
understanding of contour set estimates is underlined by a recent sharp increase
in activity in this field. However, so far all the existing work, while
important from various points of view, does not allow for quantifying the
statistical uncertainty that goes along with estimation of the contour sets. The
statistical methodology developed in this project as well as the challenging
theory underlying these developments is novel and adds significant insight to a
modern field of statistics. The project also impacts the field of statistics via
the support of graduate students and their education in a modern field of
statistics.
