
* 0706761
* New Statistical Modeling Procedures for Object Oriented Data Analysis (OODA)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,05/05/2009
* Haonan Wang,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 149,930.00

The objectives of this research are to develop novel statistical models, theory,
algorithms and applications geared towards the analysis of complex object
oriented data, including tree-structured objects and random graphs. The research
not only introduces a number of innovative techniques, but also provides various
new and deep insights into statistical foundations, e.g., modeling procedure for
complex data objects. This research significantly enhances the toolkit available
for the analysis of object oriented data. In particular, three inter-related
topics are proposed for investigation. First, the investigator develops a
careful axiomatic structure for understanding tree-structured objects, which
circumvents the need to define linear operations. Moreover, the investigator
studies how to carry out statistical inference, based on the metric induced
probability measures, in tree space. Nonparametric and semiparametric modeling
procedures are also proposed in the space of trees and graphs. Second, a model
selection procedure is studied using Hellinger distance. The asymptotic behavior
of the estimated Hellinger discrepancy, and testing the adequacy of the
approximation are considered. The performance of the proposed model selection
procedure is examined through its application to the microarray gene expression
data. Third, the investigator develops new techniques for analyzing data
collected on manifolds. Manifold data, such as data collected along a river in
an ecological study, and data gathered over a surface, have become popular in
many scientific fields. New statistical methodology to extract useful features
from manifold data is needed. Here, a geodesic low-rank thin plate splines
method is under investigation.

The research project lays out a well-grounded and comprehensive framework for
analysis of object oriented data. It greatly enhances the research on object
oriented data analysis by developing interdisciplinary research including
bioinformatics, computer science, neuroscience, mathematics and statistics. The
research on tree-structured objects can significantly benefit society by
developing new techniques in image analysis and improving medical diagnoses. The
investigator integrates research and education by working closely with both
undergraduate and graduate students, especially underrepresented groups, from
various fields. In addition, the results are to be disseminated through
presentations, tutorials and conferences and via internet.
