
* 0706965
* Theory and Applications of U-statistics for Multistate Models under Censoring
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,04/07/2009
* Somnath Datta,KY,University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,782.00

U-statistics are fundamental objects in the theory and methods of statistics.
They are generalizations of sample means and cover directly or indirectly a
whole range of estimators, estimating functions (for each value of the
parameter) and test statistics. The purpose of this proposal is to investigate
systematically a class of these statistics that may arise in various multistate
censored data problems under a unified framework. Multistate models are
progressive systems where individuals move from one state to the next and the
resulting data are generalizations of event time data. The variables of interest
include various transition times, entry and exist times to and from a given
state, waiting times in a given transient state and so on or a mixture of all of
the above and additional covariates, if any. Both right and interval censored
multistate data are considered. Applications of the U-statistics theory and
methods to the construction of nonparametric tests and confidence intervals in
multistate problems are also studied. Multistate data arise in diverse fields
and applications. For example, the states may correspond to the health status of
patients or the strength of the housing market or the climatic conditions in
various parts of the world and so on. As a result, it is expected that the
resulting methods will provide valuable statistical tools to researchers in
multiple disciplines including medicine, marketing, political science and
engineering. The proposed research will also contribute substantially in
training future statisticians since parts of it will be used for doctoral
dissertations under PI's supervision and some of the findings will be
incorporated in graduate level courses.
