
* 0706385
* Statistical Methods for Fingerprint Image Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2007,07/27/2007
* Sarat Dass,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Biometric recognition, or biometrics, refers to the automatic recognition of a
person based on his anatomical or behavioral characteristics. Among the various
biometric traits (e.g., face, iris, fingerprint, voice), fingerprint-based
authentication has the longest history, and it has been successfully adopted in
both forensic and civilian applications. However, the performance of current
fingerprint recognition systems is inadequate in the presence of noisy and
deformed images, especially when the fingerprint database is very large. Three
areas of statistical research are impacted, namely, the analysis of functional
data, multivariate dependence, and spatial and general point processes. The
proposed research will develop and utilize a Bayesian framework and related
computational schemes for inference. This framework will be used to address
following specific problems: fingerprint feature detection, modeling noisy and
deformed images, fingerprint individuality (i.e., uniqueness) assessment, and
effective distributional representations for information fusion (multi-
biometrics).

Advances in fingerprint capture technology have resulted in new large scale
civilian applications such as the US-VISIT program. However, these systems still
encounter difficulties due to the effects of biometric variability present in
operating environments and the massive number of comparisons that have to be
executed in each identification task. The proposed model-based methods are
likely to improve the effectiveness of various fingerprint processing tasks
which will eventually yield improved identification performance in real
operating environments. Further, this research will impact how fingerprint
evidence is reported and used for the identification of suspects. The proposed
research increases the role of statistics in important computer science and
engineering applications, and provides an impetus for inter-disciplinary
research and synergistic activities. Both undergraduate and graduate students
working on the proposed topics will develop the analytical and computing skills
required to perform scientific research. In this way, the proposed research
helps in the creation of future scientists to work in the emerging and critical
field of biometric recognition.
