
* 0707031
* Statistical methods for mapping imprinted genes underlying complex traits
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,05/18/2007
* Yuehua Cui,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 116,817.00

In nature, most functional regions of the genome for a chromosome pair express
equally. A variation from this equivalence results in genomic imprinting, a
phenomenon also called parent-of-origin effect. Using statistical approaches to
map imprinted genes (or imprinted quantitative trait loci (iQTL)) has shown
promising results. However, current mapping approaches based on diploid genome
are limited when the study population is polyploidy such as triploid endosperm.
Moreover, current mapping approaches by analyzing phenotypic data measured at a
single time point are too simple to take into account developmental or dynamic
imprinting trajectories. In this project the investigator develops a collection
of novel statistical models for mapping imprinted genes that govern phenotypic
traits of interests. The objectives of the proposed research are (a) to have a
thorough statistical investigation of the variance component model for mapping
imprinted genes underlying single or multiple endosperm traits; (b) to propose
methodologies for modeling imprinted gene interactions; (c) to develop
functional iQTL mapping approaches for mapping of complex dynamic imprinted
traits. With the development of human HapMap project and the availability of
sequence information for other species, another aim of the project is to develop
statistical methods to unravel the genetic secret of genomic imprinting in
sequence level. Efficient statistical algorithms, biologically meaningful
hypothesis tests, and robust model assessment tools are under investigation.

Imprinting phenomena have been increasingly observed in a wide spectrum,
spanning from plants, animals to humans. In cereals, the endosperm of a grain is
the main storage organ serving the major source of food for humans. A number of
endosperm traits beneficial to humans are controlled by imprinted genes. In
humans, many previously puzzling diseases such as Prader-Willis syndrome and
Angelman syndrome are known to be affected by imprinted genes. In this project,
the investigator will develop biologically meaningful statistical methods to
hunt for imprinted genes underlying complex traits, in order to enhance our
understanding of genetic architecture of genomic imprinting and the function of
imprinted genes. The developed models, algorithms and software will allow
researchers to better analyze their data in the hope of better understanding the
genetic basis of genomic imprinting. The project will significantly benefit
society by advancing the discovery of imprinted genes to help animal and plant
breeders to improve trait quality, and to facilitate identification of new drugs
to enhance public health. The research will be integrated into education to
train new generations in statistical genetics, and will be widely disseminated
through publications, presentations, online software and collaborations with
geneticists.


