
* 0707069
* Multi-resolution lattice models and theory for spatial process estimators
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2007,04/26/2013
* Stephan Sain,CO,University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 227,844.00

Estimating a smooth function from noisy observations is a core problem in
mathematical statistics and supports the areas of nonparametric regression and
spatial data analysis. However, there are still gaps in our knowledge of the
statistical properties of methods such as smoothing splines and geostatistical
estimators (Kriging), and there is also limited understanding of estimators that
adapt to heterogeneous structure in the function. In this proposal, the
investigators address some of the issues in nonparametric function estimation
through a spatial statistics framework. The approach is based on a new model for
nonstationary covariance functions that combines a multiresolution (or wavelet)
basis with a multivariate lattice model. This multiresolution lattice (MRL)
model builds off previous work on lattice models for spatial fields and the use
of multiresolution bases for representing nonstationary covariance functions.
The key innovation is that the lattice model describes dependence on the
coefficients of the basis, not the spatial field. The multivariate extension
allows for connections of basis coefficients between different scales, and the
localization of the basis functions in space facilitates modeling nonstationary
covariance. An important component is the extension of large sample statistical
theory to analyze spatial estimators applied to irregular locations and with
nonstationary covariance. Ultimately, in addition to methodological and
practical advances, this research seeks to break new ground in the theoretical
understanding of how nonparametric and spatial smoothers behave, and, in effect,
unifying a broad area of mathematical statistics.

The interpretation of spatial observations or fields is a fundamental data
analysis problem that is ubiquitous in the geosciences. A specific example is
the study of regional climate change where complex numerical models are coupled
to simulate climate at local scales. These numerical models are a primary tool
to quantify specific impacts of climate change at a scale that can be understood
by the general public. The fields produced by these simulations have a great
deal of large-scale structure, are noisy, and often exhibit heteroscedastic and
nonstationary behavior. Drawing inferences about these fields to provide, for
example, a probabilistic assessment of the projected climate change, requires a
deliberate statistical approach. The research outlined in this proposal seeks to
expand the tools available to analyze geophysical data, in particular the
complex outputs of regional climate models.


