
* 0707013
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Design of Experiments for Categorical Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,03/24/2009
* Min Yang,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 144,345.00

The investigators develop methods for identifying optimal and efficient designs
for experiments with categorical data. The project consists of three main parts.
(i) Identification of optimal designs for binary data under generalized linear
regression models. This part includes consideration of models in which slope and
intercept parameters can vary for different groups of subjects and models with a
random subject effect. (ii) Identification of optimal allocations of treatments
to blocks for comparative studies with binary data. A logistic model is a
popular choice for such studies. (iii) Identification of optimal designs for
count data under loglinear regression models. In this setting, the investigators
focus also on optimal designs for models that can account for subject
heterogeneity. This project is innovative in that it uses a new technique that
has vast advantages over the commonly used geometric approach.

Categorical responses are very common in designed experiments in many
scientific studies, such as drug discovery, clinical trials, social sciences,
marketing, etc. Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) are widely used for modeling
such data. Using efficient designs for collecting data in such experiments is
critically important. It can reduce the sample size needed for achieving a
specified precision, thereby reducing the cost, or improve the precision of
estimates for a specified sample size. While research on optimal designs for
linear models has been systematically developed over more than 30 years, there
are very few research publications on optimal designs for GLMs. This project is
important both for the introduction of novel theoretical tools and for its
impact on applications. For example, the results of the project significantly
reduce the time, money, and the number of patients needed in clinical trials, as
well as other scientific studies. The results can help the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to improve its guidelines for clinical trials.


