
* 0707090
* Function estimation for biased sampling and fMRI data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,06/02/2009
* Kinh Truong,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The proposal has three projects that involve the use of polynomial splines to
model (1) point process and spatial-temporal time series, (2) selection biased
(length-biased), and (3) randomly truncated data. The first part of Project (1)
considers a linear regression model in which the response is a stationary time
series and the explanatory series is a convolution of a point process and an
unknown smooth function. The aim is to estimate the unknown smooth function. The
second part of (1) deals with a non-parametric likelihood based approach to
independent component analysis (ICA) by estimating the marginal distributions of
the blind sources and the mixing matrix using the log-spline methodology. One of
the advantages of the proposed procedure is the flexibility for incorporating
the temporal or spatial correlation of the sources. The aim of Project (2) is to
estimate the underlying density or conditional density function using selection-
biased samples, by paying special attention to the situation in which the biased
sampling density tends to zero at certain rates. To what extent this will affect
the performance of the spline-based estimator is an important question and the
investigator proposes to address it by examining the rates of convergence of the
estimator. The last project deals with the estimation of density and conditional
density functions involving randomly truncated data. A new methodology based on
polynomial splines is proposed and software for the methodology will be
developed. This methodology is important for examining a wide range of
selection-bias or under-detection limits problems. Specifically, one can study
the truncation pattern closely, especially when the information about how
certain type of truncation might have occurred is available. Sampling properties
of the spline-based estimators proposed in this grant application will be
studied by extending the asymptotic results established previously by the
investigator and his colleagues. Specifically, optimal rates of convergence and
local asymptotics of the proposed estimates will be investigated and issues
related to high-dimensional explanatory variables will also be addressed.

This proposal has several broader impacts on applications to research in life
sciences. First, the time series regression models and the approach to spatial-
temporal data have a significant impact on brain research involving fMRI data,
the proposed procedures are (a) less-biased, (b) capable to display the spatial-
temporal information effectively, and (c) mathematically tractable in terms of
statistical sampling properties. Second, the proposed unified approach to
selection-biased or randomly truncated data provides major insights to the
scientific community into the issues related to data acquisition. Robust
statistical techniques are essential in the quest for important information from
brain and genomic data. Third, methods proposed here will be useful for
developing a course in statistical fMRI analysis to graduate students. Finally,
a much broader health significance of this project will be its contribution to
the better understanding of diseases that affect human lives.
