
* 0707082
* RUI: Nonstationary and High Dimensioanl Nonparametric Transfer Function Models Using Polynomial Splines
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,05/18/2007
* Jun Liu,GA,Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2010
* USD 105,000.00

This project focuses on modeling and forecasting nonlinear time series using
nonparametric methods. Because of their data-driven nature, nonparametric
methods are flexible therefore ideal for approximating nonlinear features whose
functional forms are usually unknown a priori. In his earlier study, the
investigator used local polynomial regression to model the nonlinear
relationship between time series and assumed that the noise follows an
Autoregressive-Moving Average (ARMA) process (Liu, 2005). This model is named
nonparametric transfer function model. The nonparametric transfer function model
assumes the noise to be strictly stationary, and the transfer function to be
low-dimensional. In this project, the investigator intends to generalize the
nonparametric transfer function models by relaxing these assumptions. However,
generalizing the local polynomial-based model directly is difficult partly
because of the added estimation complexity related to local polynomial
estimators when the assumptions are dropped. Polynomial spline provides an
alternative because it has an explicit functional form, which greatly simplifies
the estimation. At the same time it retains the flexibility of the model. To
relax the assumption of stationary noise, in this project the investigator
studies a new estimator in which the transfer function is approximated with
polynomial splines. This estimator allows the noise to follow an ARIMA process.
To extend the nonparametric transfer function models to higher dimensions, the
main difficulty is the ``curse of dimensionality''. The investigator plans to
overcome this problem by using an additive model to approximate the multivariate
transfer function. The additive components are modeled with polynomial splines.
The polynomial spline-based estimator can also be used to model time-varying
conditional variance in nonparametric transfer function model. The investigator
plans to approximate the transfer function and the conditional variance function
by polynomial splines. The proposed study includes the asymptotic behavior of
the proposed estimators and related issues, such as tests for additivity/unit
root, model selection, estimation and forecasting.

Forecasting and process control have been a constant interest in human society.
They cannot be achieved without proper understanding of the underlying process.
The proposed research extends the family of nonparametric transfer function
models and provides new tools to explore complex relations in real-world,
therefore enhances our abilities of forecasting and control. The proposed
research adds new capabilities to the nonparametric transfer function models so
they can be used to model high-dimensional transfer function, nonstationary time
series, and time-varying conditional variance. As a result, the applicability of
the nonparametric transfer function models is greatly enhanced. The proposed
procedures are flexible enough for many nonlinear features encountered in
practice, they are computationally efficient. The proposed methods can be
applied in many areas, for example, it is used successfully in forecasting
short-term electricity usage (Liu, Chen, Liu and Harris, 2006), which helps us
use energy more efficiently and protect the environment. The proposed research
contributes to nonlinear/nonparametric time series analysis. It further expands
the application areas of the nonparametric transfer function models and provides
useful tools to statisticians and researchers in many areas including ecology,
environmental sciences, economics, finance, engineering and biology. For
example, the proposed approach can be used to forecast volatility, which is an
important issue in financial time series analysis.
