
* 0707053
* From Centrality To Extremity in Multivariate Statistics: Data Depth, Extreme Value Theory and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,07/01/2009
* Regina Liu,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 299,767.00

Much of multivariate inference and applications evolve around the centrality
and/or extremity of the data sets or their underlying distributions. The goals
of this proposal are: (i) to develop new nonparametric statistical methodologies
for studying the effects of centrality and extremity of data by using data depth
and extreme value theory, and (ii) to demonstrate the usefulness of these
methodologies in real-life applications, including: using data depth to
construct a tractable measure of self-complexity for studying depression and
anxiety, detecting performances with extreme risk in the simultaneous monitoring
of multiple risk measures, and classifying different genome groups for more
effective medical treatments. The research findings would advance the theory
underlying each topic and broaden the applicability of statistics to other
fields. The lines of investigation are interwoven and are all motivated to build
a comprehensive multivariate statistical analysis scheme.

This research helps to develop a meaningful self-complexity measure to diagnose
patients with psychiatric disorders and provide better health care for such
patients. This research also aims to devise an effective threshold system for
signaling extreme risks, which should be useful for risk management of rare
events, such as in aviation safety or catastrophic events due to climate
changes.
