
* 0707060
* Statistical Methods for Prediction of Individual Sequences
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,05/08/2008
* Peter Bartlett,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 237,237.00

In many prediction problems that arise, for example, in computer security and
computational finance, the process generating the data is best modeled as an
adversary with whom the predictor competes. The broad goal of this research
project is the analysis and design of statistical methods for complex prediction
problems in an adversarial setting: a prediction strategy must predict any
individual sequence almost as accurately as the best strategy in some comparison
class. The research focuses on statistical methods, which are based on
probabilistic models of the data, since (a) these methods are commonly used in
practice; (b) there is evidence that these methods perform well in adversarial
settings; (c) there are good prospects of exploiting the computationally
efficient approaches that have been developed for probabilistic settings, which
is especially important for high-dimensional problems; and (d) positive results
in adversarial settings should provide better understanding of the robustness of
statistical methods in probabilistic settings. The research aims are: to develop
techniques for analyzing the performance of statistical methods, such as
Bayesian methods, for the prediction of individual sequences; to improve the
understanding of appropriate ways to measure the complexity of a probability
model used by these methods; to elucidate the impact of computational
simplifications (such as empirical Bayes approaches and MAP estimates) on the
performance of these prediction strategies; and hence to develop design
methodologies for computationally efficient statistical methods for complex
adversarial prediction problems.

There are many estimation and prediction problems for which it is appropriate to
model the process generating the data as an adversary with whom the predictor
competes. Such problems are common in information technology. For instance, in
the problem of spam filtering, the aim is to label incoming email as either
legitimate or spam, but at the same time, spammers try to design email messages
that slip past these spam filters. Thus, the prediction problem is a two-player
repeated game. Similar decision problems arise in computer network security (for
instance, the problem of deciding whether network traffic is normal or the
result of a denial-of-service attack) and in internet search (for instance,
deciding if a highly linked web page is genuinely authoritative and should have
a high page rank). In these problems, some fraction of the data seen by the
prediction strategy is chosen by an adversary who aims to fool the prediction
strategy. These adversarial problems are also common in financial applications.
Suppose that the predictions that emerge from a financial time series analysis
are used to optimize the allocation of capital across a portfolio. Then, in the
short term, it is in the interests of other market players to act so as to
diminish the returns of the portfolio, and thus render the predictions
inaccurate. It is common for statistical methods, such as Bayesian methods, to
be applied to these adversarial prediction problems, despite the fact that they
are designed for probabilistic, rather than adversarial, models of the data.
This research project aims to develop techniques to understand the inherent
limitations on the performance of these prediction methods, and hence inform the
design of more powerful prediction methods. It focuses on the predictive
accuracy and computational efficiency of methods that are suitable for the
complex and high-dimensional prediction problems that arise in practise.
