
* 0707139
* Resampling methods for temporal and spatial processes and their higher order accuracy
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2007,06/17/2009
* Soumendra Lahiri,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 319,294.00

The project focuses on investigating higher order asymptotic properties of
common resampling methods for time-series and spatial data and on development of
new ones. Specifically, this project concentrates on (i) investigating higher
order properties of resampling methods for infinite dimensional parameters of
time series data; (ii) developing Edgeworth expansion theory for statistics
under long range dependence; (iii) developing new resampling methods for spatial
data on a regular grid with an aim towards achieving higher order accuracy, (iv)
investigating ways to extend resampling methodology to irregularly spaced
spatial data and study their higher order properties.

Data exhibiting temporal and spatial dependence appear in many areas of
sciences, such as Astronomy, Atmospheric Sciences, Economics, Geology,
Hydrology, Physics, etc. Analyses of such data sets using current statistical
methodology face some limitations. This is primarily due to the fact that the
existing statistical methodology mostly rely on strong structural (i.e.,
parametric model) assumptions that are often inadequate to capture all important
features of the data generating process. This project seeks to (i) develop new
methodology (based on what are known as Resampling Methods) that provide valid
assessment of uncertainty without strong structural assumptions and (ii) develop
theoretical tools to investigate optimality properties of statistical methods
for time- and space-dependent data.
