
* 0707055
* From Information Scaling to Regimes of Statistical Models of Natural Image Patterns
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,08/29/2008
* Yingnian Wu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 12/31/2010
* USD 389,999.00

The focus of the proposed research is to develop statistical models for image
patterns of natural scenes, guided by the study of information scaling, i.e.,
the change of statistical properties of the image data over the scaling process.
The proposed research will integrate two streams of statistical and mathematical
theories in image modeling andrepresentation: (1) spatial statistical models
such as Markov random fields and Gibbs distributions originated from statistical
physics; and (2) representation and coding theories including wavelets and
sparse coding originated from harmonic analysis. At present the two areas are
studied almost in mutual isolation, with random field models working (better) in
stochastic (high-entropy) regime while the coding theories working (better) in
structured (low-entropy) regime. The PIs identify a fundamental concept, the
image entropy rate, whose scaling behavior connects the two regimes, namely the
high-entropy regime of texture patterns and low-entropy regime of geometric
patterns. More important, the connection reveals a most crucial regime in
between, that is, the mid-entropy regime of object patterns. The PIs propose to
integrate the three regimes within a unified theoretical framework, and this
integration will lead to powerful models and algorithms for learning and
recognition of natural image patterns. The issue of scale and modeling is
important in many scientific areas. As a biological application, the proposed
research also includes modeling and analysis of 1D ChIP-chip data, based on the
work done by the PI and collaborators. ChIP-chip is a technology for isolation
and identification of genomic sites occupied by specific DNA binding proteins in
living cells. This technology is playing an important role in studying gene
regulation. The proposed work will strengthen existing methods for analyzing
such data.

Images of daily environments contain a bewildering variety of patterns and
objects, such as trees, foliage, grass, rivers, houses, cars, human figures,
faces, dogs, etc. The images are large arrays of numbers. In order to teach
computers to automatically learn these patterns and recognize them from such
image data, it is crucial to understand the mathematical and statistical
properties of natural images and to develop simple but general statistical
models as well as efficient computational algorithms for representing and
recognizing these patterns. The goal of the proposed research is to study the
information contents of natural images and to develop such models and algorithms
within a unified framework. The proposed research will make useful contributions
to both statistics and computer vision. The goal of the latter is to teach
computers to see as accurately and effortlessly as human beings do.


