
* 0707004
* Collaborative Research: Integral Transform Methods for Sufficient Dimension Reduction in Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2007,08/10/2007
* Yu Michael Zhu,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2010
* USD 79,928.00

This project is aimed to develop theory and methods for sufficient dimension
reduction in regression analysis involving a large number of predictor
variables. The investigators propose a general approach called the integral
transform approach to facilitating dimension reduction. The key idea of this
approach is to use integral transform and response transformation to change the
domain where dimension reduction is performed. Due to the availability of a wide
range of transformations and integral transforms, this approach leads to a
flexible and effective framework for addressing and resolving challenges raised
by high dimensionality. Through a series of well-defined research problems, the
investigators study this framework and develop specific dimension reduction
methods for many important regression applications. The success of this project
not only provides effective practical tools for high-dimensional data analysis
but also represents an advance in the theory and methodology of semiparametric
inference.

High-dimensional data that involve a large amount of variables are nowadays
routinely generated and collected in areas such as scientific research,
government, business, etc. It is well-known that high dimensionality causes
difficulties in processing and analyzing these data. This is commonly referred
to as the curse of dimensionality. There is an urgent demand of statistical
tools that are able to mitigate the curse of dimensionality through dimension
reduction. This project represents an answer to this demand and is particularly
aimed at achieving dimension reduction in regression. The results from this
project can be widely applied in areas where regression involving a large number
of variables is required. Gene expression and protein sequence data analysis is
one such example. Therefore, this project can help enhance scientific research
and discovery and benefit a variety of social and economical activities.


