
* 0709985
* Conference Proposal: The Third Erich L. Lehmann Symposium -- Statistical Optimality
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/15/2007,03/07/2007
* Javier Rojo,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/29/2008
* USD 18,000.00

The Third Erich L. Lehmann Symposium

The four-day conference is the third of a series of symposia. The goal of the
symposia is to examine the role that optimality can play, or should play, in
modern statistics. Due to the advent of high throughput data collection
technology and the parallel development of computing power to analyze such data,
it often happens that statistical theory gives way to raw computing power.
Although most of the new exciting statistical methodologies have provided tools
to make headway in many important scientific problems, a need to generalize and
systematize this knowledge is now quite evident. The Third Symposium will take
place at Rice University during May 16th - 19th and will bring together a group
of experts to discuss cutting-edge research optimality ideas in the context of
modern statistical methodologies. It is believed that, although much progress
has taken place in areas such as data visualization and data mining and
knowledge discovery among others, the subjects are ripe for the development of
an optimality paradigm that allows for objective comparisons of methodologies.
This new paradigm, although still to be defined, is necessary to push the
research frontiers in these important disciplines. The conference will showcase
new developments by leading researchers in an environment conducive to the
development of new human resources.

This proposal will fund airfare and per diem expenses support for twelve young
investigators and eight Ph.D. students to attend the conference. Women and
minority young investigators and Ph.D. students will be actively recruited and
encouraged to apply. Pfizer, Rice University, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, and MD Anderson Cancer Center have made contributions
to fund other aspects of the conference. Refereed papers will be published and
invited and plenary sessions will be digitally recorded and made available to
the scientific community through Rice University's online archives. An evolving
webpage for the Symposium may be found at http://www.stat.rice.edu/~jrojo/3rd-
Lehmann.


