
* 0711142
* Symposium on Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,03/16/2007
* Joseph Kadane,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 14,960.00

Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics IX is the ninth workshop in the series that
was begun in 1991. The workshops are held in odd years at Carnegie Mellon
University in early fall. The ninth workshop is planned for October 19-20, 2007.
The highest level goal of the workshop series is to advance statistical practice
by examining Bayesian methods in specific applied contexts. The objectives of
the workshop are to explore the interplay of statistical theory and practice in
the context of substantive scientific research; promote the continued
development of Bayesian statistics by highlighting problems in the sciences that
require non-standard approaches; provide an opportunity for scientists and
statisticians to present their work in depth, highlighting both the scientific
background and the analytical approaches; and encourage dissemination of the
findings presented at the workshop via well documented and peer reviewed case
studies. As it has evolved, this workshop series has become an important meeting
for younger researchers in Bayesian statistics. The workshop aims to encourage
young researchers, including graduate students, to present their applied work;
provide a small meeting atmosphere to facilitate the interaction of young
researchers with senior colleagues; expose young researchers to important
challenges and opportunities in collaborative research; and include as
participants women, under-represented minorities and persons with disabilities
who might benefit from the small workshop environment. In addition to our
traditional poster session, our workshops include a session devoted to
presentations by younger researchers. The conference will also run a short
course at the beginning of the workshop. The topic chosen for this year is
sequential Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods.

Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics IX is the ninth workshop in the series that
was begun in 1991. The workshops are held in odd years at Carnegie Mellon
University in early fall. The ninth workshop is planned for October 19-20, 2007.
The highest level goal of the workshop series is to advance statistical practice
by examining Bayesian methods in specific applied contexts. The objectives of
the workshop are to explore the interplay of statistical theory and practice in
the context of substantive scientific research; promote the continued
development of Bayesian statistics by highlighting problems in the sciences that
require non-standard approaches; provide an opportunity for scientists and
statisticians to present their work in depth, highlighting both the scientific
background and the analytical approaches; and encourage dissemination of the
findings presented at the workshop via well documented and peer reviewed case
studies. Most statistics meetings allow a very limited time (like 20 minutes)
for the presentation of a paper. While this is OK for studies that depart only
slightly from what is already known and understood, it is a major expositional
problem for more ambitious studies. Bayesian statistics, a recent movement in
statistics, requires exploration of the scientific background of a study, the
statistical modeling and computation, and the conclusions, with all the
necessary caveats. Accordingly, the Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics
workshops are organized to give researchers and discussants ample time (3 hours)
to present and discuss each of two serious Bayesian empirical papers. There is
also a special session for young researchers to present their work, a poster
session, and a short course (which this year is on sequential Markov Chain Monte
Carlo methods, an important new Bayesian computing technique). The conference
supports younger researchers, women and under-served minorities to attend the
meeting.
