
* 0714669
* Collaborative Research: A General Framework for High Throughput Biological Learning: Theory Development and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2007,08/24/2007
* Shaw-Hwa Lo,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 270,028.00

This application presents a comprehensive research plan for the investigation of
a general framework and various new methods to handle complex large-scale data
sets generated from biological (medical) as well as other scientific studies.
Two goals are articulated in this proposal: theory development and application
in biology and medicine. The former is focused on the study of a general yet
core, model-free framework to effectively address major issues arising from high
dimensional data. In the latter, the investigators seek to apply methods
developed from the theory part to resolve machine learning type problems that
arise in biology and medicine. In particular, this team intends to study the
problems related to biological and medical prediction in response to treatments,
clinical diagnosis of diseases (such as cancers), discovery of protein-protein
interactions and biological network constructions related to disease etiology
and motif identification. To achieve these two goals, the investigators will
study theoretical and practical properties under a general setting and evaluate
a series of novel statistical/computation procedures/software which will then be
tested by a broad range of real and simulated data, some from current on-going
studies.

The emergence of high dimensional data in most scientific fields poses new
challenges for statisticians. Methods successful in dealing with low dimensional
data are no longer effective for high dimensional data. One of the greatest
difficulties in analyzing these data is to identify the informative
variables/features and their associated clusters, and decipher the
characteristics of the interaction between these variables and clusters. To meet
current and future needs for digging hidden knowledge out of high dimensional
data comprehensively and systematically, the scientific fields must develop new
methods. The current project is a direct response to this need. Based on
theoretical evidence (as preliminary results) already obtained in extracting low
dimensional information, this team plans to apply and to develop various
effective procedures to address practically important problems in the domains of
biology and medicine. The investigators will study a novel screening process
applicable across fields to demonstrate how high quality classifiers of low
dimensionality can be identified while joint information among the influential
variables are fully utilized. For further interpretation for biological
validation/confirmation this team will study how to construct biological
networks based on low dimensional classifiers and how to identify significant
association patterns among them. A feedback mechanism will be established
between the methodology development and biological validation teams, where
statistical/computational results will be regularly discussed and biologically
validated. It is anticipated that the key ideas and methods developed here will
find numerous applications in disciplines other than biology/medicine. The
proposed research is likely to advance substantial knowledge and significantly
benefit current and future efforts in molecular biology/statistics/computational
biology/disease prediction/drug discovery. The project would also provide
valuable research experiences and training to undergraduates.


