
* 0742690
* Higher order accuracy of bootstrap methods for temporal and spatial processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2007,12/18/2007
* Soumendra Lahiri,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 73,835.00

The emphasis of the project is on investigating higher order properties of
common resampling methods for time-series and spatial data and on development of
new inference methods that improve the accuracy and stability of existing
methods. Specifically, this project concentrates on (i) developing Edgeworth
expansion theory for Studentized statistics under dependence, (ii) investigating
higher order accuracy of bootstrap approximations for time series data, (iii)
developing resampling methods with an aim towards achieving higher order
accuracy, (iv) a nonparametric method for the selection of optimal block length
empirically, (v) a pooling method for the bootstrap that yields more stable
estimators of population parameters, (vi) investigating accuracy of bootstrap
approximation in spatial prediction problems, and (vii) investigating accuracy
of bootstrap approximation for spatial data for irregularly spaced data-points.

Data exhibiting temporal and spatial dependence appear in many areas of
sciences, such as Astronomy, Atmospheric Sciences, Economics, Geology,
Hydrology, Physics, etc. Analyses of such data sets using current statistical
methodology face some limitations. This is primarily due to the fact that the
existing statistical methodology mostly relies on strong structural (i.e.,
parametric model) assumptions that are often inadequate to capture all important
features of the data. This project seeks to (i) develop new methodology (based
on what are known as Resampling Methods) that provides valid assessment of
uncertainty without strong structural assumptions and (ii) develop theoretical
tools to investigate optimality properties of various resampling methods for
time- and space-dependent data.
