
* 0753787
* Collaborative Research: The Analysis of Time Series Collected in Experimental Designs
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2007,10/29/2007
* Hernando Ombao,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 42,982.00

The research project has three basic goals. The first goal is to estimate the
second order properties of a nonstationary process using data from multiple
units. A wavelet-based functional model with stochastic subject-specific
representation is proposed. A computationally efficient algorithm for estimation
will be developed along with theoretical optimal properties of the estimators.
While this project is focused on the frequency or spectral domain, the second
project will develop methods in the time domain. The goal of this project is to
accommodate structural breaks within the time series using mixtures of state-
space models. These mixtures are characterized by covariates, treatment and
subject-specific effects in both the mixture components and mixing weights. The
third project focuses on both temporal and spatial components. In particular,
this project integrates spatial information by developing models and
corresponding estimators to accommodate data structures in both time and space.
The goal is to assess the differences across groups and the subject-specific and
covariate effects on the dynamic structure.

The research focuses on an area that has been, for the most part, neglected by
the statistics community. In particular, the question to be addressed is how to
best analyze data obtained from experiments when the data are taken sequentially
in time and/or space. Typical examples include experiments where EEGs are taken
on various subjects with different diagnoses, or functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) experiments, where subjects with different conditions are
requested to perform tasks while in a magnet. The difficulty in analyzing such
data is that they are often irregular (nonhomogeneous or nonstationary) in
nature. The techniques for analyzing regular time series are well established,
but new techniques are needed to account for the irregularities over time and/or
space. The fact that these data are collected in complex experiments adds
another layer of difficulty onto the analysis.
