
* 0803540
* Collaborative Research: Detecting false discoveries under dependence using mixtures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2008,09/03/2008
* Subhashis Ghoshal,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 59,999.00

Statistical analysis of multiple testing problems revolves around the
distribution of the collection of p-values arising from simultaneous tests. Data
from fMRI, Proteomics, Microarray and other biomedical experiments exhibit
dependence among p-values. Statistical inference yields biologically irrelevant
conclusions if such dependence is not taken into consideration while estimating
error control measures such as the false discovery rate. This proposal
delineates a model oriented approach to multiple hypotheses testing by flexible
and accurate modeling of the joint distribution of the p-values in dependent
situations using mixtures. An additional theoretical goal the investigators
study properties of skew-mixture models. By incorporating dependence in the
model for the p-values, the proposed research provides valid controls of false
discoveries, especially in complex biomedical applications. The proposed
methodologies provide a foundation for statistical analysis in large dependent
multiple testing situations and will spawn new research in the area of false
discovery control.

Multiple hypothesis testing is one of the primary statistical tools available to
the scientists for efficiently analyzing large-scale complex biomedical data
such as gene-expression data, protemics data or brain imaging data. Disease
association studies in such biomedical applications require testing significance
of association of several thousand genes or proteins or brain regions,
simultaneously. Identification of a gene or a protein as being potentially
associated with a given disease is called a discovery. However, in large scale
biomedical studies there is a risk of accumulating error via making too many
false discoveries. The proposed research substantially influences the practice
of statistics in biomedical applications by providing accurate estimates of
error rates in large scale disease association studies. The investigators
specifically develop error control mechanism for brain imaging applications in
MRI studies of autistic patients. The project impacts human resource development
in the form of graduate student education and training.


