
* 0804547
* New multiple testing methods for pairwise comparisons & other dependent data cases
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2008,08/19/2008
* Harold Sackrowitz,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 140,206.00

The investigators will study new methodology in multiple testing in the case
where test statistics are dependent. The objective is to provide extensions of
the multiple residual down method (MRD) developed by these investigators. The
extensions encompass important topics such as pairwise comparisons, contrasts, a
variety of exponential family distributions, and tests for independence of
collections of contingency tables embedded in a large contingency table. The new
methodology and its extensions are expected to have several desirable advantages
over current methodology.

Multiple testing is one of the most important practical areas of statistical
inference. Here is a list of areas in which multiple testing is utilized and has
impact: (i) microarray analyses ? the identification of which genes are related
to cancer,(ii)monitoring spatial and temporal abundance of bacteria in air
samples in US cities, (iii)identifying successful mutual funds, (iv)identifying
individual or groups that are vulnerable to disclosure risk, (v)identifying
changes in quality in production processes, (vi)determining which blood analytes
remain unchanged when new and more efficient blood collection tubes are used,
and (vii)identifying which schools are not meeting expected standards. In
addition, applications of multiple testing have been used in imaging, analysis
of proteins, and numerous other branches of medicine. Research can provide
better and more efficient methodology, which can greatly benefit all those
cognate fields.
