
* 0804587
* Shape Restrictions, Semiparametric Models, and Empirical Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,04/06/2010
* Jon Wellner,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 260,000.00

Jon A. Wellner will carry out research on empirical process methods and
computational strategies for a variety of semiparametric and nonparametric
models for shape restrictions, censored data, and missing data problems. In
particular, Wellner and University of Washington graduate student Marios
Pavlides will conduct research on several models involving multivariate monotone
density functions and multivariate current status observation schemes, a class
of models currently of interest in connection with HIV-AIDS studies. Wellner and
University of Washington graduate student Arseni Seregin will conduct research
on nonparametric estimation of log-concave densities and generalizations thereof
in one and higher dimensions. Some of the research on empirical processes will
be carried out jointly with Aad van der Vaart (Free University, Amsterdam). Some
of the research on inference under shape constraints will be carried out jointly
with Fadoua Balabdaoui, Marloes Maathuis, and Shuguang Song (former Ph.D.
students). The work on new computational algorithms will be carried out jointly
with Hanna Jankowski, a recent post-doctoral student at the University of
Washington and now a faculty member at York University, Canada. These
investigations will involve nonstandard asymptotics for maximum likelihood
estimators, likelihood ratio statistics, and distribution theory for new
nonstandard limit distributions. The research will involve development of basic
empirical process tools and methods, and applications of these new tools and
methods to statistical problems concerning semiparametric models, shape
restricted models, and inverse problems. Applications include regression models
for panel count data, bivariate interval censored data of several kinds,
regression models for survival data with missing covariate data, studies of non-
and semi-parametric maximum likelihood estimators used in AIDS research, new
confidence bands for shape restricted inference, and both basic empirical
process theory and new semiparametric estimation procedures for two-phase data
dependent designs.

The advances in inference methods for competing risks models are used to study
causative effects of viral loading in HIV vaccine trials. The developments in
bivariate censored data are applied to studies of mother-to-child transmission
of HIV-AIDS. The work on two-phase data dependent designs has application to new
designs with increased efficiency for clinical trials and case-cohort sampling
in epidemiology. The tools of empirical process theory allow investigations of
many problems of current interest in other areas of statistics involving high-
dimensional data and parameter spaces. The research benefits education and human
development by the training of graduate students and the inclusion of the
resulting new statistical methods in statistics courses at the University of
Washington and elsewhere.
