
* 0804165
* Omnibus and change point tests for functional time series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2008,03/04/2010
* Piotr Kokoszka,UT,Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 129,982.00

A functional time series consists of a collection of curves or surfaces, rather
than scalars or vectors, recorded sequentially over time or space. Functional
observations are obtained from high resolution measurements (physics,
engineering, finance) or from smoothing irregularly spaced observations
(biology, psychometrics, environmental science). The last decade has seen the
emergence of a number of models for such data. Unlike for scalar or vector time
series, no systematic methodology is available to verify if a given model is
appropriate for the data, or for choosing among several competing models by
using a measures of fit. No methodology to check if a single stochastic
structure can be assumed for the whole functional record is available either.
The proposed research focuses on two types of tests: 1) omnibus tests intended
to detect departures in any direction from a specified model, and 2) change
point tests designed to detect a model change at some unknown time. Change point
tests are particularly important for time series, as "conditions" may change
with time, and assuming one model for the whole realization may lead to very
misleading inference. Practical implementations is based on solid theoretical
understanding which requires overcoming challenges not encountered in modeling
scalar time series. While many approaches seem intuitively appealing, those that
are feasible and optimal are focused on, and nontrivial details are worked out.
A tool box of tests and comprehensive methodology validated by theory,
simulations and a number of applications is developed.

Recent advances in measurement and data storage technology have led to the
emergence of functional time series in many fields of science and engineering. A
functional time series consists of a collection of curves or surfaces, rather
than numbers. For example, rather than looking at a closing daily value of an
economic indicator index like Dow Jones or NASDAQ, in times of uncertainty and
high volatility, regulators and market participants focus on the intra-day
evolution of the curve which shows how an index changes from minute to minute.
Understanding how typical daily index curves look like, how much can be
explained by regular variability, and what is unusual and requires action are
important practical questions. Functional time series appear in many other
fields, most notably in physics, engineering, biology, medicine and
environmental science. In the latter, daily curves showing the concentration of
a pollutant every 15 minutes are much more informative than a maximum or average
daily values, which may not be useful in assessing the actual risk to the
public. The research develops statistical procedures for detecting departures
from a ususal pattern of curves. Special emphasis is placed on detecting a
sudden change in these patterns. The methods are automated to a large degree and
facilitate decision making.
