
* 0804140
* Flexible Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Correlated Multivariate Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, COFFES
* 08/01/2008,07/30/2008
* Ori Rosen,TX,University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 119,998.00

The proposed research focuses on a number of topics related to the analysis of
correlated multivariate data. Bayesian methods in combination with mixture
models and nonparametric techniques result in novel flexible methods. In one
project, the investigator proposes a method for the analysis of multivariate
functional data. Cubic splines will be used to estimate the unknown mean
functions, as well as the subject-specific functions. To accommodate correlation
and unequally spaced measurement times, the multivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process will be explored. Another topic of interest is parsimonious estimation
of the covariance structure of longitudinal data when the assumption of a
constant covariance matrix over time is unreasonable. To allow for an evolving
parsimonious covariance matrix, the Cholesky decomposition of the inverse
covariance matrix will be used along with mixture modeling. In a third project,
the investigator's previous work on spectral matrix estimation for stationary
multivariate time series will be extended to the case of locally stationary
multivariate time series. The estimated spectral matrix along with the spectral
envelope technique can be used to analyze categorical time series, such as DNA
sequences. This analysis, however, is limited to short DNA sequences for which
the assumption of stationarity is reasonable. In this project, local behavior of
longer DNA sequences will be accommodated by extending the investigator's
previous work via mixture modeling. In another project, modeling a covariance
matrix using the spectral decomposition will be explored. This approach can be
used as a building block in other applications such as model-based clustering.

The proposed research develops novel flexible statistical methods for the
analysis of data consisting of several correlated variables. One area of
application is psychiatric research, where despite decades of clinical trial
experience in major depression, there is only limited understanding of which
patients with major depressive disorder respond better to psychotherapy or to
pharmacotherapy. Of particular interest is the identification of baseline
subject characteristics which differentially predict treatment response in the
two groups. The response variables in this case may be different measures of
depression taken longitudinally on psychiatric patients. Another area of
application is the analysis of DNA sequences. A DNA sequence can be described as
genes containing coding regions separated by noncoding regions. Coding regions
within genes code for the proteins which determine the organism's structure and
functioning. Detecting genes in a DNA sequence is important for analyzing the
genome of an organism. A third area of application is clustering of microarray
data to identify functional groups of genes. The goal of cluster analysis for
microarray data is to group genes into clusters with similar profiles. Knowledge
about expression levels of genes from different cells may help in diagnosing
diseases or in finding drugs to cure them.
