
* 0805481
* Asymptotically Sufficient Statistics in Nonparametric Curve Estimation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,06/04/2010
* Andrew Carter,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 110,101.00

An important area of mathematical statistics are nonparametric curve estimation
problems in their various forms. One growing approach to these complicated
problems is to find asymptotically sufficient statistics to simplify them. These
statistics can also be used to find asymptotically equivalent experiments that
can unify the approaches to inference and estimation for a number of different
types of nonparametric problems. One class of nonparametric problems is the
class of regression models where the mean of the data is a smooth function of
the design points at which the data is observed. It is well known that these
models can be thought of as discrete samples of a continuous, signal-plus-white-
noise model where, as the size of the sample increases, negligible information
is lost about the mean function. Specifically, the increments of the continuous
process observed by the white-noise model are asymptotically sufficient and have
nearly the same distribution as the regression observations. This project finds
asymptotically sufficient statistics in some nonparametric regression models
that allow estimation of nuisance parameters such as the variance or covariance
of the errors or the density of the randomly placed design points. These
statistics consist of two parts: one corresponds to the increments of some
process, and the second contains information about the value of the nuisance
parameter. These asymptotically sufficient statistics lead to an asymptotically
equivalent model that observes a continuous Gaussian process where the mean
function is first transformed by an observed filter. These white-noise
approximations provide a new and unifying approach to a number of nonparametric
regression problems. There are other nonparametric models, such as density
estimation from independent data, that have been shown to be asymptotically
equivalent to the white-noise model. The same technique of finding auxiliary
estimators of nuisance parameters and then approximating the conditional
distribution given these estimators can also be applied to the density
estimation experiment. These sufficient statistics are a step in the direction
of finding an approximation to the density estimation experiment on two
dimensional sample spaces.

This project seeks to find better techniques for estimating a signal in the
presence of noise by constructing approximations that are appropriate for large
sample sizes. The work will have an impact on the theory of nonparametric curve
estimation, the basis for applications such as analyzing financial series or
medical images, as well as a broad impact on research and education in
mathematical statistics. In many areas of technology today, large sets of data
that do not follow a typical pattern are difficult for scientists to analyze.
Non-regular estimation problems like this might come up in problems such as
filtering noisy medical images or signals, estimating distributions of plant
species, or analyzing financial series. signal interpretation, financial
analysis, and other applications. In this project, the investigator transforms
the problem into a form that can be solved by already existing statistical
tools. As a result, existing methods of analysis can be applied to a wider range
of technological problems.
