
* 0805860
* Development and Analysis of MCMC Algorithms and Computational Methods in Bayesian Sensitivity Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2008,07/30/2008
* James Hobert,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 179,992.00

The use of Bayesian statistics in the applied sciences has increased
dramatically over the last decade, largely because of the availability of Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods to estimate the posterior distributions. Along with
this increased use, researchers are now routinely considering more complex
models, for example hierarchical models with many levels and regression models
with many potential predictors. Consideration of more sophisticated models has
two consequences. Because the parameters live in larger spaces, there is a
stronger need for the development of MCMC methods that give accurate estimates
of the relevant posterior distributions and expectations for a given model, and
there is a stronger need for methods for doing model diagnostics and selection.
An important component of this project is the development of tools for model
assessment and sensitivity analysis. The investigators develop methods for
efficiently calculating a very large number of Bayes factors, and plotting them.
They consider situations in which there is a set of models indexed by several
continuous hyperparameters. Calculation of the Bayes factors helps determine
whether a subset of hyperparameter values constitutes a class of reasonable
choices. The investigators also develop a set of computationally efficient
schemes for estimating the posterior expectation of a function of a parameter as
the prior is varied continuously. This enables users to determine which aspects
of the prior have the biggest impact on the posterior. Markov chains used in
complex settings often involve enhancements designed to speed up convergence.
But little is known theoretically regarding the effect of these enhancements. In
this project techniques from operator theory are used to analyze the long-term
behavior of Markov chains. The operator theory framework provides tools to
better understand the behavior of these chains and this understanding enables
the development of results regarding the accuracy of estimates produced by these
chains and also suggests ways to improve these chains or design better ones. The
investigators apply the theoretical results obtained from operator theory to
very concrete problems of model selection and assessment.

Model selection in complex situations is an important and pervasive problem in
scientific and medical research. It includes in particular variable selection in
regression, where a few important variables are to be selected from many
candidates and used for understanding, prediction and decision making. Different
models can lead to different conclusions, with potential impact on public
policy. Whereas for frequentist methods there is available an extensive body of
material for doing diagnostics, for Bayesian methods the methods that exist are
much more limited. The tools for Bayesian model assessment and sensitivity
analysis, together with the theoretical results regarding Markov chains that
will be obtained in this project, will enable researchers to correctly evaluate
the accuracy of estimates produced from Markov chains that explore very large
spaces, and will enable them to correctly determine how long chains need to be
run in order to provide a required level of accuracy.


