
* 0805965
* Unified Dynamic Modeling of Event Time Data with Semiparametric Profile Estimating Functions: Theory, Computing, and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,06/23/2008
* Jun Yan,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Event time data under various censoring schemes arise in a variety of fields.
The temporal dynamics of covariate effects on the occurrence of events can be
flexibly studied in a partly functional regression model on the mean function of
temporal processes defined by event times, with some covariate coefficients
time-varying while others time-independent. Statistical inferences are
challenging with the presence of multiple time-varying components, particularly
when event times are not continuously but discretely observed, as under interval
censoring. The investigator studies a unified semiparametric profile estimating
function approach and an estimated version of it when the event times are only
discretely observed. For continuously observed data, the model parameters are
estimated from an algorithm that alternately updates the current estimate
between an estimating equation for time-varying coefficients and an estimating
equation for time-independent coefficients. For interval censored or doubly
censored data, estimating functions will be estimated first using multiple
imputation and then solved alternately. The methodology will be implemented in
an R package under the quality assurance scheme of the R Project. The proposed
approach provides a unified theoretical framework of dynamic regression models
for event times, enabling a synthesized investigation of computing algorithms
and statistical inferences. It allows efficient estimation and successive
hypotheses test of covariate effects. Application of the method to a cystic
fibrosis disease registry data will generate new knowledge on the temporal
nature of the association between malnutrition and pulmonary disease
progression.

The proposed method is motivated by the need of modeling temporal dynamics of
covariate effects on the occurrence of certain events. Events of interests can
be, for example, the recurrences of some chronic disease symptoms such as lung
infection in cystic fibrosis patients, or the breakdowns of some engineering or
electronic systems such as access failure of computer disks. A blend of time-
varying effects and time-independent effects allows most flexibility in
assessing the efficacy of a treatment of a disease or a design of new system
over time. The method has an impact on the practice of event time data analysis
when the temporal nature of covariate effects are of important interests. A
publicly available software will get the methodology into the hands of those who
will profit from using them, and, therefore, help to understand the temporal
dynamics of covariate effects on event occurrences.
