
* 0805598
* Fully Nonparametric Models for Random Effects, Order Thresholding, Boostrap Testing, and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2008,07/15/2008
* Michael Akritas,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Technological advancements in information gathering, and the increased fusion
of mathematical innovation with biological, oceanic/atmospheric, and
psychosocial sciences, have created a plethora of highly complex and very high-
dimensional data sets in interdisciplinary research contexts. The non-standard
features of such data include non-normality, complex heterogeneity and
dependence structures, high-dimensionality, low sample sizes and unbalanced
designs. The investigator puts forth more realistic statistical models for such
data sets and develops advanced statistical methods for their analysis. This
project has five specific aims: to enhance the modeling alternatives by
proposing fully nonparametric models for crossed and nested two-way random and
mixed effects designs, to construct statistical procedures for the common
hypotheses of interest under each of these models (including robust rank-based
procedures), to propose order thresholding (thresholding based on L-statistics)
for reducing the dimensionality of the alternative hypothesis and for
identification of the signal location, to propose a bootstrap testing method for
improved accuracy of the test procedures, and to explore applications of the
aforementioned test procedures to classification problems, through the recently
developed test-based classification method. The proposed models and methods are
fundamentally different in approach from the standard likelihood methods, the
non- and semi-parametric models, and the Bayesian techniques.

The significance of this project stems from the fact that statistical analysis
is the final, and often the most important, stage of many expensive scientific
investigations. Does the concentration of certain contaminants in coastal waters
have a decreasing or an increasing trend? Is a trend in the concentration of
contaminants a result of natural processes or is it caused by human activity?
Are gene expressions different under different biological environments and which
genes are responsible for this difference? Has the Gang Resistance Education and
Training (G.R.E.A.T.) program been effective in reducing adolescent
deviant/illegal activities in urban areas? In early detection of the use of
bioweapons, is there a signal (a certain symptom at rates higher than
background) and if so where is it located? Typically, the data collected for
answering such questions exhibit highly non-standard features. The data being
collected by the Mussel Watch Project of NOAA's National Status and Trends
program for monitoring marine environmental quality, is a good example of the
type of complex features such data can exhibit. Due to their non-standard
features, the data may fail to satisfy the regularity conditions that
alternative models and methods require. Analyzing data under assumptions that
are not satisfied may lead to incorrect conclusions regarding the statistically
significant factors and trends, or may fail to identify an existing signal or
the genes that are affected by a disease. The objective of this proposal is to
develop advanced methods for data analysis based on realistic statistical
models, and to develop software for their implementation.
