
* 0805946
* Exact inequalities and limit theorems for Rademacher and self-normalized sums, and related statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2008,07/30/2008
* Iosif Pinelis,MI,Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

The main objectives of the project are as follows: * Prove the longstanding
conjecture on the best constant factor in the Rademacher-Gaussian tail
comparison. * Prove another longstanding conjecture, on the asymptotic
domination of the Rademacher tail by the Gaussian one. * Consider also the
``asymmetric'' case. * Extend to the case of moderate deviations the result due
to Shao et al. on the saddle-point approximation to large-deviation
probabilities of a self-normalized sum of independent random variables. * Obtain
limit theorems, including Berry-Esseen-type bounds and Cramer-type large-
deviation asymptotics, for Pearson's product-moment sample correlation
coefficient and a number of similar and more general statistics. Thus, the
investigator aims to solve longstanding and difficult problems of probability
theory and mathematical statistics. The first two of them concern some of the
most important properties of such a classical and fundamental object as the
Rademacher sums, whose distributions play the role of the extreme points of the
set of the distributions of sums (and self-normalized sums) of any independent
symmetric random variables. Extensions to the ``asymmetric'' case will also be
considered. Closely related are other main objectives of the project, concerning
limit theorems for self-normalized sums (or, equivalently, for Student's
statistic).

The main impact will be in significantly better understanding of important
properties of some of the most fundamental objects in probability theory and
mathematical statistics. The successful completion of the project will also
result in novel and important applications to such classical objects in
statistics as Student's test and Pearson's correlation test, which are some of
the very few hypotheses tests used most broadly in sciences and engineering.
While there are great difficulties to overcome, it appears that the attainment
of these objectives is within reach, given a number of advances already made by
the investigator and his rather unique expertise in various areas of probability
and statistics, as well as his demonstrated abilities to identify and solve
difficult and longstanding problems and also to work effectively in a wide and
highly diverse range of fields, including mechanical engineering, biology,
operations research and combinatorics, and geometry and physics. Efforts will be
made to disseminate results, not only via publication in wide-circulation
journals, but also via news networks (stories on the investigator's work on
evolution modeling and the Eiffel tower shape modeling have already been
broadcast around the world by the United Press International and other news
agencies). A number of graduate students will be involved into the project;
efforts will be made to recruit from underrepresented minorities.
