
* 0805879
* Statistical Methodology and Applications to Genetics, Engineering and Economics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,05/20/2008
* Tze Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2011
* USD 587,375.00

Searching a parameter set for the location of one or more signals in a noisy
background arises in gene mapping, brain mapping, bioinformatics and astronomy.
An important part of the solution of these problems involves the probability
that a random field exceeds a high threshold. The proposed research develops a
unified analytic approach to evaluate these boundary crossing probabilities, and
importance sampling and sequential Monte Carlo methods to supplement the
analytic approximations. A closely related area of research is estimation and
forecasting problems in time series models and stochastic dynamical systems
whose parameters may change with time. Although in practice abrupt parameter
changes typically occur very infrequently, the unknown times of their occurrence
have led to prohibitive complexity of the Bayes estimators and predictors in the
literature. By using parallel recursive algorithms and combining some new ideas
in change-point detection with empirical Bayes methodology, the proposed
research develops asymptotically efficient estimation and prediction schemes
with manageable complexity. Bayesian models of parameter changes in Markovian
systems are special cases of hidden Markov models. A goal of the proposed
research is to develop a comprehensive theory of efficient parameter estimation,
filtering and smoothing in hidden Markov models on general state spaces. Another
related direction of research is econometric time series and stochastic
optimization problems in financial economics.

Important objectives of the proposed research are to develop statistical methods
for gene mapping, signal processing, adaptive control of engineering systems,
and decision and pricing problems in financial markets. The broader implications
of the research include (i) direct applications in engineering, finance, and
genetics where mapping can be the first step towards better diagnostics or
treatment of a disease or towards improving plant or animal stock, and (ii)
training the next generation of scientists by involving graduate students in all
phases of the research.
