
* 0805809
* Dynamic Models and Decision Making for Complex Reliability Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2008,05/09/2010
* James Lynch,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 249,999.00

The major challenge for assessing system reliability or decision-making
regarding maintenance or replacement policies is that many systems are composed
of, or can be viewed as, complex systems of components (or of subsystems) whose
behavior within the system can be quite complicated due to omponent interactions
and dependencies. This challenge requires model selection that incorporates
"physics-of-failure" considerations into the model, integrates component
reliability information into system reliability models that realistically models
the censoring for these types of systems, and accounts for uncertainties in the
model. Crucial to the decision making process is the proper model choice (model
selection) as well as the integration of component reliability information into
the system reliability assessment where in many cases the component information
obtained from system data involves complicated censoring mechanisms. The major
goal of this proposed project is to study dynamic load-sharing reliability
models and decision-making with model selection for such models. Specifically,
the aims of this project are: 1. to propose dynamic load-sharing models for
reliability systems that incorporate "physics-of-failure" considerations and the
dynamic interactions and dependencies among components or subsystems; 2. to
obtain probabilistic properties of these load-sharing systems, in particular, to
derive the system life distribution; 3. to examine data-accrual schemes for such
systems and to develop statistical inference procedures for these load-sharing
systems that also account for censoring; and 4. to develop decision-making
strategies in the context of reliability systems when there are several
competing models, leading in particular to decision-making with model selection
or, possibly, model-averaging.

The assessment of system reliability requires accurate prediction of system
failure. This is also essential to decision making regarding maintenance or
replacement policies and is especially important for key systems or equipment in
attempting to prevent catastrophic failures during critical operations. The
merit of this proposed project emanates from the fact that the dynamic load-
sharing reliability models will take into account model component interactions
and dependencies. These generic reliability models will also be useful for other
complex systems, such as in physical, biological, and medical sciences. For
example, for a mechanical system under increasing load, (such as a composite
under tensile loading where fiber segments are components or a routing system
under increasing traffic, where the nodes are components) the load-sharing rule
describes how the load or traffic is transferred/redistributed from failed
components to working components and takes into consideration the "physics-of-
failure." The proposed models have the potential to synthesize "physics-of-
failure" and "statistical reliability" concepts to describe how damage to the
system contributes to system failure. The statistical inference aspects of this
project, including the model selection and the decision-making portion, will
address important problems pertaining to the estimation of model parameters
based on complex data for these dynamic models. This inference problem has not
been dealt with extensively in the reliability literature, hence this project is
expected to provide significant advances on this direction. The results of the
investigations are expected to impact engineering and other sciences by
providing novel and more realistic models for system failure and inference
procedures for prediction of failure and for making maintenance and replacement
decisions.
