
* 0805758
* High Dimension, Low Sample Size Discrimination
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2008,03/03/2010
* Jeongyoun Ahn,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 105,000.00

Proposed research is motivated from the discrimination problem with high
dimension, low sample size data. The investigator studies the intrinsic
difficulties of the discrimination problem by exploring asymptotic geometric
structure of such data. Three main activities are proposed: a) the asymptotic
inconsistency of leave-one-out cross-validation. The study is expected to
explain why it shall fail when the number of variables greatly exceeds the
number of observations; b) the effect of the relationship between the
dimensionality and the sample size on the difficulty of discrimination task; and
c) a discriminant direction vector that only exists for the data with high
dimension, low sample size. The data points collapse on this direction vector
and also are most separated by group labels. The investigator plans to study its
theoretical and empirical properties of the procedure such as its optimality,
uniqueness, and asymptotic performances.

The overall goal is to investigate the nontraditional and unique challenges in
high dimension, low sample size discrimination. The proposed approach may be
regarded atypical, but it is more relevant to the problem itself. The
applications of proposed research include text document classification such as
Spam email filter, medical imaging such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging, and bioinformatics such as microarray gene expression and proteomics.


