
* 0806133
* Change-Point Estimation Under Abrupt Changes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2008,03/04/2010
* Venkata Jandhyala,WA,Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 149,967.00

There have been attempts in the literature to derive the asymptotic distribution
of the maximum likelihood estimate (mle) of a change-point for offline change-
point models under the abrupt change formulation. These attempts, thus far, have
yielded results that are either of analytical interest only, or they are
available only in the form of bounds and approximations. Here, the investigators
develop exact computable expressions for the asymptotic distribution of the
change-point mle when an abrupt change occurs in the parameters of some of the
most basic and commonly encountered change-point models. Specific models
considered include: (i) change in the parameter of a univariate exponential
distribution; (ii) change in the parameters of a multivariate exponential
distribution; (iii) change in the mean only of a univariate normal distribution;
(iv) change in the variance only of a univariate normal distribution; (v) change
in both mean and variance of a univariate distribution; (vi) the extensions of
problems (iii)-(v) for the multivariate normal distribution; and (vii)
extensions to situations such as Poisson mixtures of generalized inverse
Gaussian distributions. Depending upon the model, the derived distributions for
the change-point mle may be either symmetric or possibly asymmetric. On the
other hand, distributions derived in the literature under the additional
assumption of smoothing are known to be always symmetric under all modeling
scenarios. Change-point methods are important scientific tools for the detection
and estimation of changes that occur in variables monitored over time. Such
methods are at the forefront of identifying changes in variables related to
issues of contemporary significance such as climate change, ozone depletion,
water pollution, air pollution, and nuclear waste monitoring programs. For
example, on the basis of various scientific theories, claims are made that
global warming has begun some years ago. The question is whether relevant data
collected overtime support such claims. If so, when did such a change happen? In
their attempts to monitor air quality and water quality, scientists at the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) collect data upon a number of hydrological
and atmospheric variables on a regular basis. The scientists are then confronted
with identifying changes that may have occurred in the variables being
monitored. Answers to such questions require studied application of change-point
methods to the collected data. Thus, the investigators make advances to change-
point methods mainly related to the problem of estimating the time of change.
Since practical data from different sources give raise to different probability
models, the developed methods are broad enough that they are applicable to a
wide range of practical scenarios.
