
* 0806096
* Beyond Stationarity: Statistical Inference for Nonstationary Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2008,07/08/2010
* Suhasini Subba Rao,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 115,475.00

The investigator develops new methods for analysing nonstationary time series
and their properties. Many methods in time series are developed under the
premise that the observations are stationary. This assumption simplifies both
the estimation procedure and asymptotic analysis. However, in real life this
assumption is often quite unrealistic. Ignoring nonstationarity in the data and
treating the observations as if they were stationary, could give misleading
conclusions. Therefore it is important to develop methods for dealing with data
that is either temporally or spatially nonstationary. The investigator focuses
on three areas where, in applications, nonstationarity can arise (i) statistical
inference for time-varying ARCH-type processes (ii) nonstationary random
correlated (stochastic) coefficient regression models (iii) analysis of
spatially nonstationary spatio-temporal models. These are summarised below. The
investigator develops methods which test or track structural changes in time-
varying ARCH and GARCH processes. In order to develop sampling properties for
the proposed methods, mixing of the time-varying ARCH-type processes is
required, and the investigator studies the mixing properties of such processes.
Random correlated coefficient regression (RCCR) models are often used to explain
the nonstationarity seen in the data. Despite its advantages, until recently the
statistical analysis of RCCR models has been quite limited. The investigator
develops statistical sound and computationally efficient parameter estimation
methods for RCCR models. Observations from spatio-temporal processes can arise
frequently in several disciplines, and several factors could cause the
observations to come from a spatially nonstationary process. The investigator
investigates spatially nonstationary, spatio-temporal processes. In particular,
the investigator considers methods which decompose estimates of the model into a
global spatially stationary process, and an additional locally nonstationary
term.

In several disciplines, it is assumed that the main character of data observed
over time (usually known as a time series), for example volatility, is not
influenced by time. This time invariance property is known as stationarity and
it is often the underlying assumption in many current statistical methodologies,
because stationarity can often simplify the analysis. However, statistical
methods which overlook the nonstationarity can lead to misleading or incorrect
conclusions. There are several real data examples where there is empirical
evidence to suggest that stationarity is an oversimplification. A particularly
pertinent example is global temperature anomolies, where there is plenty of
evidence to suggest that both the average temperature and the variation have
changed over the past 150 years. In this project we develop statistical methods
for nonstationary time series, in particular to identify where changes have
occured and factors which have caused the changes. By developing methods that do
not ignore the nonstationarity, we are better able to understand the mechanisms
driving the data, which leads to better forecasts. These methods can be applied
a wide range of subjects, including economics (identifying factors behind the
current credit crunch) and climatology (test whether the rise in CO2 levels, has
an influence on the amount of variation in the global temperatures).


