
* 0806176
* Integral Curve Estimation: New Methodology and Applications to Diffusion Tensor Imaging
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,06/23/2008
* Lyudmila Sakhanenko,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 104,871.00

The focus of the project is to model and to estimate the integral curves that
are driven by an unknown vector field which is not observed directly. Instead, a
noisy data is available for a related spatial field. The investigator proposes
integral curve estimators and studies their consistency and asymptotic
distribution. Probabilistic methods are utilized to address these non-parametric
inference problems. This work is motivated by Diffusion Tensor Imaging (a
special type of Magnetic Resonance Imaging) where there is a growing need for
statistical methods. Given observations of signal intensities that are related
to water diffusion tensor, one can find the vector-field corresponding to the
maximal eigenvalue of the tensor, which shows the main direction of diffusion.
Then the integral curve corresponding to this vector-field is a fiber, since
water molecules diffuse mostly along fibers in some tissues such as white matter
in brain. One of important questions is whether a fiber starting at a specific
point reaches a certain region. The proposed methodology provides answers to
this connectivity problem and more importantly it assesses statistical quality
of those answers. To summarize, the investigator develops statistical methods
that complement Diffusion Tensor Imaging technology to help study architecture
of soft tissues such as brain or muscle.

This proposal outlines mathematical and statistical issues underpinning the
development of a novel model for estimation of fibers based on observed noisy
data of signal intensities. This model provides answers to questions in
Diffusion Tensor Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DT-MRI, a brain imaging technique),
which in turn could help to improve understanding of physics and biology of live
brain and to advance diagnostical methods for brain diseases and disorders. The
proposed research increases the role of statistics in DT-MRI. It integrates
mathematics and statistics with physics and medicine. As a natural
generalization, the proposed methodology for curve (fiber) estimation, based on
not only vector or tensor data but some spatial field, is of interest by itself.
Its analysis shows how probabilistic methods are invaluable for problems in non-
parametric statistical inference. The investigator also sees potential
applications of this work to other fields of science such as meteorology.
Furthermore, this project builds a base for attracting and training graduate
students with interest and skills to work in interdisciplinary research.
