
* 0840795
* Algebraic Statistical Models
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,05/01/2009
* Seth Sullivant,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2010
* USD 87,808.00

Algebraic statistics is concerned with the use of commutative algebra, algebraic
geometry and combinatorics in statistical inference. The connection between
algebra and statistics arises from the fact that many statistical models for
discrete random variables have the structure of algebraic varieties. This
underlying algebraic structure can be exploited to develop new tools for
analyzing statistical data and also suggests new research directions in algebra
and combinatorics. The research undertaken by the PI concerns the study of the
algebraic structure of statistical models. In particular, the research focuses
on the study of the ideals defining the statistical models as algebraic
varieties, ways that the ideal generators and Grobner bases can be used as tools
in statistical inference, and the development of algebraic techniques for
studying and computing these defining ideals. The particular models studied by
the PI are log-linear models, phylogenetic models, and mixture models. Among the
varieties that arise in this study are toric varieties, determinantal varieties,
secant varieties, and many new varieties which deserve further study.

Statistical models for discrete data are increasingly used throughout the
social and biological sciences. Of particular note is the emergence of
statistical techniques for the analysis of biological sequence data (i.e. DNA,
RNA, and protein sequences). These statistical models are families of
probability distributions inside a finite dimensional space, and these families
often have an algebraic structure. The PI proposes to further his work exploring
the algebraic structure of these statistical models, increasing the interaction
between two important areas (algebra and statistics) in the mathematical
sciences.
