
* 0846068
* CAREER: New Statistical Methodology and Theory for Mining High-Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,05/15/2013
* Hui Zou,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The area of high-dimensional modeling is developing rapidly. This research aims
to push these developments forward to meet new challenges arising in different
fields. In particular, the investigator studies (a). new statistical methodology
and theory for mapping high-dimensional datasets onto a space with much-lower
dimensions while assuring minimum distortion; (b). efficient and robust variable
selection in semiparametic models; (c). a novel regularization approach to
nonparametric model selection and estimation.

Modern computing power and scientific innovations allow scientists to easily
collect high-dimensional data in various disciplines. Analysis of high-
dimensional data poses many challenges and offers great opportunities to
statisticians. The availability of high-dimensional data has reshaped
statistical modeling. This proposal focuses on new statistical methodology and
theory for knowledge discovery and information retrieval from high-dimensional
data. The investigator plans to develop User-friendly computer programs for
public use. The research will make significant contributions to areas outside
statistics as well, including biology, computer science, biomedical engineering,
medical informatics, economics, and so on. The integrated educational program
includes substantial initiatives that will involve undergraduate and graduate
students and expose them to state-of-the-art research in the topics related to
the proposal. These include new courses, workshops and mentoring. The research
results will be integrated into K-12 education and be applied to industrial
research.


