
* 0854908
* Collaborative Research: Tree Structured Object Oriented Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2009,09/18/2009
* James Marron,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,995.00

This proposal is for research on finding ways of developing population level
understanding of, and insights about, a collection of tree structured objects.
I.e. the goal is the analysis of the variation, including variation in branching
structure, in a population of data points that are trees. While this goal is
statistical in nature, it is very far beyond the reach of existing statistical
methods. Thus an entire new area of statistical research is opened up by the
work proposed here. This work is driven by a particular example data set of
human brain artery trees, collected by a neuro-surgeon collaborator, who has,
and will continue to, inform the research directions chosen, and the steps
taken. While this motivating example is vasculature of the human brain, there
are many other contexts which will be impacted by the new methods developed
here, discussed below. The closest statistical area to the proposed research is
the currently active area of Functional Data Analysis, in which the atoms of the
statistical analysis are curves (instead of the more typical numbers or
vectors). This abstract concept was extended to Object Oriented Data Analysis
(OODA), by Wang and Marron (2007), where the atoms become more complicated
objects of various types, including tree structured objects. OODA presents a
number of major new data analytic challenges. Addressing these challenges will
require the development of totally new types of statistical methods. Even simple
statistical concepts, such as the population mean, are not straightforward to
develop. Deeper properties, in particular the quantitation of variation about
the mean, are far more challenging. The results of Wang and Marron (2007) were a
first pass at formulating statistical concepts in terms of optimization
problems. A major limitation was that it was unclear how to compute useful
solutions of these for realistic data sets. Aydin et al (2008) achieved a major
breakthrough in this direction by inventing linear time solutions to some of
these apparently intractable optimization problems, which brings practical OODA
of the artery tree data set within reach of modern computational facilities. The
proposed work is on much deeper analyses, which requires the invention of
powerful new approaches to understanding variation. In particular, the current
topology-only analyses will be extended to full nodal attribute data types that
will enable simultaneous study of other types of variation as well (e.g. in
branch thickness and location), the entirely new area of discrimination for
populations of tree structured objects will be explored, and innovations in the
visualization of complex tree data objects will be made. These deeper analyses
are expected to yield deep new anatomical results, involving symmetry and
dependence on covariates such as age, that are unavailable from the simple
summaries currently being used to analyze tree data.

The driving data set for this research is a collection of over 100 patients?
magnetic resonance angiographic (MRA) brain artery trees. This proposed project
will develop new statistical methods for extracting useful information from this
collection of trees. Major new population-level insights on human brain anatomy
will be targeted. The big picture goal of this research is the development of
methods for characterizing normal brain artery structure. As well as being an
important scientific anatomical goal in itself, this has potential for major
medical applications. For example, this work provides the potential for a
vascular-based diagnosis of brain tumors (which have aberrant arterial trees).
Arterial tree analysis should improve the success of current cancer treatments
through earlier diagnosis than is available using current techniques. Future
medical applications are expected to extend well beyond the driving problem of
human brain arteries to many other types of widely-studied anatomical
structures, such as airways in the lung, the nervous system and various types of
collection duct systems. In addition, this body of work is expected to drive new
ideas in many other areas which naturally encounter trees as data objects, such
as text mining (where a standard technique is representation of grammatical
structures as trees), phylogenetic trees in genetics, and the analysis of social
and computer networks. Finally this work is expected to have an impact on
mathematics by stimulating the development of new ideas there, e.g. in
optimization and graph theory.
