
* 0854970
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Statistical Inference for High-Dimensional Data: Theory, Methodology and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,09/23/2010
* Tianxi Cai,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 142,987.00

The analysis of high-dimensional data sets now commonly arising in scientific
investigations poses many statistical challenges not present in smaller scale
studies. Extracting information with precision from such data is becoming ever
more important. This FRG proposal is the PIs' unified effort to respond to the
pressing scientific needs. Specifically, The goals are to develop a
comprehensive theoretical framework and general methodologies for estimating a
large covariance matrix and its functionals and for functional data regression
where the predictors and/or the responses involve functional measurements, and
to address a wide range of important applications in biomedical studies.

The statistical and scientific objectives outlined in this proposal are at the
intellectual center of a rapidly growing field in statistics and biostatistics.
The new technical tools, inference procedures, and computing algorithms for
analyzing high-dimensional data will greatly facilitate scientific
investigations in a wide range of disciplines, These fields include astronomy,
biology, chemistry, bioinformatics, and particularly in medicine. The proposed
efficient analytical procedures hold great potential in deriving more accurate
prediction rules for clinical outcomes based on new biological and genetic
markers and thus may lead to a better understanding of disease processes.
Research results from this proposal will be disseminated through the workshops
and seminar series such that the methods would be publicly available to
researchers in other disciplines. Software tools developed will be made freely
and publicly available as open source code. The proposed project will also bring
high-quality training to students and postdoctoral researchers.
