
* 0904181
* Collaborative Research: Novel methods for pharmacogenomic data analysis using gene clusters
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2009,08/19/2009
* Shuangge Ma,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract

Numerous pharmacogenomic studies have been conducted using microarrays to survey
the whole genome and detect disease-associated genes. Genes have the inherent
clustering structure. The goal of this study is to develop a systematic
framework using principal component analysis (PCA) based methods to detect gene
clusters differentially expressed and/or with joint predictive power. More
specifically, the investigators will (1) develop novel methodology to detect
gene clusters marginally differentially expressed; (2) develop penalization
methodology to detect gene clusters with joint predictive power for the disease
clinical outcomes of interest; and (3) conduct extensive numerical studies, and
develop publicly available software. This study will greatly advance our
understanding of the ?large p, small n? statistics as well as human genomics.
Methodologies developed in this study can be applied in other areas including
image processing, immunology, molecular dynamics, small-angle scattering, and
information retrieval.

Identification of genomic markers from analysis of pharmacogenomic data is a key
step in understanding human genomics and personalized medicine. The proposed
study has been motivated by the urgent need to overcome drawbacks of existing
methods. It will feature novel statistical methods, rigorous theoretical
development, extensive numerical studies, development of public software, and a
direct impact on practical studies. The proposed study will enrich the family of
high dimensional methodologies in general. In addition, analysis of breast
cancer, colon cancer, and lymphoma microarray data will lead to a deeper
understanding of the genomic mechanisms underlying those cancers. From
educational and social prospective, the proposed study will foster more
intensive collaborations among investigators from different institutions and
background. It will promote teaching, training and learning at Yale University
and at the University of North Carolina. Moreover, the investigators will attend
statistical and genomic conferences and give presentations, which may promote
interdisciplinary research among scientists from diverse fields.


