
* 0904548
* Statistical Models of Internet Traffic and Queueing Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,08/02/2009
* Bowei Xi,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 54,900.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The investigator will construct different statistical models for the general
Internet traffic and traffic from one extremely time-sensitive application,
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), due to the different traffic generation
mechanism: A VoIP call creates a unique ON-OFF traffic process and the
superposed VoIP traffic is generated following a call arrival process. On the
other hand the general Internet traffic is a superposed packet stream where
individual connection can be treated as a marked point process. The statistical
models for both types of traffic will reflect the effect of superposition of
multiple connections. The number of connections will be an important parameter
in all the models under consideration. Stochastic processes theory will be
extensively used to create statistical models of the non-linear long range
dependent Internet traffic. The investigator will conduct a queueing study for
VoIP, using the proposed VoIP traffic model as the arrival process at a queue.
The queueing study will not be limited to the tail probabilities, and will
provide results for the entire output process to better understand the effect of
superposition on queueing behavior.

Statistical models of Internet traffic are critical for computer network design
and capacity planning purpose. Parsimonious models which accurately capture the
Internet traffic properties will assist network engineers to design future
networks with the ability to accommodate user traffic growing quickly beyond the
scope of what is being observed today. The models will have simple structure
that provides intuition and formulas for the traffic statistical properties, and
serve as a tractable basis for further mathematical study of the Internet
traffic. Because Quality of Service (QoS) criteria for the general Internet
traffic can be a little relaxed while VoIP must comply with very strict QoS
standards, the queueing study for VoIP will demonstrate how much VoIP traffic a
network can support while maintaining the QoS standards. The proposed research
requires knowledge in both statistical theory and computation. Students directly
involved in the project will gain experience of statistical computing, and learn
the knowledge of stochastic processes and queueing theory.
