
* 0904825
* Collaborative Research: Spectral and Connectivity Analysis of Non-Stationary Spatio-Temporal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2008,11/25/2008
* Wesley Thompson,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 29,987.00

The focus of this research is the development of new statistical methodologies
for modeling connectivity in non-stationary spatio-temporal data. The
investigators will develop four specific methods and models which will be
applied to data provided by t he investigator's collaborators. First, motivated
by the need for more sophisticated methods to investigate complex dependencies
between two time series (e.g., brain regions), the investigators will build
tools for exploring non-linear and time-evolving dependence between signals
using dynamic mutual information in the spectral domain. Second, the notion of
spatially-varying and temporally-evolving spectrum will be made precise via a
stochastic representation of non-stationary spatio-temporal processes. An
asymptotic framework for consistent estimation and inference will be developed.
Third, a general spectral model for connectivity in a multi-subject experiment
via a latent network model will be formulated. The empirically-driven model will
incorporate items such as stimulus types, exogeneous time series, and subject-
specific random effects. Finally, to complement this exploratory approach for
modeling spectral data and connectivity, the investigators will build a
scientifically-motivated semi-parametric state-space model of effective
connectivity using multi-subject data.

The overarching goal of this research is the development of new statistical
methodologies for analyzing data that has both a time and space dimension.
Spatio-temporal data are prevalent in many disciplines, including the
environmental and soil sciences, meteorology and oceanography, neuroscience and
the emerging fields of health and bioterrorism surveillance. The primary data
source for the investigators is time-sequenced data of brain activity measured
at many locations in the brain. These signals contain information on how the
brain functions, how it responds to outside stimuli, and where synchronization
of functionality occurs. The statistical models the investigators are developing
help sift through this information, allowing for the detection of trends in
brain functionality, and estimation of population- and individual-level
differences in performance. The empirical nature of the models allows for data-
driven confirmation and discovery of neuroscientific theory. The statistical
models will also be predictive, aiding in the quest for personalized diagnosis
and treatment of depression, anxiety, and other neurological conditions. While
the statistical research is motivated by the investigators' ongoing
collaboration with neuroscientists, there is a unified statistical theme
applicable to many other areas of interest.
