
* 0905730
* "Nonparametric Estimation with Applications to Large and Complex Survey Data"
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,07/02/2009
* Lily Wang,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 100,200.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

One difficulty facing today's survey statisticians is the increasingly complex
structures of surveys. The U.S. is very well provided with various sorts of
longitudinal surveys which have considerable advantages over widely used cross-
sectional data for capturing dynamic demographic relationships. It is desirable
to make inferences from these complex surveys as model-free as they can be.
Nonparametric statistics is a flexible and promising tool that properly reflects
complex design structures. However, the simultaneous consideration of detection
of survey errors with high dimensionality, smoothing and the additional
complexity emerging from complex correlation structures presents great
challenges in nonparametric survey analysis. The investigator works on novel
nonparametric model-assisted methods for large and complex surveys, including
longitudinal surveys, via incorporation of "cheap" auxiliary information. The
current project includes (1) developing finer and more intelligent nonparametric
tools for survey sampling; (2) investigating nonparametric survey methodology in
the presence of nonsampling errors, such as nonresponse and measurement errors;
(3) exploring new procedures and novel theory in longitudinal survey analysis.

The field of survey research is undergoing profound and rapid changes brought on
by larger societal, technological, and theoretical developments. With large
complex surveys in many research areas becoming increasingly available for
public use, the theory and practice in this proposal can serve as an important
tool for survey practitioners, (bio)statisticians, epidemiologists, economists,
sociologists, and other researchers. The proposed methodologies will
significantly enrich the techniques of longitudinal survey modeling and broaden
the traditional understanding of survey sampling. The proposed research will
also strengthen the U.S. federal statistical system by providing survey
researchers from several federal agencies (including Census Bureau, the National
Center for Health Statistics, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics) modern and advanced methods in survey methodology.
