
* 0905753
* Design and Analysis of Complex Experiments: Branching Factors and Functional Responses
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2009
* Ying Hung,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 128,096.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Statistical design and analysis of experiments is an effective and commonly used
tool in scientific discoveries. The rapid growth in technology and computing
power has made available many complex experiments, such as those with branching
factors and functional responses. It also poses many new challenges. The primary
objective of this proposal is to develop a set of novel and efficient
statistical methods to tackle the emerging challenges and thus accelerate
discoveries in many disciplines that use experimental investigation. The
research plan consists of two parts. The first part of the research focuses on
design and analysis of experiments with branching and nested factors. In many
complex experiments, some of the factors exist only within the level of another
factor. Such factors are often called nested factors. A factor within which
other factors are nested is called a branching factor. Design and analysis of
experiments with branching and nested factors are crucial in many complex
systems and have not received much attention in the literature. In the first
part of this proposal, new classes of designs, theory, combinatorial and
algorithmic construction strategies, and structured modeling are proposed that
can take into account the branching and nested structure in a complex experiment
and identify important factors effectively. The second part of the research
focuses on the analysis of computer experiments with functional responses.
Physical experiments can be expensive and time-consuming; thus, computer
experiments have been widely used as economical alternatives. Many computer
experiment responses are collected in a functional form. However, literature on
modeling computer experiments with functional responses remains scarce as most
of the existing modeling techniques focus on single outputs. Although there are
some dimension reduction techniques for functional responses, they do not
account for an important feature, the deterministic outputs, of computer
experiments. To address this issue, a sequential technique is proposed, which
provides an interpolating model. It also incorporates a novel iterative
procedure and thus enjoys great computational efficiency.

The new class of designs, design theory, combinatorial and algorithmic
construction methods, and structured models proposed in this research appears to
be the first systematic investigation of experiments with branching and nested
factors. They can open new avenues for studying problems that energize both
theoretical and applied research. The proposed sequential modeling technique for
computer experiments with functional responses takes into account the special
features in computer experiments and enjoys great computational efficiency. It
is an innovative concept which can lead to new research in functional data
analysis. Both methods are readily applicable to a variety of scientific fields,
such as electronic packaging, biomechanical engineering design, wildfire
control, and influenza modeling.
