
* 0906449
* Association Analysis of Multivariate Competing Risks Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,07/02/2009
* Yu Cheng,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 196,354.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In this proposal, the investigator describes three projects
on association analysis of multivariate competing risks data which arise
frequently in genetic family studies, demography and other areas. Often one is
interested in familial association of the onset time of a certain event, with
the presence of competing events which may dependently censor the occurrence of
the target event. The usual association methods for multivariate survival data
assuming the censoring by competing events independent of the target event may
produce biased results. In addition, the marginal distributions of the event of
interest are not identifiable. Hence the proposed association analysis for
multivariate competing risks data focuses on two important quantities in
competing risks literature: cause-specific hazard (CSH) and cumulative incidence
functions (CIFs). The investigator develops a series of association analyses of
multivariate competing risks data which account for the dependence censoring by
competing events appropriately. The first project is related to two equivalent
association measures of multivariate competing risks data which are CSH ratios
and estimated nonparametrically without smoothing. In the second project, the
investigator expands the application of frailty models to association analysis
of multivariate competing risks data through an improper random variable and
expresses the bivariate CIF in terms of its marginals and an association
parameter. To incorporate covariates, in the third project, the investigator
develops parametric regression models to investigate covariate effects on
marginal CIFs and the indirect effects of covariates on the association
analysis. These association methods cover many existing approaches for bivariate
data as special cases. The proposal concentrates on modeling familial
association in a target event with the presence of competing events where the
standard methods may produce biased results. For example, in a large dementia
study, family clustering in dementia onset is of interest where the competing
event death may preclude the occurrence of dementia. The application of this
research to the dementia and other studies in health and medicine is expected to
generate novel insights on the association in a target event among members of a
cluster, which help individuals and practitioners perceive the familial risks
more accurately. The enhanced understanding may lead to better prevention and
intervention in the target population who are at elevated risks. The methods can
be used in many other applications such as demographic studies of human
mortality, extremes in financial assets and returns, genetic evaluation of sires
for longevity of dairy cows and annuity valuation with dependent mortality in
insurance.
