
* 0906919
* Nonparametric Methods for Jump Processes Under Microstructure Noise
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2009,07/07/2009
* Jose Figueroa-Lopez,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 107,250.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The investigator studies nonparametric methods for continuous-time jump
processes that are contaminated by a background noise, or are affected by random
clocks. In financial markets, for instance, the background noise is a byproduct
of the way trading takes place, while a random clock could model non-synchronous
trading effects or a cumulative measure of economic activity. The proposed
research develops methodologies to quantify and mitigate the effects of the
nuisance components by determining appropriate sampling frequencies, bias
correction tools, and data-driven model selection criteria. The focus of the
work is on drawing inferences for the jump component of the process. Three
concrete research directions are put forward: (1) Adaptive nonparametric methods
for the infinite-dimensional parameter controlling the jump dynamics, (2)
Incorporation of the market microstructure of asset prices into the model and
the statistical methodology, and (3) Extensions to more versatile models with
jumps such as time-changed Levy or additive processes.

In recent years increasingly complex probabilistic models have been developed in
a quest to incorporate the real nature of the phenomenon under consideration.
Considerably less effort has been devoted to a systematic study of the effects
that departures from the presumed model have in the statistical estimation of
the underlying parameters driving the phenomenon. However, without an
appropriate statistical methodology, even the most sophisticated paradigm
produces only limited practical impact in industry and across other fields. The
proposed work is expected to significantly advance the theory of mathematical
finance by targeting the aforementioned critical implementation issues.
Furthermore, in light of the ongoing trend by the financial industry to adopt
risk-adverse models that incorporate "bubles" and potential crashes, the present
research is expected to foster opportunities of collaboration between academia
and industry. An empirical assessment of the potential sudden price shifts of a
commodity is critical to develop appropriate risk-management and investment
strategies. Other outreach objectives include extensions to spatio-temporal
discontinuous processes which are increasingly in demand in fields such as in
environmental sciences.
