
* 0906497
* General Semiparametric Inference via Bootstrap Sampling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,07/04/2009
* Guang Cheng,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 100,003.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objectives of this project are first to prove the theoretical
validity of the bootstrap method as a general inferential tool for the
semiparametric models, and then invent a computationally attractive bootstrap
inference procedure, called k-step bootstrap. Semiparametric modelling has
provided an excellent framework for the modern complex data due to its
flexibility to model some features of the data parametrically but without
assuming anything for the other features. The bootstrap is the most popular
data-resampling method used in statistical analysis, and has recently been
applied to the semiparametric models arising from a wide variety of contexts.
Therefore, the systematic theoretical studies on the bootstrap inferences for
the semiparametric models are fundamentally important. In practice, the
computational cost of the bootstrap inference procedure is particularly high for
the semiparametric models. Thus, the investigator proposes an approximate
bootstrap method, i.e. k-step bootstrap, and will show that this novel approach
results in huge computational savings but without sacrificing any degree of
inference accuracy. In addition, the investigator will develop a set of
asymptotic results to elucidate the asymptotic structure of the semiparametric
M-estimation, which is crucial for the future theoretical research. M-estimation
refers to a general method of estimation including the maximum likelihood
estimation as a special case.

The primary impact of the proposed work is to lay solid theoretical foundation
for the general semiparametric inferences via bootstrap sampling. In addition,
the proposed k-step bootstrap approach is practically beneficial in several
regards. For instance, the scientists who bootstrap a large data set will
benefit, as the minimal computational cost needed in the k-step bootstrap to
achieve the satisfactory inference accuracy will be precisely analyzed. However,
the broader impacts of the proposed activities are multiple. For instance, a key
aspect of this project is the integration of research and teaching, which will
be achieved by proposing specific projects for students during the teaching of
classes on semiparametric inferences and bootstrap computation. This pedagogical
method also facilitates the participation of underrepresented groups of
students.
