
* 0906532
* Nonstationary spatial-temporal covariance models for multivariate processes on a globe
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,08/02/2009
* Mikyoung Jun,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 75,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project studies classes of spatial-temporal covariance functions for
nonstationary, multivariate processes on a globe. Many processes in geophysical
and environmental problems these days take large portion of the Earth as their
spatial domain and exhibit strong spatial nonstationarity (particularly with
respect to latitude). Moreover, it is common to have multiple variables of
interest, such as relationship between precipitation and temperature. However,
there are not many spatial-temporal covariance functions that can deal with
nonstationary processes on a globe and there are almost none developed so far
for multivariate problems. In this regard, the investigator develops a flexible
class of spatial-temporal covariance functions for univariate as well as
multivariate processes on a globe. The idea of applying differential operators
with respect to latitude, longitude, and time to an isotropic process on a globe
is explored. The coefficients of the operators, varying over latitude, allow
flexible nonstationary covariance models for univariate process. It also helps
to create a rich class of cross covariance models suitable for real physical
processes. The ultimate goal of this project is to build a joint statistical
model for multiple climate model outputs. It has been demonstrated that these
numerical climate models have correlated errors and it is critical to have
flexible cross covariance models to accurately model the dependence structure
among different climate model errors. There are several interesting
computational issues that arise from this application. In particular, the
investigator studies algorithms for fast computation of inverse of covariance
matrix with special structures, covariance tapering, likelihood approximation,
and missing data imputation method.

This study is motivated by the scientific problem of evaluation and integration
of multiple climate model outputs. Under the coordination of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), various organizations over the
world are developing numerical climate models and the cost to develop and run
these models are enormous. However, it is common to simply take averages of
these models and assume they are independent. In addition to the contribution to
the field of statistics, the proposed study will provide a useful tool for
climate scientists for inter-comparison of multiple climate models. Moreover, it
will help climate scientists to improve their understanding of past, current,
and future climate by accurately integrating multiple climate models beyond
simple averages and allow them to achieve more precise uncertainty in their
predictions. The results of the proposed research will be formed as
multidisciplinary courses for students of both statistics and atmospheric
scientists. The investigator anticipates that this type of effort will boost
future collaboration between statisticians and atmospheric scientists.


