
* 0906593
* Estimation, Detection and Control of Multiple Change-point Stochastic Systems with Applications to Economics, Engineering, Biology and Climate Science
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2009
* Haipeng Xing,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 110,000.00

The problems of parameter estimation, abrupt change detection, and system
control in stochastic systems with multiple change-points arise in financial
econometrics, industrial quality control, gene mapping and abrupt climate change
studies. An important ingredient in the solution to these problems is efficient
estimation of piecewise constant parameters with unknown multiple change-points.
In the proposed research, the investigator will develop a unified hidden Markov
filtering approach to parameter estimation, and bounded complexity approximation
algorithms that can be implemented via parallel recursions. In particular, four
types of problems from different fields are investigated in the study. The first
develops estimation and forecasting procedures for an econometric time series
model, in which a generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity
process for conditional variances is intertwined with piecewise constant
unconditional variances for which the change-points are unknown. The second
studies detection of parameter changes with unknown pre- and post-change
distributions in stochastic systems. The third investigates segmentation of
piecewise constant signals in sequence data and discusses its applications to
the analysis of genomic copy number variation. The fourth, arising in abrupt
climate change, develops estimation theory and algorithms for multiple
structural changes in the celebrated Lorenz system, which is chaotic. This
system provides a highly simplified description of atmospheric circulation and
has served as a testbed for methods of parameter estimation in climate studies.
The investigator will show how these challenging problems from different areas
are unified and solved by the hidden Markov filtering approach to multiple
change-points.

Abrupt or gradual parameters changes in complex stochastic systems are often
encountered in various scientific and engineering practices including economics,
biology and climate studies. While systems with gradually changing parameters
have received much attention historically, recent advances in science and
engineering show the growing importance of stochastic systems with abrupt, but
unknown parameter changes. In economic studies, the authorities and industrial
practitioners are interested in dating turning points of economic activities. In
current genomic research, DNA copy number variations (i.e., gains or losses of
specific chromosomal segments) are key genetic events in the development and
progression of numerous diseases including cancer, HIV acquisition, and
Alzheimer and Parkinson's disease, and an important step in studying these
genetic events is to identify the regions of variations. In climate studies,
abrupt changes of Earth's climate have attracted increasing attention from
researchers and policy makers due to their projected severe impact on regional
and global ecological and economic systems, and new statistical techniques are
needed for nonstationary climate or climate-related variables due to the limited
values of current statistical tools with a gradually changing assumption.
However, the effort of solving these problems is hampered by the statistical and
computational complexity caused by unknown abrupt changes. The proposed research
presents a unified statistical theory to model and estimate such changes in
complex systems, and the applications should shed new light on efforts at
tackling these challenging problems. In particular, this study allows us to
model abrupt changes of climate systems at the global level by incorporating
current state-of-the-art climate modeling techniques with statistical analysis.
Furthermore, the application of the proposed research to climate sciences links
the statistical theory with high-performance computation, and hence opens up new
horizons to statistical methodologies.


