
* 0906812
* High dimensional data: new phenomena and theory in modeling and approximation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,02/19/2013
* Iain Johnstone,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,205,685.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project studies high dimensional settings exemplified by Linear Regression
model selection when there are more potential predictors than observations, and
Linear Discriminant Analysis when there are more available features than
observations, in both cases assuming that only a small unknown fraction are
relevant. A two-dimensional phase diagram indexes the ratio of number of
variables to number of observations as well as a measure of the fraction of
relevant variables. In one region of this diagram, the analysis task can be
completed successfully, elsewhere it fails utterly. The investigators propose a
four-pronged effort on dimensionality reduction: (1) Phenomenology of Phase
Transitions in High-Dimensional Data Analysis: Make structured large-scale
computational studies to investigate several such transitions in depth and
expose empirical regularities for theoreticians to study. (2) Theoretical
Statistics Supporting High-Dimensional Data Analysis: Proposers have developed
`at the physicist's level of rigor' a derivation showing roughly that regression
model selection must fail for *any* algorithm above a certain boundary in the
phase diagram. A rigorous proof, planned for this project, will involve the
interplay of classical statistical decision theory, random matrix theory, and
statistical physics heuristics. (3) High Dimensional Convex Geometry: A
surprising but revealing relationship exists between several of the phase
transitions of high-dimensional data analysis and certain key phenomena in high-
dimensional convex geometry. The project will further explore these phase
transitions and connections. (4) Inference with Large Random Matrices: A random
matrix theory perspective leads to useful new questions and results in classical
multivariate analysis that will be pursued in this proposal, with useful
connections with the phase transition work expected. For example, the project
will systematically study the distribution of the largest root statistic at
``contiguous'' alternatives in a variety of the standard statistical settings of
multivariate analysis, and address related questions such as tail inequalities
for the double Wishart model.

Scientific practice in fields ranging from computational biology to image
understanding generates ever more datasets in which massive numbers of features
are measured per observational unit. The resulting high-dimensional datasets are
often mined for features and associations. In many cases, there are at least as
many features as observations. It has lately become clear that data analysis in
this setting offers deep new phenomena of real importance to applications. Two
examples -- of many -- include: Linear Regression model selection when there are
more potential predictors than observations, but only a small fraction of these
are relevant (and which ones aren't known), and Linear Discriminant Analysis
when there are more available features than observations, but again only a small
unknown fraction are relevant. In such cases there is a `breakdown' phenomenon,
described by a 'phase diagram': a precise relationship between the number of
relevant features and the number of observations at which certain procedures for
learning from data become impossible. The new results to be developed about this
phenomenon by this project will provide practitioners of high-dimensional data
analysis with an improved understanding of the sharp limits to data mining, as
well as forging new links between statistical theory and fields like high-
dimensional convex geometry and statistical physics.
