
* 0906421
* Stability, Inference, and Weighting in Model Selection
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2009,09/17/2012
* Dennis Boos,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The first of three components to the proposed research exploits the form of
weighted least squares estimators to develop new approaches to regression
diagnostics, robust estimation, and variable selection. The second component
addresses the problem of frequentist inference after model averaging, and
"bagging" in particular. A new "parallel bootstrap" resampling approach is
proposed for finding variance estimators with total computational effort about
twice that of the original bagging step. The third component addresses the
problem of determining when model averaging is beneficial. Model averaging often
improves prediction over a base procedure, but not always. Because the
improvement in prediction is achieved at the expense of interpretability, it is
important to know when model averaging is advantageous and when it is not. Thus
a model-stability index that is applicable to general regression models will be
developed and studied.

The proposed research addresses well-recognized problems that arise when
estimating the relationship between a dependent response variable Y and several
predictor variables, e.g., Y = loan failure and X1 = household income, X2 =
number of dependents, etc. The methods and insights developed by this research
will be very useful in applications of regression modeling and thus will
facilitate research in numerous other disciplines including basic science
research and applied research that directly affects quality of life. Results
will be disseminated via web and journal publications, conferences, and
seminars. The project will also significantly impact human resource development
in the guise of education and training of graduate students, some of whom who
are likely to come from under-represented groups in light of the NC State
Statistics Department's commitment to a diverse graduate program.






