
* 0906394
* New Change-point Problems in Genomic Profiling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2009,09/04/2009
* Nancy Zhang,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

DNA copy number data, which measures gains and losses of segments of genomes, is
an important data type for understanding genetic variation and for clinical
research. The analysis of DNA copy number data motivates new statistical
problems, especially in the areas of change-point detection and high dimensional
data analysis. This proposal identies these problems, formulates statistical
models, and proposes methods for their solution. The topics covered include
model selection for irregular high dimensional models, simultaneous change-point
detection in a large number of aligned sequences, and segmentation of partially
observed sequences. These developments in statistical methodology are a direct
response to the current analysis needs at the Stanford Genome Technology Center
and in the Cancer Genome Atlas Project, and open source software will be made
available to these and broader communities.



Cancer and other genetic diseases are no stranger to genome scientists: high-
throughput technologies and statistical analyses have always promised to provide
a systems level?s view of disease inheritance and progression. In recent years,
new concurrent advances in genomics and statistics, including more efficient
high throughput data-collection methods, larger patient sample sets, the
atmosphere of more open collaboration, and greater sophistication in study
design and data analysis have positioned us to make major new advances in
studying genetic disease. Despite this promise, there is still much waiting to
be done. In particular, statistical methods for the analysis of genome-wide
profiling data lacks the sophistication to deal with the many issues that arises
in modern data collection schemes. These issues include high dimensionality,
missing observations and simultaneous inference in a large number of patient
samples. In this proposal, the investigator and her colleagues formulate these
new problems and put forth models with practical solutions. These developments
in statistical methodology are a direct response to the current analysis needs
at the Stanford Genome Technology Center and in the Cancer Genome Atlas Project,
and open source software will be made available to these and broader
communities.
