
* 0906400
* Travel Support for the Directions in Statistical Computing (DSC) 2009 Meeting; Copenhagen, Denmark; Summer 2009
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/01/2009,02/17/2009
* Luke-jon Tierney,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,000.00

DSC 2009, an international workshop on Directions in Statistical Computing, will
be held July 13--14, 2009 at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. This is the
sixth in a series of meetings; previous meeting were held in Vienna, Austria
(1999, 2001, and 2003), Seattle, WA (2005), and Auckland, New Zealand (2007).
The workshop will focus on, but is not limited to, open source statistical
computing and aims to provide a platform for exchanging ideas about developments
in statistical computing. UseR! 2009 will be held July 8--10 in Rennes, France,
and is the fifth in a series of conferences the use and development statistical
methods and software related to the R system. This proposal is for funding
exclusively to provide support to assist with travel expenses for junior
investigators from US institutions to attend this meeting. Work of young
researchers is often among the most novel, yet often these researchers lack the
travel funds necessary to attend such a conference because they have not yet
established themselves sufficiently to attract external travel and other funding
for their work.

Statistics is playing an increasingly important role in interdisciplinary
research, and statistical computing is essential as the means for making new
methodology available to researchers and allowing the best statistical practices
to be applied effectively. Scholarly conferences on statistical computing are an
essential framework for the exchange of ideas and for encouraging the
exploration of new directions in the design of statistical software.
International conferences are particularly valuable as they allow the exchange
of ideas among researchers from around the world who would not ordinarily come
into direct contact. The benefit to young researchers of a first exposure to the
international research community is particularly important. International
meetings also provide an opportunity to meet with outstanding international
graduate students and encourage them to consider opportunities for further study
in the United States.
