
* 0906482
* Quantile Regression for Multivariate Time Series Models with Functional Coefficients
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2009,07/08/2009
* Jiancheng Jiang,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 99,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Quantile regression receives increasing attention in econometrics and statistics
for its advantages over mean regression. For multivariate nonlinear time series,
there is little solid mathematical theory on quantile regression in the
literature, although much work has been contributed using the maximum likelihood
or least squares estimation. In this research project the investigator develops
spatial quantile regression modeling theory of multivariate nonlinear time
series data with multivariate exogeneous variables. Several multivariate
functional-coefficient models and associated estimation methods are proposed.
From a theoretical perspective, the investigator and his colleagues study
asymptotic properties of the estimators, variable selection, and parametric and
nonparametric hypothesis testing for the proposed models, based on the
global/local spatial quantile regression. The novel modeling approaches open a
prosperous avenue of research in the multivariate nonlinear realm and are
expected to stimulate others to address a number of problems which remain beyond
the reach of existing models and techniques. The computational method for
implementation of the proposed methodology is also considered.

In financial markets, multiple time series are usually related. For example, the
yields of three-month, six-month and twelve-month Treasury bills are highly
related and exhibit co-movement. For such multivariate time series data, one
should use multivariate models. Although univariate models for each time series
may be employed, they are not able to capture the relationship among different
time series and may not be efficient. Since nonlinear features widely exist in
economic data, it is important to develop some multivariate nonlinear modeling
techniques. The investigator proposes flexible multivariate nonlinear models and
introduces cutting edge techniques to refine the models and to achieve
robustness and efficiency of estimation. This is very important because it
relaxes restrictive assumptions frequently used in statistical and economic
research and hence enables us to achieve more accurate and realistic results.
The proposed variable selection method is important because economic data often
include many variables. Which variables should be chosen for the problems of
interest? Decisions in variable selection are often arbitrary. The research will
provide elegant methods to identify those relevant variables and enable
investigators to make reliable decisions. The proposed hypothesis testing
methods are also important because they allow one to refine the models. After
fitting a model, a relationship between variables is discovered. Is this
discovery true in the real situations? With the aid of the proposed hypothesis
testing methods, the question can be correctly answered with high probability,
and hence the rate of error in discovery can be reduced.
