
* 0906813
* New Directions in Functional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2009,06/19/2013
* Jane-Ling Wang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,627.00

Functional data analysis is an emerging area in statistics that deals with a
sample of random functions. In practice, measurements of these random functions
are often taken intermittently at discrete time points and may be subject to
random noise. This results in two scenarios, one with complete or dense
recordings, termed 'functional data', and another with sparse measurements at
discrete time points, termed 'longitudinal data' because such data are typical
for longitudinal studies. Statistical analysis for these two types of data and
the respective theory differ substantially. The investigator advocates that it
is not necessary to develop methodology for functional and longitudinal data
separately as is common practice. Instead, a unified approach that handles both
data structures on a single platform will be developed. The approach is rooted
in the dimension reduction approach of principal component analysis, which has
been extended to functional/longitudinal data and termed 'functional principal
component analysis (FPCA)'. Existing FPCA approaches assume that data are from a
single population, thus do not take advantage of available information on
covariates, which can be either time-independent or time-dependent. The first
theme/aim of the proposal is to fill this gap in the literature by adjusting
FPCA for covariate information, for both functional and longitudinal data. A
recent FPCA approach developed by the PI and colleagues facilitates this
extension, which is coupled with nonparametric and semiparametric approaches. A
second theme of the proposal is to apply the functional methodology in Aim 1 to
unstructured (non-functional) high dimensional data by reordering and then
'stringing' them into data which can then be interpreted as functional data.
'Stringing' can be accomplished through multidimensional scaling. If
sufficiently strong correlations exist among the variables of the unstructured
data, an ordering can be found in which neighboring variables are highly
correlated. This approach turns the curse of high-dimensional data into a
blessing, as functional data analysis inherently takes advantage of the
adjacency of high dimensional densely recorded data for each subject. The
overarching goal of this project is to develop a cohesive framework for several
types of high dimensional data through a combination of FDA and Stringing
approaches. The two themes are thus tightly connected and further explored in
Aim 3, to develop and disseminate software for these methods.

High dimensional data are common nowadays in many disciplines. This proposal
focuses on two types of high-dimensional data: functional/longitudinal data and
unstructured high-dimensional data. The combined approaches of Aims 1 and 2 can
handle a large variety of high-dimensional data. The proposed research is
motivated by real world problems, such as those from the Baltimore Longitudinal
Study or in gene expression studies listed in the databases of the National
Center for Biotechnology Information. A significant portion of the problems
originates from ongoing collaborations of the PI with biologists and
demographers and aims to identify: (1) key biological and behavioral factors
that contribute to longevity, (2) key risk factors to diseases, and (3) genes
that are related to patient survivals. The new approaches will help to shed
light on important issues in many fields by overcoming the challenges with high
dimensional data.
