
* 0906631
* Adaptive Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2009
* Yves Atchade,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 99,556.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a flexible computational technique that has
proven very useful to many scientific disciplines and is the backbone of current
implementations of Bayesian inference. Recent research developments suggest that
the use of adaptive methods can make Monte Carlo algorithms considerably more
effective. This research proposal has two major components. The first part will
contribute to the development of a limit theory for adaptive MCMC algorithms.
More Specifically, the PI will develop a resolvent-based martingale
approximation technique to investigate the central limit theorem and the
asymptotic variance estimation for various adaptive MCMC algorithms. The second
part of this research activity will develop a new MCMC algorithm for the
Bayesian analysis of statistical models with intractable normalizing constants,
a topic that currently poses major computational challenges. This part of the
research is driven by the protein design problem in computational biology but
the same problem also frequently occurs in many other statistical models
including Markov random fields, Markov point processes.

Markov Chain Monte Carlo is a well-established Monte Carlo technique for
sampling probability distributions. The method is used widely to solve
substantive problems in many areas of applications. It is especially useful in
situations with high-dimensional data, which is increasingly common in science
and engineering research as well as applications. Thus, the research
developments from this project can have a significant impact on methods for
doing statistical inference in these areas. Through its theoretical component,
this research project will advance the general understanding and strengthen the
use of adaptive Monte Carlo methods in practice. In the course of developing the
asymptotic theory, the PI will develop original extensions to some well-
established probabilistic tools. The research is also proposing a new algorithm
to tackle one of the most challenging current problem in Monte Carlo simulation;
sampling from the posterior distribution of statistical models with intractable
normalizing constants.
