
* 0906818
* A New Paradigm for Multiple Correlated Outputs Given Dissimilarity and Other Information From Multiple Sources
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,02/22/2012
* Grace Wahba,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2013
* USD 582,405.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The objective of this research is to develop novel/improved
methods for statistical model building and risk factor estimation when the
training set has complex continuous and discrete attribute variables and
including, but not limited to extremely long attribute vectors of which only a
small set of interacting variables are believed to be relevant, but it is not
known which. In addition, noisy relationship or dissimilarity information may be
known between sufficiently many pairs of training set members, along with
multiple correlated Bernoulli outcomes. In this context the objective is to
model relations between the attribute and dissimilarity information and the
multiple Bernoulli outcomes, as well as their correlations and conditional
relationships. In particular the work will be concerned with issues related to
developing tuning procedures for the multiple correlated Bernoulli case with
heterogenous input data and penalty functionals, variable selection problems in
this complex setup and the development of novel/improved computational tools to
handle large data sets with complex optimization criteria.

With the availability of huge amounts of data and high speed computing, modern
statistical model building and data mining tools are doing impressive things to
extract information in just about every scientific field from Astronomy to
Zoology, not to mention problems in marketing, government, defense, health and
the economy. Data sets in many areas of interest contain deeply embedded
information relating to the risks of various outcomes, given complex inputs or
observables. However the generation of huge, complex data sets in many fields of
endeavor is beginning to outstrip the tools available for analyzing them. A new
paradigm is proposed for development, which builds on previous results and which
has as core the ability to deal with complex heterogenous data structures, to
understand relationships between complex multivariate input information and
complex multivariate correlated responses. The proposed work, when completed and
disseminated, will provide a set of important and useful tools for new/improved
statistical model building/data mining relating observational data in complex
input structures to complex multiple correlated outcomes.
