
* 0906858
* Two Problems in Statistical Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2009,09/04/2009
* Weizhen Wang,OH,Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 102,811.00

When making inferences about parameters using the confidence interval (CI) or
the hypothesis test (HT), typically, the CI provides more information about the
parameter, but is hard to construct; while the HT has a relatively easy
construction, but does not provide precise information about the location of
parameter as the CI does. The principle investigator (PI) tries to resolve these
two problems (at least to a certain degree) by i) providing a construction
method of the CI based on coverage probability, and ii) a generalization for the
HT. There have been many efforts to derive a CI since it was first proposed by
Laplace in 1814. There are five methods for the CI construction: pivotal
quantities, inversion of tests, guarantee intervals, Bayesian method and
invariance. But none of these is based on the analysis of coverage probability,
which, however, is all one needs in the definition of CI. The development of
such a method is one goal of the proposal. In fact, by focusing on the coverage
probability, optimal CIs, including the smallest CI (a subset of any other CI),
can be constructed within a certain class of intervals, and the smallest
interval automatically minimizes the expected length and the false coverage
probability. The PI will construct the smallest or admissible CI's using the
criterion of set inclusion introduced by PI in 2006 under different scenarios.
The traditional HT only deals with a two-choice problem. However, most
applications involve a multiple-choice problem. In the second part of the
proposal, the PI will generalize the HT procedure so that one is able to make a
choice among more than two mutually exclusive claims. This can be done by first
partitioning the basic alternative into multiple claims and partitioning the
sample space correspondingly, then using the observed data to decide which claim
is tested as the alternative, and finally conducting a traditional test for the
selected claim. This new procedure provides flexibility to solve any multiple-
choice problem. Various applications will be addressed, including traditional
problems, such as analysis of variance, model selection, detecting small shifts
in quality control, and some open problems, including the detection of active
effects in nonorthogonal saturated designs. In short, almost all testing
problems, except for those with a one-sided alternative, can be reconsidered
using the new procedure, and different, more efficient results are expected.

A parameter is a certain quantity that describes the entire distribution of a
population of interest, and inference about the parameter is one of the
fundamental problems in Statistics. A simple but very useful example is to
estimate the proportion (the parameter) of all patients (the population) who
show improvement after taking a certain drug. As two major statistical inference
tools for a parameter, the confidence interval (CI) addresses the "what" type of
question and the hypothesis test (HT) answers the "yes" or "no'' type of
question. In spite of the tremendous progress in statistical theory and
applications in recent years, the foundation of Statistics is not as solid as it
should be. Some basic problems, including the comparison of two proportions,
still do not have an ideal solution. However, a fine solution for this problem
would be very helpful to establish the superiority of a newly developed drug
over the control more securely and more efficiently. As another case, a high
dose of a drug typically has a severe side effect. So identifying the minimum
dose level of a drug that is effective is an important issue for patients. This
involves the comparison of several proportions for different dose levels with a
common proportion of the control group. The main task of Statistics is to make
estimations, predictions and decisions with measured precision and/or high
probability of being correct based on the observed data. The ongoing research is
an attempt to improve the understanding of Statistics from the root, and will
lead to better or optimal solutions for the two problems mentioned above as
direct applications. More specifically, short confidence intervals will be
constructed based on coverage probability, and the newly proposed testing
procedure will be able to handle the multiple-choice problem.
