
* 0907655
* Data Depth for Nonparametric Multivariate Analysis: Goodness-of-Fit Tests Based on Spacings, Classification, and A Coherent Framework for Data Depth
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,07/04/2009
* Jun Li,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2013
* USD 119,736.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
Public Law 111-5).

Advanced computing and data acquisition technologies have made possible the
gathering of large multivariate data sets in many fields. Efficient multivariate
statistical analysis tools for such data sets are highly sought after. Among the
existing multivariate analysis approaches, the one based on the data depth has
received most attention recently, due to its highly desirable nonparametric
nature. Expanding further along the theme of data depth, this proposal outlines
three new research projects in nonparametric multivariate inference, namely: (1)
to develop a new class of multivariate goodness-of-fit tests based on
multivariate spacings; (2) to introduce a novel nonparametric classification
algorithm using the so-called DD-plots; (3) to extend the general framework for
all notions of data depth, and to develop new data depths which are suitable for
analyzing data drawn from non-continuous distributions.

The proposal addresses important problems in theoretical multivariate
statistics, which have a wide range of applications in practice. All three
research directions are highly competitive, since any new development in these
directions will significantly advance multivariate statistical methodology as a
whole. The proposed research also aims to bring forth many efficient statistical
inference procedures with immediate applicability in many domains such as
medicine, biology, psychology, just to name a few. Motivating examples in
ecology and environmental sciences are elaborated in the proposal. They will
also be illustrated fully in future publications, which should help foster more
interdisciplinary interaction between statistics and other fields.
