
* 0907017
* Methods for High-Dimensional and Functional Data, with Applications to Mapping Human Brain Networks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2009,07/26/2009
* Philip Reiss,NY,New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 127,537.00

The application proposes a set of methods for analyzing high-dimensional and
functional data. Although motivated by problems in mapping the human brain and
its network structure, the methodological innovations proposed are much more
widely applicable. The main objectives are to develop and disseminate novel
methodology in the following three areas. (1) Linear and generalized linear
regression of scalar outcomes on image predictors: There has been considerable
work in the functional data analysis literature on regressing scalars on one-
dimensional functional predictors. The investigator has pioneered an approach
well suited to the more challenging problem of high-resolution image predictors,
but much further work is needed in this area. (2) Inferring networks from large
covariance and correlation matrices: This includes multiple time series and
time-frequency methods to infer connections among brain regions from functional
neuroimaging data, and techniques for two-sample testing and discrimination with
high-dimensional data. (3) Analyzing complex outcomes based on the distances
among outcomes: This includes distance-based reliability assessment and
permutation tests that use distances to infer differences among groups.

In their quest to understand human brain function and mental health disorders,
researchers in neuroscience and psychiatry are increasingly collecting large and
complex data sets. Such data sets may include large numbers of variables per
subject, or even sequences of brain maps for each subject, as are produced by
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Novel statistical techniques play a
central role in deriving scientifically useful information from these complex
data sets, which may ultimately aid in the diagnosis and treatment of
psychiatric disorders. The methods developed in this research have potential
applications in other scientific domains, including ecology and genetics.


