
* 0907484
* Density-Preserving Maps
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2009,08/11/2011
* Alexander Gray,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This project will investigate two aspects of high-dimensional statistics. First,
it develops a new alternative paradigm for nonlinear dimension reduction (often
called manifold learning) in which, instead of preserving local distances in the
original space as done by existing approaches, the approach preserves the
densities in the original space. The motivation is twofold: Using results from
Riemannian geometry, the investigators have shown that is not possible in
general to preserve distances, and that it is always possible to preserve
densities; in addition, because perhaps the common scientific use of nonlinear
dimension reduction methods is to visualize clusters and outliers, which are
arguably best formally described in terms of densities, it can be argued that
this approach directly preserves the actual information of interest. This is
achieved by means of novel formulations resulting in least-squares problems, as
shown in preliminary work, or convex optimization problems to be developed.
Second, the project develops theory and methodology for nonparametrically
estimating the densities of points lying on a submanifold, which is needed as
the first step in the overall approach. This includes asymptotic results which
are dependent on the dimension of the submanifold rather than that of the
ambient space, as current exist. This provides contrast to the popular
conclusion that nonparametric estimation in high dimensional spaces is simply
intractable. Theoretical, methodological, and experimental development will be
performed.

Very high-dimensional data, such as text documents, images, or astronomical
spectra as typically encoded, have become increasingly important and prevalent,
while statistical theory and methods have only recently attacked such problems
with full vigor. Such data are critical for homeland security, medicine, remote
sensing of the environment, e-commerce, and a host of other domains. The
intellectual merit of the work is the introduction of a new way of formulating
and analyzing two fundamental statistical operations on such data, called
dimension reduction and density estimation. Each of these could open the door to
new avenues in the much-needed area of very high-dimensional statistics. The
broader impact of the work is the transformative ability of analysts to reliably
identify outliers and clusters in high-dimensional data -- for example such a
tool could help astronomers identify new types of astrophysical objects. The
work will be distributed as part of a well-distributed state-of-the-art toolbox
of statistical methods to maximize impact across many areas of data analysis.
