
* 0907297
* Adaptive Designs and Sequential Monitoring
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2009,08/25/2009
* Feifang Hu,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 130,001.00

Clinical trials are complicated and usually involve multiple objectives such as
controlling type I error, increasing power of detecting treatment difference,
assigning more patients to better treatment, and more. In literature, both
adaptive designs (by changing design procedure sequentially) and sequential
monitoring (by changing analysis procedure sequentially) have been proposed to
achieve these objectives to some degree. In this project, the investigator
combines these two sequential procedures and studies the advantages of
sequential monitoring response-adaptive randomized clinical trial. The
investigator first derives the asymptotic distribution of the sequential test
statistics of the combined procedure. Based on the asymptotic properties, the
investigator selects appropriate boundaries for the combined procedure to
achieve multiple objectives. Further, he investigates the implementation of the
combined procedure to some real clinical trials.

Clinical trials usually involve multiple competing objectives such as detecting
clinical difference among treatments, minimizing total cost and protecting more
people from possibly inferior treatments. Adaptive designs dynamically use
sequentially accruing data in decisions for collecting future data in order to
achieve these objectives. In conducting clinical trials, sequential monitoring
is a standard technique to balance the ethical and financial advantages of
stopping a trial early against the risk of an incorrect conclusion. This
proposal is concerned with combining adaptive designs and sequential monitoring.
The investigator will first investigate sequential monitoring of a response-
adaptive randomized clinical trial and will then study the advantages of this
combined procedure. Upon completion of this project, one can apply sequential
monitoring to an adaptive randomized clinical trial to achieve multiple
objectives. The research projects will produce advanced statistical tools for
analyzing data which is sequentially collected. These tools may be applied in
many fields including drug development, medical studies, industrial experiments,
economics and finance.
