
* 0907678
* Quasi-Likelihood of Models: Modified Profile Likelihood for Model Selection
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Heping He,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 120,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Most of statistical inferences are based on statistical models for data, so
model selection plays a fundamental role in statistical inferences. There is
huge amount of literature to develop model selection theory and methodologies
such as AIC, BIC, bootstrap criteria, cross-validation criteria and so on.
However, model selection is still an ``unsolved'' problem in the sense that
there are no magic procedures to get the best model. The goal of this proposal
is to develop quasi-likelihood functions of candidate models as a very accurate
and natural model selection criterion. Note that the quasi-likelihood functions
here are functions of models themselves instead of parameters in the models.
Motivated by the modified profile likelihoods (MPLs), the investigator treats
those parameters in each candidate model as nuisance parameters, and the models
themselves as the values of the ``parameter'' of interest, to develop the quasi-
likelihood functions of candidate models. The selected model is then the one
maximizing the quasi-likelihood of models. Some simulations have shown that the
proposed MPL works very well for the selection of error probability laws in
location-scale models. The MPL of models has also been obtained for composite
transformation models. The investigator will then develop the quasi-likelihood
function of models to select variables and error probability laws in regressions
and study its theoretical properties. The investigator will also develop the
quasi-likelihood of models in exponential family, study its theoretical
properties justifying its good performances expected in simulations and
applications, and explore to apply it to regular models. Other than these, the
investigator may go further to develop the quasi-likelihood to select the number
of change points in the change point problems, and to select the order of AR or
ARMA time series models. The investigator will also compare the proposed quasi-
likelihood function with AIC, BIC, and so on to see its advantages. The
investigator may study the other model selection problems in statistics and the
other disciplines and carry out some practical and important applications.

Model selection is one of the fundamental tasks of scientific inquiry. The
proposed quasi-likelihood of models provides a novel, very natural, universal
and extraordinarily good way to select models. This novel model selection
criterion would be a significant progress in solving the ``unsolved'' model
selection problems in statistics and the other disciplines. Since model
selection problems exist arguably in almost every discipline, the proposed
quasi-likelihood of models can be broadly used in various disciplines such as
statistics, signal processing, econometrics, medicine, biology, computer
sciences, communication, engineering, physics and even quantitative chemistry.
The investigator will collaborate with the other disciplines to solve some of
their real problems.
