
* 0927126
* Semiparametric regression for correlated data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2008,03/19/2009
* Tatiyana Apanasovich,PA,Thomas Jefferson University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 25,749.00

There has been growing interest in developing innovative statistical models for
dependent data. The project aims to address the following issues which have
arisen in modeling correlated data: extra zeros in count data, non-linear
functional relationships and measurement errors. Frequently it is of interest to
make marginal inference about trends and effects of explanatory variables on
correlated counts. Failure to account for the extra zeros may result in biased
parameter estimates and misleading inferences. The investigator proposes a
generalization of the standard zero-inflated regression model to the correlated
data case, allowing for a Heckman-type selection process. Measurement Error
Models offer coverage of estimation for situations where the model variables are
observed subject to measurement error. The second part of the project focuses on
developing Semiparametric Measurement Error Model for dependent data using two
approaches: the first is based upon the idea of Monte Carlo corrected scores and
the second is a generalization of the SIMEX (simulation-extrapolation) method to
general semiparametric models.

Semiparametric regression is concerned with the flexible incorporation of non-
linear functional relationships in regression analyses. The investigator is
particularly interested in correlated data which arise in a variety of settings
in many areas of applications: Biology, Genetics, Bioinformatics, Biostatistics,
Medicine, Econometrics, Engineering and Sociology. In many practical situations
the attribute or event of interest is rare and/or other variables preclude
observation of an event, consequently a higher proportion of the counts than
implied by standard models may equal zero. Part of the focus of this proposal is
to develop semiparametric models for the correlated data with extra zeros. When
there is an uncertainty in measuring covariates, the usual regression estimators
are biased and when the measurement error is substantial, alternative procedures
are necessary. Part of the emphasis of the proposal is on developing
semiparametric measurement error regression models for dependent data. The
statistical methodology to be developed will be circulated to the statistical
community in academia and industry through series of papers and publicly
available programming code. On the educational front, some of the research
material in this proposal will be incorporated in courses at the undergraduate
and graduate level. Some projects will also serve as dissertation topics for
Ph.D. advisees and will therefore play an important role in the training of
future statisticians.


