
* 0951689
* Workshop on Categorical Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 12/01/2009,12/01/2009
* Linda Young,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2010
* USD 9,880.00

Categorical data are collected in numerous applications. As computing resources
and power have become widely available, a comprehensive set of categorical data
methods has begun to emerge. Yet, important open research questions remain. As
increasingly large categorical data sets are collected, challenges of analyzing
high dimensional data become more common. Assessing the correlation structure
and properly modeling it are more problematic for categorical data than for
normally distributed data. Similarly, when missing data are non-ignorable,
generalized estimating equations usually result in biased estimators. Mixed
models and smoothing techniques for categorical data are important areas of
research. Bayesian methods have become popular for model averaging and model
selection procedures. An area of particular interest now is the development of
Bayesian diagnostics (e.g., residuals and posterior predictive probabilities)
that are a by-product of fitting a model. In this workshop, research leaders and
young researchers in the field of categorical methodology will be brought
together. Eleven leaders will present lectures at the cutting-edge of research.
Young researchers will have the opportunity to present posters show-casing their
research and to visit extensively with seasoned researchers.

Numerous applications give rise to categorical data, e.g. sex, race, and
education level. Many of the traditional statistical methods assume that the
data are from a normal distribution and are not appropriate for categorical
data. With the increased availability and power of computational resources, a
comprehensive set of statistical methods for categorical has been developed.
However, additional statistical methods are needed. In genetics, large numbers
of categorical responses are collected from each individual, leading to complex
analytical questions. In many studies, some data are missing. This could arise
because a person drops out of a study, refuses to respond, etc. Sometimes the
missing data occur randomly, and the missingness may be ignored. At other times,
the missing data is not at random, such as when a treatment makes people feel
badly and they drop out. Such missingness cannot be ignored. These are but two
research areas to be explored during the workshop. The workshop will provide an
excellent opportunity to discuss the many recent significant developments in
categorical methodology and to identify important problems and new research
directions. This workshop will identify the methods that seem to work best in
areas of application driven by new technology.
