
* 1004769
* Estimation of Discrete Probablility Distribution with a Pareto Tail
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,07/19/2010
* Zhiyi Zhang,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 34,255.00

The central theme of statistical sciences may be described as making inferences
about the probability distribution of a random variable based on a sample of the
random variable driven by the underlying distribution. Over the central region
of the data range, the higher data frequency often enables more reliable
estimation of the distribution. However, regardless how large a sample may be,
there are always regions in the range of the random variable where few or no
sample observations are available, for example, the tail region. Ironically it
is on the tail regions where statistical inferences are often most important.
The investigator studies the problem of estimating a parametric tail with power
decay in, and only in, the extremely distant tail of a discrete probability
distribution. The investigator proposes to develop a consistent estimator of the
tail probability distribution via a perspective offered by Turing?s formula.
Such an estimator, if established, would represent a previously unknown
methodology which could shed light on an array of statistical problems involving
tails of discrete probability distributions across a range of research
disciplines.

The proposed project is motivated by, in addition to its theoretical merits,
many practically important problems. The central focus of the project is to
provide a methodology to quantify the likelihood of an extremely rare event, so
rare that it may not have been previously observed. For example, in finance, the
assessment of value at risk may involve quantification of an extremely unlikely
event that would cause a huge loss of value during a short time period in a
portfolio; the scenarios of stress test for financial industry may also be
beneficially considered under this methodology. In insurance, it may be of
interest to assess the likelihood of a natural or personal disaster of extreme
magnitude. In environmental biology, it may be of interest to assess bio-
diversity in a population accounting for those super small minority species that
are not represented in a sample. In homeland security, it may be of interest to
assess the likelihood of a terrorist attack whose type is previously unobserved
or unaware of. The proposed project provides an opportunity to enhance the
ability to find solutions to all the above mentioned problems and beyond.
