
* 1005612
* Shrinkage Methods for Variable Selection and Structure Discovery, with Applications to High Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Howard Bondell,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 130,000.00

The proposed research addresses variable selection within the context of today's
complex data structures. The first component of this project is to combine
"supervised clustering" and variable selection into a single step. The goal is
to facilitate the identification of important predictive clusters leading to the
discovery of an underlying grouping structure. Secondly, this project proposes
to introduce a new technique to tune variable selection methods which not only
outperforms existing methods, but has an intuitive interpretation to non-
statisticians. The third component of this project is to perform simultaneous
variable selection and constrained quantile regression. In complex data, simply
modeling the mean as a function of the predictors may not capture the full
relationships. Quantile regression models the effect of the predictors on
various percentiles of the response. The approach proposed in this project
alleviates the well-known issue of crossing curves in quantile regression.
Finally, in complex and high-dimensional data, outliers are almost certain to
exist, so methods that are robust to these outliers are essential. The final
component of this project is an approach to combine robust methods with variable
selection via a direct weighting of observations. All four components of this
research will be developed via a penalization, or equivalently, a constrained
optimization, framework via appropriate choices of penalty. With the abundance
of information now available in all scientific fields, it can be an overwhelming
task to decide on which of the massive number of possible predictor variables to
include in a model. Therefore, it is essential to develop techniques to perform
variable selection. Penalization techniques to perform variable selection have
gained increasing popularity and are routinely applied in diverse branches of
subject-matter research including drug discovery, consumer marketing,
environmental systems, financial markets, image processing, homeland security,
genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. It is often the case that the
investigator has a number of goals in mind when performing a statistical
analysis. A common example occurs in gene expression studies, where one may wish
to perform subject classification, gene selection, and gene clustering,
simultaneously. The proposed research is particularly geared toward enabling the
accomplishment of these types of multi-faceted analyses. A general theme of the
proposed research is that appropriately chosen penalty functions can achieve
multiple statistical objectives simultaneously and in an integrated fashion. The
importance of the variable selection problem across all disciplines, and the
investigator?s collaborations with medical researchers and other scientists will
allow the results to be readily disseminated into the applied research community
where it can be used to improve the quality of life.
