
* 1005635
* Large Matrix Estimation for Super-High Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2010,08/19/2013
* Yazhen Wang,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 529,978.00

The amount and complexity of data generated to support modern scientific studies
continues to grow rapidly. Large data sets, characterized by many variables or
features and/or many samples, are now commonly studied in fields ranging from
finance and biomedical sciences to geoscience and engineering. Such large
complex data pose a number of statistical and computational challenges that are
absent in more traditional statistical tools, where sample size is required to
be much larger than the number of features or variables. At the same time, they
present unprecedented opportunities to statistics discipline. For these super-
high dimensional data, practical statistical methods with rigorously-established
properties, while remain difficult, become more important than ever to many
frontier scientific studies like climate modeling, portfolio allocation and risk
management, quantum computation and quantum communication, gene expression
study, and image understanding. This project studies the estimation of (i) large
covariance matrices; (ii) large volatility matrices in high-frequency finance;
(iii) large density matrices in quantum information science. The investigator
intends to develop novel statistical methodologies and theories via sparsity for
the large matrix inference problems based on complex super-high dimensional
data. The research project has great potential to make a significant impact on
the broad scientific community.

Digital revolution has a profound impact on data collections in scientific
research and knowledge discovery, and technological advances make it possible to
collect data with relatively low costs. As a result, the amount and complexity
of data generated to support modern scientific studies continues to grow
rapidly. Large data sets are now commonly used in fields ranging from finance
and biomedical sciences to geoscience and engineering. Such large scale, complex
data pose a number of statistical and computational challenges that are absent
in more traditional statistical tools. At the same time, they present
unprecedented opportunities to statistics. For these data sets, valid
statistical methods become more important than ever to many frontier scientific
studies like climate modeling, portfolio allocation and risk management, quantum
computation and quantum communication, gene expression study, and image
understanding. The research project creates advanced effective statistical tools
for the analysis of such vast complex data. The investigator actively engages in
activities to integrate research with student training and address applications
in the fields of biomedical sciences, geoscience, finance, and quantum
information science.
