
* 1005529
* Travel Support for the 10th ISBA World Meeting on Bayesian Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/01/2010,03/10/2010
* Peter Mueller,TX,University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2011
* USD 10,000.00

The funding is for travel support for US participants in the "10th ISBA World
Meeting on Bayesian Statistics", to be held June 3 through 8, 2010, in Benidorm,
Spain. The grant will pay partial travel expenses for 10 young investigators,
including at least 5 women and other under-represented groups. The purpose of
the conference is to bring together the diverse international community of
investigators in statistics and in other areas who develop and use Bayesian
methods to share recent findings and to present new and challenging problems to
be addressed by the community.

This grant enables 10 young investigators from US institutions to participate in
the main international meeting for Bayesian statistics which is held every two
years. The use of Bayesian methods in academia, government and industry has been
steadily increasing over the past 20 years, with many US researchers playing a
leading role. This grant will help to maintain and strengthen this leading role
of US scientists. The project will do so in particular by providing young
investigators with important opportunities for networking and dissemination of
their research results. The meeting is organized by the International Society
for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA, http://www.bayesian.org). The mission of ISBA is to
promote the development and application of Bayesian statistical theory and
methods useful in the solution of theoretical and applied problems in science,
industry and government.
