
* 1006344
* Collaborative Research: Constructing New Multiple Testing Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2010,05/24/2010
* Sanat Sarkar,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2013
* USD 167,659.00

Multiple hypothesis testing has become an increasingly active area of research
because of its usefulness as a statistical tool to analyze data from modern
scientific investigations, such as DNA microarray and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies. While several statistical methods have been
put forward to address different multiple testing problems arising in these
studies, often they were developed without fully utilizing the fact that the
underlying test statistics are dependent, although such dependence is a natural
phenomenon for data from these studies and might lead to misleading conclusions
if not properly taken into consideration. The proposed research project seeks to
develop new and innovative multiple testing methods by properly addressing the
so called `dependence issues?. It focuses on three broad areas of research: (i)
developing new multiple testing methods controlling generalized versions of some
standard error rates that allow a few false rejections (ii) developing new
multiple testing methods controlling multiple false directional errors, and
(iii) developing new data-adaptive methods controlling the familywise error and
false discovery rates. This project will be expected to have a broad impact on
the theory and practice of statistics. The results from this project will be of
importance to virtually any statistical investigation where questions are posed
in terms of testing several hypotheses. For instance, in microarray or fMRI
studies where detection of differentially expressed genes or active voxels is
often framed as a multiple testing problem, in pharmaceutical investigations
where multiple testing techniques are routinely used in dose-response study or
in evaluating a drug's efficacy over standard drug or placebo, our project can
potentially offer new and improved methodologies. The project would also benefit
education through training of graduate students, incorporation of the developed
methodologies in statistics courses. The results will be disseminated through
presentations and discussions at national and international conferences, and
visits to other institutions. The software to be developed under this project
will be made available, free of charge, to the scientific community.
