
* 1007603
* Semiparametric Inference for High-dimensional Correlated or Heterogeneous Cross-sectional Data with Discrete Response
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2010,05/21/2010
* Lan Wang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 176,595.00

Substantial advancement has been achieved over the past decade in high-
dimensional data analysis with diverging number of covariates. However, when the
research interest is focused on modeling the relationship between the response
variable and a high-dimensional vector of covariates, most existing work only
applies when the response variable is continuous and often requires stringent
conditions such as independence or homogeneity. Many fundamental problems remain
unsolved for high-dimensional data with discrete responses, especially when the
standard modeling assumptions are not satisfied. This project aims to develop
new statistical theory, methodology and algorithms for analyzing high-
dimensional correlated or heterogeneous cross-sectional data with binary or
count responses. More specifically, the investigator will (1) rigorously study
the asymptotic theory, including consistency and asymptotic normality, of the
semiparametric procedure of generalized estimating equations in the new
diverging p asymptotic framework; (2) investigate generalized estimating
equations based variable selection procedures for high-dimensional longitudinal
and spatially correlated data; and (3) investigate the theory and methodology of
sparse quantile regression, where the number of parameters may greatly exceed
sample size, for analyzing heterogeneous data with possibly discrete responses.

The prevalence of high-dimensional binary and count data in various scientific
fields, such as biomedical and health sciences, economics, social sciences and
environmental studies, demands new statistical theory, methodology and software.
Many important issues in analyzing high-dimensional binary or count data,
especially in the presence of correlation or heterogeneity, have not been
systematically studied. Moreover, existing work based on the full likelihood or
the independence assumption in the high-dimensional setting cannot be readily
applied. This project will make significant and timely contribution to the
general theory and methodology of high-dimensional data analysis in the
diverging p framework. Such theories are critical for guiding practical data
analysis. Undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, will be encouraged to participate in this research
project.
