
* 1007877
* Collaborative Research: Inference for Statistical Graphics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2010,09/02/2010
* Hadley Wickham,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 59,808.00

Since the publication of the NSF landmark report "Visualization in Scientific
Computing" in 1987, computer-aided visualization has been recognized as one of
the most potent tool sets for scientific discovery. However, discoveries based
on data displays are often criticized because they are not secured by
statistical inference. The team of researchers from Iowa State University, Rice
University and University of Pennsylvania is addressing exactly this issue by
bringing the rigors of statistical inference to visual data exploration.
Statistical inference for plots are cast as comparison of a plot of the actual
data with plots of null data simulated under a null hypothesis. If the actual
plot stands out from a background of "null plots", it amounts to the rejection
of the null hypothesis. Executing this idea leads to rigorous protocols that can
confer proper statistical significance to visual discoveries. Tools of
mathematical statistics are employed to reduce composite null hypotheses to
single reference distributions: conditioning on a minimal sufficient statistic,
bootstrap plug-ins, and posterior predictive sampling. The protocols also have
the potential to shift the perception of exploration-based findings in the
scientific communities and dramatically increase the impact that these findings
are allowed to have. The testing protocols will be made accessible with
implementation in the open-source R language.

Data graphics are an essential part of communicating information. But how
reliable is the information that we gather from them? The investigators will
develop a rigorous framework for visual inference modeled after formal
statistical testing. This framework allows the reader of a graphic to determine
whether structure is real or spurious (is that a man in the moon, or just some
rocks?). These protocols have the potential to shift the perception of
exploration-based findings in the scientific community and dramatically increase
the impact of exploratory work. Some aspects of the protocols are so intuitive
that they can be used for general audiences and integrated in the teaching of
introductory statistics at from grade school to college.
