
* 1007556
* AMC-SS: Asymptotic Analysis of Extreme Risks with High-Dimensional Tail Dependence Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,08/03/2012
* Haijun Li,WA,Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,999.00

This grant provides funding for the extremal dependence analysis of high-
dimensional distributions with dependence structures described by vine copulas
that are built from basic building blocks of bivariate distributions. The
extremal dependence among multivariate extremes can be characterized in terms of
the spectral or intensity measure using Multivariate Extreme Value Theory. The
parametric feature, enjoyed by marginal univariate extreme values, vanishes in
the dependence structure of multivariate extremes, and thus rich dependence
properties remain largely unexplored, especially for large stochastic systems
modeled by vine copulas. Focusing on the interplay between the tail dependence
method and multivariate regular variation, the investigator in this research
develops an extremal value theory for high-dimensional graphical models, such as
vine copulas, by exploring recursive schemes for tail dependence according to
underlying graph structures. This graphical extreme value theory is then used to
quantitatively analyze tail dependence emergence and contagion in large
stochastic systems, and to develop tractable asymptotic estimates for extremal
system risks fueled by tail dependence of high-dimensional multivariate
extremes.

Extremal dependence has been observed in diverse fields, such as data networks,
financial risk management, and global climate change, to name just a few.
Extreme risk fueled by tail dependence and its contagious adverse effects have
been best illustrated from the global financial crisis and climate change. This
project targets a fundamental research for these pressing issues that are
important to safety, security and sustainability of complex societies.
Successful completion of the project will lead to efficient and accurate
estimations for extreme risks and will enhance research capabilities to
understand, detect, and mitigate extreme risks, which will facilitate effective
catastrophe risk management that benefits society.
