
* 1007494
* Collaborative Research: Case-Control Studies, New Directions and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2010,08/26/2010
* Bhramar Mukherjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 118,926.00

Case-control studies mark possibly the single most important and far-reaching
contribution that statisticians have made in the domain of Public Health and
Epidemiology. The prime objective of this research is to make some new
contributions to case-control studies, both in methodology and in application.
In particular, the PIs propose a semiparametric Bayesian method to incorporate
longitudinal data in a case-control analysis using penalized splines. New
Bayesian functional data-analytic tools are needed here. The methods will be
applied to biomarker based screening procedures, and will provide a critical
appraisal of the association between prostate cancer and the past trajectory of
prostate-specific antigen measurements. A second component of the proposed
research is the analysis of case-control data generated from two-phase sampling
with non-monotone missingness in covariates. Such designs have many potential
applications in case-control studies that explore interplay of genetic and
environmental risk factors. Exploiting assumptions like gene-gene and gene-
environment independence adds to the complexity of the inference. The methods
are motivated by an immediate application to a large population based case-
control study of colorectal cancer. The final aspect of this proposal deals with
a united methodology which provides equivalent inference for odds ratio
parameters based on prospective and retrospective models. Both frequentist and
Bayesian methods will be considered. The PIs have a track record of successful
collaboration in this domain, and want to advance/ extend their work further in
these new directions.

Two scientific streams are currently dominating clinical medicine and public
health: the molecular biology approach with an emphasis on genetics and
discovery of novel biomarkers, and the quantitative approach with an emphasis on
epidemiology. The developments in these areas jointly are making fundamental
contributions to the study of etiology, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of
complex diseases. Though the standard unmatched case-control study design still
remains one of the most popular epidemiologic tools, phenomenal advancement of
medical science and genetic technology is giving rise to many complex design and
analysis issues which statisticians and epidemiologists have never confronted
before. This proposal lies in that new interface of epidemiology and statistics.
To understand the mechanism of complex diseases and to design targeted
intervention strategies for high-risk individuals is one of the major areas of
scientific research in this century. The current proposal is not a mere academic
pursuit but an effort to contribute to this scientific process.
