
* 1007574
* Computer Experiments: Multi-Layer Designs, Kriging, and Beyond
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2010,05/18/2010
* C. F. Jeff Wu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims at developing new ideas and methods on the design and analysis
of computer experiments. On the design side, the investigators propose a new
class of designs, called multi-layer designs. They are constructed from the
well-known two-level fractional factorial designs by moving the points into
different layers. This increases the number of levels for each factor and helps
in filling the experimental region more evenly. The multi-layer designs have
comparable space-filling properties to those of the optimal Latin hypercube
designs, but are much easier to construct. Because of its unique geometric
features, the proposed multi-layer designs may lead to a rethinking about the
construction and properties of space-filling designs. The proposed approach
gives a new tool for the researchers to take advantage of the vast amount of
knowledge on fractional factorial designs in the construction of computationally
efficient experimental designs for computer experiments. On the analysis side,
two topics are proposed to address the potentially serious issue of stability
with the kriging method, which is the most common tool for analyzing such data.
The first is to investigate the possible causes for the numerical stability in
the inversion of the correlation matrix in kriging via its condition number. The
second is to propose a new method, called hybrid kriging, by combining the
prediction accuracy of kriging with the cheap/fast computation of the
regression-based inverse distance weighting method. Since kriging has been
commonly used in spatial statistics as well as in computer experiments, the
proposed work on kriging can also influence the research on statistical modeling
of spatial variation.

Because of the rapid advances in physical modeling and numerical methods,
complex mathematical models can now be reliably used to mimic physical
realities. Their practical implementations benefit from the advent in fast
algorithms and software development. Therefore, complex system simulations are
now routinely used in lieu of physical experimentations. For example, airbags in
a car can be designed through sophisticated computer simulation that mimics a
car-crash in a computer instead of building and crashing real cars. The proposed
work should lead to the methodological development of a generic nature for
designing and analyzing such computer experiments, which in turn can lead to
reduced development cycle time, better product, and cost reduction. In view of
the wide ranges of applications of complex system simulations, the proposed
experimental design and analysis methodology should have broad-based impacts on
a variety of problems like geological and atmospheric studies, computational
material design, thermal management of supercomputers, and other green energy
applications.
