
* 1007652
* REML in time series models: Applications to unified inference in moderate and near integrated autoregressions, dynamic panels, cointegrated systems and non-linear IV regressions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2010,05/12/2010
* Willa Chen,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2014
* USD 143,047.00

The proposed research demonstrates how the restricted likelihood approach can
resolve several well known estimation and inference problems. For the inference
problem of a near integrated process with deterministic components, this
research provides a framework for unified inference based on the chi-squared
distribution for autoregressive processes with deterministic components
regardless of whether they are stationary, moderate integrated, near integrated
or integrated processes. A weighted least squares approximate restricted
likelihood is provided for multivariate time series models so that a
computationally simple method with attractive theoretical properties is
available. The proposal also includes using the restricted likelihood for the
incidental parameter problem in dynamic panel data model. Research is also
planned to explore the restricted likelihood for non-linear models for which
there do not seem to be any results available.

This research will help to build a bridge between statistics and economics.
Restricted likelihood has existed for almost four decades and been routinely
used in linear mixed models. While the restricted likelihood has historically
been used for bias reduction, recent research has also shown that the restricted
likelihood based likelihood ratio test statistic has nice properties in
nonparametric models. However, this large body of work on the restricted
likelihood has largely ignored its potential use in time series models with only
very few exceptions including the PI's research under the previous grant. This
proposal is a continuing dialogue with researchers and practitioners in
statistics as well as econometricians on the applications of restricted
likelihood. A number of projects are presented with the aim of facilitating the
application of restricted likelihood in the most widely used econometric models.
