
* 1007751
* A Study of Boundary Phenomena in a Class of Parametric and Nonparametric Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2010,05/18/2010
* Moulinath Banerjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The project deals with boundary effects in a class of parametric and
nonparametric models. Three main directions are pursued. The first involves the
development of methodological and inferential techniques for estimating
boundaries in the covariate space (in regression models) using both likelihood
based methods and least squares type criteria and are motivated primarily by (a)
the need to build stochastic models in response--covariate studies and survival
analysis that cater to the development of individualized treatment therapies for
cancer-afflicted individuals, and, (b) the development of adaptive multistage
strategies for estimating discontinuities in regression surfaces. The second
direction involves the determination of a region enclosed by a closed surface in
Euclidean space where a function assumes an extremal value (a maximum or a
minimum). A novel procedure based on P--values obtained from statistical tests
conducted at different points in the domain of the function, for the hypothesis
that the function assumes its extreme value at those points, is developed to
this end. The final direction deals with quantifying the effect of the sampling
distribution of covariates on nonparametric MLEs of the regression function, in
nonparametric regression under shape--constraints like monotonicity or
convexity. The resolution of the grid on which the covariate is supported is
seen to be critically related to the asymptotic distributions of these shape-
constrained estimators. Here, one encounters boundary effects in the sense that
there exist specific resolutions at which the asymptotics transition
dramatically from Gaussian to non-Gaussian.

The proposed research program is motivated by compelling problems in several
different areas: from clinical trials for cancer patients, epidemiological
studies and data from complex `omics' experiments to problems in systems
engineering, signal processing and FMRI studies. On the scientific front, the
research based on this grant will lead to new design-based adaptive procedures
for studying the behavior of engineering systems under different input
intensities as well as new designs for clinical trials to identify core factors
involved in cancer progression, to the development of indvidualized treatment
therapies in cancer research, to a better understanding of brain activation
mechanisms via accurate identification of signals obtained from FMRI and to
methods for signal processing via sensor networks. The novel methodological
procedures ensuing from our research will be disseminated to the relevant
scientific communities, both via inter--disciplinary interaction and
collaboration, and the development of software in a readily accessible language
environment. Finally, on the educational front, the material from the proposed
research will provide dissertation topics for graduate students who will also be
supported on this grant; the project will therefore play an important role in
the training of future statisticians.
