
* 1007528
* Constrained Statistical Inference and Information Theory
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,05/09/2012
* Bhaskar Bhattacharya,IL,Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

By applying techniques from constrained optimization and information theory,
this research enhances statistical inference, makes new developments and gains
new insights into existing methodology. PI concentrates on: (1) Considering the
covariance selection problem of multivariate normal distributions, PI develops
its Fenchel dual formulation and shows that the dual solutions are themselves
elements of the solution covariance matrix. This insightful observation yields
mechanics to calculate direct estimates under decomposable models. This
understanding coupled with tools from convex duality help PI to generalize the
covariance selection to multivariate dependence, which includes MTP2 and trends
popularly used in longitudinal studies using covariance pattern matrices. The
iterative proportional scaling algorithm, used for estimation in covariance
selection problems, may not lead to the correct solution under such dependence.
Addressing this situation, PI presents a new algorithm for dependence models and
shows that it converges correctly using tools from Fenchel duality. Results
concerning the speed of convergence of the new algorithm are addressed. The
methodology will be applied on a real data set involving decreasing CD4+ cell
numbers from an AIDS study. (2) PI develops constrained conditional log-linear
(or multinomial response) models for panel data. Information theoretic tools are
used to show these models are I-projections on certain moment equalities. This
observations leads to construction of prediction functions which can incorporate
restrictions on parameters by considering moment inequalities. Constrained
versions of conventional Markov models, independence models, distance models are
developed by using previous responses and present and past covariates when
predicting the current response. This approach has advantages over the marginal
modelling approach used in longitudinal studies. Statistical properties of these
prediction functions are investigated from a population and as well as a
sampling perspective. Problems such as existence and uniqueness of optimal
prediction functions are addressed. Basic properties of measures of prediction
quality are examined using information theory tools. Estimation, consistency and
asymptotic distributions of the estimators are studied. The results will be
applied on data from National Longitudinal Study of Youth. (3) A parametric
model is presented for the analysis of square contingency tables where there is
a one-to-one correspondence betweeen the categories of the row, column
variables. Parametric scores are assigned to the rows/columns to reflect the
ordinality of the categories. Efficient estimation under order restrictions of
these scores is a difficult problem as they are functions of each other. Instead
of using unrestricted estimates, PI proposes functions which can be used when
pooling the adjacent violators (PAV). For these functions, PI proposes results
that derive their asymptotic normality, consistency, and show that they have
same order relations as the score parameters. For computational purposes,
several algorithms are proposed, including PAV, complete search and an active-
set method. Goodness-of-fit testing of the model has a chi-bar-square
distribution. Parametric bootstrap procedure is proposed for yielding reliable
p-value.

New constrained statistical inferential methods are developed using information
theoretic techniques by exploring connections between covariance selection and
multivariate dependence; constrained conditional log-linear models for panel
data are presented and their statistical properties are investigated; and in
square tables with ordered parameters, statistical inference under order
restrictions are proposed. The results are directly useful in analyzing
longitudinal data arising from medicine, reliability, sociology, econometrics,
etc. The proposed activities will involve training graduate students for future
researchers in statistics and providing selected undergraduate students with
research experience.
