
* 1007513
* Computer-intensive methods for nonparametric time series analysis'
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2010,02/23/2012
* Dimitris Politis,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2014
* USD 274,986.00

The project focuses on the development of methods of inference for the analysis
of time series and random fields that do not rely on unrealistic or unverifiable
model assumptions. In particular, the investigator and his colleagues are
working on: (a) extending the range of applicability of the AR-sieve bootstrap
beyond the setting of linear time series; (b) devising a new Time-Frequency
bootstrap procedure in which bootstrap pseudo-series are generated in the time
domain although the resampling happens in the frequency domain; (c) devising a
residual bootstrap scheme with larger resample size to be used for improved
density estimation from time series data; (d) constructing an automatic method
of efficient aggregation of spectral density estimators; (e) testing for the
support of a density, as well as testing for overdifferencing and estimating the
spectral density at a vanishing point; (f) devising an improved block bootstrap
procedure to handle time series that are periodically or almost periodically
correlated; (g) resampling and inference for locally stationary time series and
inhomogeneous (but locally homogeneous) marked point processes; and (h)
investigating different aspects of resampling with functional data, including
the difficult problem of appropriately studentizing a functional statistic.

Ever since the fundamental recognition of the potential role of the computer in
modern statistics, the bootstrap and other computer-intensive statistical
methods have been developed extensively for inference with independent data.
Such methods are even more important in the context of dependent data where the
distribution theory for estimators and tests statistics may be difficult or
impractical to obtain. Furthermore, the recent information explosion has
resulted in data sets of unprecedented size that call for flexible,
nonparametric, computer-intensive methods of data analysis. Time series analysis
in particular is vital in many diverse scientific disciplines, e.g., in
economics, engineering, acoustics, geostatistics, biostatistics, medicine,
ecology, forestry, seismology, and meteorology. As a consequence of the
proposal's development of efficient and robust methods for the statistical
analysis of dependent data, more accurate and reliable inferences may be drawn
from data sets of practical import resulting into appreciable benefits to
society. Examples include data from meteorology/atmospheric science, such as
climate data, economics, such as stock market returns, medicine, such as EEG
data, and bioinformatics, such as genomic data.
