
* 1007686
* Spatially Correlated Data with Errors-in-variables: Inteference and Prediction with Application to Paleoclimate Reconstruction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2010,05/21/2010
* Bo Li,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 145,000.00

The project focuses on methods to retrieve signals in spatial data that are
possibly masked due to measurement errors. Specifically, the investigator
proposes to establish unbiased parameter estimates and optimal predictions for
spatially correlated data with errors present in both predictors and responses,
and then apply the solutions to paleoclimate reconstruction to achieve a
faithful representation of the past climate. The results from the proposed work
will take both the spatial correlation and errors-in-variables into account to
uncover the true relationship between the response and explanatory variables.
The bias and the asymptotic behavior of the parameter estimates and the
optimality of predictions in different senses under various measurement error
structures are investigated. Besides, a new practical method for estimating the
variance-covariance matrix of measurement errors for data with no replicates is
proposed.

The primary impact of this project is to provide practical statistical tools to
correct the effects of errors-in-variables in spatial data analysis. Once the
results are applied to paleoclimate reconstructions, they will solve a long
standing problem concerning the amplitudes of past climate that plays a central
role in understanding the dynamics of the climate system. In addition to
climatology, the proposed methods can be generally applied to a variety of other
disciplines such as seismology, environmetrics, atmospheric sciences and public
health studies, where data are usually spatially correlated and contain
substantial noise. However, the broader impacts of the proposed activities are
multiple. A key aspect of this proposal is the integration of research and
teaching, which will be achieved by proposing specific projects for students
during the teaching of classes on measurement errors and on spatial statistics.
