
* 1007480
* Local Likelihood Estimation for Nonstationary Random Fields
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2010,04/26/2012
* Ethan Anderes,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 148,752.00

Stationary random fields play a fundamental role in both theoretical and applied
spatial statistics. Unfortunately, stationarity is often violated when working
with real data. This presents a challenge for the spatial statistician who is
interested in estimating and modeling dependence structure in random fields. The
investigator and his collaborator will study, and subsequently apply, a recently
developed version of local likelihood estimation for estimating parameters that
govern the local dependency in nonstationary random fields. The application is
to use local likelihoods for the estimation of the local distortion of the
cosmic microwave background (CMB) due to gravitational lensing. Detecting and
estimating this lensing is important for two reasons. First, measuring the
distortion gives an indirect measurement of matter in the Universe which can
provide detailed maps of the distribution of Dark Matter. Secondly, one can use
the estimates of gravitational lensing to obtain a more accurate measurement of
the un-lensed CMB. This will provide scientists with a deeper probe of
fundamental cosmological questions. Specific aims of this proposal include: 1)
develop computational techniques which will make local likelihood estimation
applicable to large data sets such as the CMB; 2) develop the theory of
estimating equations for local weight construction with a particular focus on
mitigating bias and automatically adjusting for boundaries and uneven
observation locations; 3) construct estimates of uncertainty in the local
likelihood estimates of the parameter function; 4) use the principle irregular
term to develop flexible and universal local models for general nonstationary
random fields.

Nonstationary random fields are becoming a ubiquitous feature in the recent data
deluge and high resolution sensing. Unfortunately, the techniques for modeling,
estimating and predicting nonstationary random fields have yet to be fully
developed and analyzed. This proposal will make steps towards the goal of
developing a complete set of methodological techniques for analyzing
nonstationary random fields. Moreover, the tools thus constructed will be
useful, not only for Astronomy and Cosmology, but other branches of science and
technology as well. This makes the broader impact of the scientific consequences
of this proposal two fold. On the one hand, accurately estimating gravitational
lensing in the CMB has far reaching consequences for the understanding of cosmic
structure and the beginnings of the Universe. On the other hand, the tools from
this project are expected to have broad use in other areas of real world
application. Recently developed technologies such as fMRI and diffusion tensor
imaging are two examples of other scientific areas that will benefit from the
methodologies developed for nonstationary random fields.
