
* 1007553
* Modeling and analyzing phenomena, particularly interactions amongst moving particles
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2010,05/13/2015
* David Brillinger,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2015
* USD 320,000.00

Consider a moving object whose locations are known at known times. This is the
data/process to be studied in the project. It will be called trajectory data.
Inherent variability will be assumed making the phenomenon random. The basic
process will be assumed to satisfy a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) or a
Functional Stochastic Differential Equation (FSDE). In the former case it will
be convenient to assume that the object moves in a potential field whose
gradient gives the drift term of the SDE. When data are available an approximate
likelihood function will be set down for the data. This allows inference
procedures such as estimation, simulation and testing to be invoked. The models
may be parametric or nonparametric. One or several objects, or particles, may be
involved. In the latter case there may be interactions. In the case that
explanatory variables are present both fit and predictability may be improved by
their inclusion. Practical and theoretical properties of the approach will be
developed.

Trajectory data appear in many places these days, particularly since the Global
Positioning System (GPS) appeared. Locations of individuals of a collection or
of just one object are estimated at a succession of times. The times may be
equally spaced or not. They may be different for different objects. One object
of this work is to develop mathematical and statistical models for the tracks of
the objects. These models may be used to examine scientific hypotheses
concerning movements as well as to discover novelties. There may be explanatory
variables, such as bathymetry, to include in the modeling. The future movement
may depend only on the most recent position or it may depend on more past
values. The models need to reflect this and allow examination of the assumption.
Data from fields including animal biology, marine biology, astronomy, biophysics
will be studied as will the implications of unequally spaced data.
