
* 1007762
* Bayesian Partition Models for Detecting Influential and Interactive Variables
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2010,05/10/2013
* Jun Liu,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2015
* USD 349,850.00

Variable selection in regression modeling is a long-standing problem in
statistics. Recently, there has been a significant surge of interest in
analytically elegant, numerically robust, and algorithmically efficient variable
selection methods, largely due to the tremendous advance in data collection
techniques such as those in biology, internet, and marketing. This proposal
considers the model selection problem in both univariate and multivariate high-
dimensional regression problems with discrete covariates. The main goal is to
develop Bayesian methodologies enabling the discovery of interactions among
certain independent variables (e.g., genetic markers) affecting the response(s).
By taking a Naive Bayes modeling perspective and introducing flexible latent
structures to model dependence among variables, the investigator will design
methods that can detect interactions of a handful of covariates among tens of
thousands of candidate predictors. By introducing ?individual type? variables,
the investigator outlines a strategy to decouple the modeling of the covariates
from that of the responses. This strategy allows one to link a subset of
covariates to a subset of the responses, which is an important goal in many
biomedical studies. Strategies for extending the ideas to cases with continuous
covariates will be explored and tested. This research will also bring the power
of these new methods and theory to bear on several important application areas
such as genetics, bioinformatics, and economic data analysis.

Selecting a subset of predictors among a large number of candidates for accurate
prediction of certain outcomes (e.g., weather, stock price movement, heart
disease risk etc) is a long-standing and challenging problem in statistics.
Recently, there has been a significant surge of interest in analytically
elegant, numerically robust, and algorithmically efficient variable selection
methods, largely due to the tremendous advance in data collection techniques
such as those in biology, internet, and marketing. It has now been widely
recognized by both general scientists and quantitative modelers the importance
of discovering among many candidate factors that are truly influential on the
outcomes/responses. The proposed research is motivated by important genetics and
genomics problems. Its goal is to develop statistical and computational
strategies for not only selecting informative predictors but also discovering
interactions among the predictors that may significantly influence the outcome.
In genetics, such interactions among genetic mutations are called ?epistasis,?
and their detection is one of the main challenges in the post-genome era. In HIV
drug-resistance mutation studies, such interactions often reveal new insights on
the molecular basis of virus's drug resistance and can lead to innovative and
effective treatments. It is expected both to enrich statistical modeling theory
and to provide novel computational and statistical strategies applicable to a
wide range of problems in diverse fields. The preliminary tools the investigator
has developed have already been successfully applied to a number of genetics and
biomedical studies. These methods can also be readily applicable to many ?data
mining'? tasks, such as text mining, network studies, and e-commerce. It will
provide both educational and interdisciplinary research opportunities for
graduate students, and will result in software that may be of interest to
biomedical researchers, economists, and other practitioners.
