
* 1007775
* Sequential testing of multiple hypotheses, simultaneous confidence estimation, and multichannel change-point detection
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2010,03/05/2012
* Michael Baron,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The project focuses on the development of new theory and methodology of
sequential multiple comparisons. It aims to develop cost-minimizing methods and
supporting theory for conducting multiple statistical inferences sequentially.
This includes testing multiple hypotheses, constructing sequences of
simultaneous confidence sets, detecting changes in multiple channels, and making
other sequential statistical decisions involving multiple parameters or multiple
measurements. This study extends the recently obtained step-up and step-down
procedures for multiple comparisons to sequential designs. It searches for
optimal stopping rules that minimize the expected cost of the experiment while
controlling for the false positive and false negative rates. The new methodology
combines flexibility and cost-optimization of sequential procedures with the
ability of modern statistical methods for multiple comparisons to control the
familywise error rate and power. Proposed sequences of simultaneous confidence
sets generalize the idea of repeated confidence intervals to the case of
multiple parameters and achieve the desired overall confidence level. The new
multiple hypothesis testing methodology is used for the derivation of sequential
change-point detection algorithms sensitive to a change in any one or several
parameters.

Deliverables of the project include a sound statistical methodology for
designing multiple comparison experiments at the minimum expected cost. One of
the main applications is in sequential clinical trials that are conducted to
answer multiple questions, for example, about the efficacy and safety of the
tested treatment. Cost-optimization of such medical studies ultimately results
in the reduced cost of health care. The new change-point detection procedures
allow simultaneous tracking of changes in multiple parameters, which is used for
the timely discovery of epidemic and pre-epidemic patterns and bioterrorist
attacks. Controlling for the rate of false alarms, proposed change-point
detection schemes are aimed to minimize the expected detection delay ensuring
prompt reaction to unexpected changes. Their application sheds light to a number
of global questions. Is the economy (welfare, climate, environment) changing? In
what way and what direction is it changing? When did the change begin? Does the
change continue, or has the process stabilized? Proposed sequential statistical
tools address these and other important questions that involve multiple
statistical comparisons.
