
* 1007543
* Collaborative Research: Generalized Fiducial Inference - An Emerging View
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2010,06/15/2012
* Jan Hannig,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

This proposal is motivated by the success of Generalized Fiducial Inference as
introduced by the PIs as a generalization of Fisher's fiducial argument. As a
result of the many studies conducted by the PIs on the theory and applications
of generalized fiducial methods the following important conclusions can be made:
(a) A unified and systematic procedure is available for developing fiducial
solutions for large classes of problems; (b) The fiducial approach generally
leads to very efficient inference procedures and thus they are competitive with
procedures developed using other approaches; (c) Fiducial procedures are
asymptotically correct in large classes of problems; (d) Many fiducial
distributions can also be realized as a Bayesian posterior by an appropriate
choice of a prior. However, this is not always possible, which establishes that
the two approaches are not equivalent in general; (e) Both the Bayesian approach
and the fiducial approach lead to useful interval inference procedures as have
been established in various publications in both areas. It is clear that neither
approach can claim to dominate the other; (f) Both approaches typically require
MCMC simulations in regards to actual numerical computation of the required
posterior or fiducial distributions. After giving due consideration to areas of
statistical inference where a fiducial approach is expected to lead to new and
useful results, both theoretical and practical, the PIs propose to conduct
research into the following topics: (a) Extensions of Interval Data fiducial
framework for Generalized Linear Mixed Models together with associated
computational approaches; (b) Extension of the work of the PIs to address the
model selection problem within the Generalized Fiducial Inference framework; (c)
Definition and investigation of the concept of a Robustified Fiducial
Distribution for a parameter and development of computational methods for
calculating it from data; (d) Application of robust fiducial approaches to
arrive at new robust inference methods in some standard parametric examples; (e)
Development of some general computational strategies for implementation of
fiducial methods for complex practical problems.

This proposal studies a new approach to statistical inference based on Fisher's
fiducial argument. The implications of this work will have an immediate effect
on public policy. For instance, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
guidance document spells out analysis procedures for demonstration of
equivalence of two or more drug formulations. The PIs aim to show that the
fiducial approach will lead to more efficient procedures, which will result in
cost and time savings, an important issue for the drug industry. In metrology,
the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) in conjunction with the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), has published a ``Guide to
Expression of Uncertainty in Measurements'' (GUM) which gives the procedures to
be followed by national metrological institutes such as NIST in the US, NPL in
UK, and PTB in Germany. A problem that is unique to metrology is that every
measurement is subject to unknown and unknowable systematic errors that are
often larger than random errors. The only currently known way to quantify these
unknowable systematic errors is via specification of subjective distributions
for them. The GUM specifies some ad hoc methods for combining data-based
estimates of standard deviations for some error components and subjective
estimates of uncertainty for other error components. The PIs aim to demonstrate
that the fiducial method provides a new natural approach for accomplishing this.
Such results are likely to influence the metrology community in modifying and
improving their current procedures.
