
* 1007594
* Simultaneous Confidence Regions for Functional Data Analysis: Theory and Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2010,08/24/2010
* Lijian Yang,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 159,986.00

This research project provides simultaneous confidence regions for various
functional features in functional data analysis (FDA), with asymptotic theory
and guide to practical implementation. Specifically, asymptotically correct
confidence regions will be constructed for (1) the mean function of functional
data and the coefficient function in varying coefficient longitudinal regression
model; and (2) the covariance function of functional data and the regression
function in functional linear model. For the simpler functions in (1), the
investigator will employ both regression spline and local polynomial methods in
order to establish rigorous asymptotic theory for both sparse and dense function
data. Results on partial sum strong approximation by Brownian motions and
advanced extreme value theory for sequences of non-stationary Gaussian processes
will be applied to obtain distributional properties of the maximal deviation
processes. For the more complicated functions in (2), the investigator will
propose two-step estimators and show that it is asymptotically as efficient as
some ?infeasible? analogs. Asymptotic distributions for maximal deviations are
established for the ?infeasible estimators? which are then inherited by the two-
step estimators.

Functional data, also known as curve data, consist of collections of digitally
recorded curves or surfaces, often with random errors. Such data abound in
virtually all scientific disciplines, including but not limited to, climatology,
clinical studies, epidemiology, evolutionary biology and food
engineering/science. The need to draw information out of a sample of curves,
coupled with the unleashing of modern computing power, has made functional data
analysis (FDA) one of the most active areas of contemporary statistics research.
While multivariate statistics is about unknown vectors and matrices, FDA
concerns unknown curves and surfaces, which is most naturally done with
confidence regions. The methods developed by the investigator fill a major gap
in the current FDA methodology, which lacks procedures to make conclusions on an
entire curve with quantifiable uncertainty. Codes written in common software
packages such as Matlab or R will be freely distributed so practitioners from
academia and industry for analyzing functional data in real time, with own
chosen significance levels. Completing this project depends crucially on several
capable Ph. D. students working under the investigator?s supervision, so state-
of-the-art research is integrated with the training of graduate students as
future researchers, consistent with NSF's education goal.
