
* 1007583
* Model Functional Data Through a Local FPCA Framework
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2010,07/10/2010
* Jie Peng,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,685.00

This research is motivated by numerous real life problems whose modeling and
analysis involve functional data, i.e., data where the measurements per
subject/replicate correspond to values of a function (referred to as sample
trajectory). In particular, this research is motivated by functional clustering
problems and functional data which are dynamical in nature. Functional principal
components analysis (FPCA) has been widely used in analyzing functional data. In
spite of its success, FPCA tends to be inefficient if the geometry of the
trajectory space is non-Euclidean, especially when sample trajectories are only
observed at sparse sets of time points, as is the case for many scientific
studies. Sources for such nonlinearity include but not limited to the existence
of underlying clusters of the sample trajectories, or the sample trajectories
being governed by a nonlinear dynamical system. The investigator proposes a new
strategy (referred to as the local FPCA framework) for analyzing sparsely and
noisily observed functional data. It aims to derive more efficient localized
representations for sample trajectories which take into account geometric
structures of the trajectory space. This framework combines the principles
underlying functional principal components analysis with the notions of
functional clustering and nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Specific aims of
this research include: (a) Develop a local FPCA framework which clusters the
sample trajectories into homogeneous subgroups and applies FPCA within each
cluster to derive more efficient representations of the sample trajectories. (b)
Fit ordinary differential equation models with random parameters by a model-
based local FPCA approach. (c) Study theoretical aspects of the proposed methods
and apply them to various scientific problems.

This research will produce a new set of statistical tools for scientists working
in various fields such as plant biology, ecology and epidemiology who must
analyze longitudinal/functional data. In particular, this research is a stepping
stone toward understanding complex dynamical systems. The PI is collaborating
with scientists on studying HIV disease dynamics at a population level, and this
research helps achieving a better understanding of these systems which hold
important implications in the pathologies of AIDS. The computational and
analytical tools resulted from this research are also likely to stimulate
further studies in related fields. Moreover, this research develops open source
software that is freely available to the whole scientific community. Facing
complex data and challenging questions, a new generation of researchers needs to
be trained in an inter-disciplinary manner. The broader training component
includes exposing statistics/biostatistics students to real scientific problems
involving functional data. On the other hand, through collaborations, scientists
working in related fields are able to enhance their quantitative analysis
skills.
