
* 1007657
* Post Model Selection Inference and Empirical Bayes Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2010,05/24/2010
* Lawrence Brown,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Consider a standard Gaussian multiple regression model involving p independent
covariates. In many applications a first step of the analysis is to reduce the
data via model selection to one containing only a subset of these possible
predictors. If the covariates are correlated, conventional inference based on
the selected model may be invalid; for example, probabilities that confidence
intervals cover the true parameter values for the selected model may be grossly
overstated. The investigators propose a version of classical inference criteria
and a corresponding method for guaranteeing that post selection inferences will
be valid within these criteria. The inference is conservative in that it is
valid independent of the model selection method that was used, and correct
(though possibly conservative) marginal coverage is guaranteed for all parameter
configurations. The procedure is algorithmically easy to describe. However in
its optimal implementation requires numerical estimation of certain
probabilities related to high dimensional Gaussian distributions, and feasible
computation of these probabilities for larger values of p is an issue still
under investigation. Notwithstanding certain useful asymptotic bounds can be
derived, and some important special cases can be analyzed with greater
precision.



Conventional statistical inference requires that a model of how the data were
generated be known before the data are analyzed. Yet in applications involving
such common procedures as the Analysis of Variance and multiple regression it is
often the case that one or more model selection procedures are first undertaken
in order to help determine a model for the analysis. This model selection is
then followed by statistical tests and confidence intervals computed as if the
final model had been chosen in advance of examining the data. Examples abound in
the social sciences, in the econometric literature, in epidemiology and in
genomics. This proposal begins by examining consequences of such a practice in
order to categorize the degree to which it may be misleading and misguided.
Without additional care the parameters being estimated are no longer well
defined, and post-model-selection sampling distributions have properties that
are very different from what would be the case without model selection.
Statistical inference such as confidence intervals and statistical tests does
not perform as is customarily assumed. Many authors have noted some or all of
these problems, but have not proposed valid general statistical inference
procedures to cope with the situation. The investigators propose and study a
method that produces valid statistical inference within the models selected
based on the observed data. The proposed approach is universally valid,
independent of the procedure that was used to select the variables to be
retained in the model. Thus, from this perspective it is not necessary to
investigate the details of the various model selection proposals in current use.
Nevertheless, certain models and model selection procedures do yield improved
performance of our confidence interval proposal, and some aspects of this will
naturally be included in our research. In particular some new model selection
methods based on nonparametric Bayesian ideas will be investigated both for
their ability to flexibly produce satisfactory models and from the perspective
of post model selection inference. Extension of these post model selection ideas
will also be explored in a variety of statistical settings beyond the most
common Gaussian linear models that are the initial target of this proposal.
