
* 1007593
* Conditional Modeling and Conditional Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2010,09/09/2010
* Stuart Geman,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 245,999.00

In many applications, the complexity and dimensionality of the data preclude
nonparametric inference, despite the availability of massive data sets. At the
same time, it is usually true that too little is known about the detailed
mechanisms generating the data to meaningfully specify parametric models.
Conditional modeling and conditional inference are semi-parametric approaches to
complex high-dimensional data in which attention is focused on manageable low-
dimensional statistical modeling and estimation. Applications include efficient
feature estimation and data classification (e.g. in computer vision), exact
tests for broad and scientifically relevant hypotheses (e.g. in the statistical
analysis of multi-electrode neuronal recordings), exploration of time scale in
non-stationary processes (e.g. in the study of market dynamics), and
construction of complex distributions through successive low-dimensional
perturbations (e.g. in the study of probabilistic context-sensitive grammars).
High-dimensional data are ubiquitous. Sources include molecular biology,
finance, neurophysiological recordings, and the imagery and text of the
Internet. Despite the availability of almost unlimited amounts of these data,
their complexity and high dimensionality challenge existing statistical models
and represent a bottleneck to successful applications. Oftentimes the complexity
and dimensionality can be finessed through mathematical methods that select and
focus on a collection of low-dimensional characteristics of the data. The
approach avoids untenable or un-testable model assumptions without necessarily
compromising the information content and power of the data. The research is at
the interface between statistical theory and scientific application, with
potential impact in technology (e.g. through computer vision) and, more broadly,
society (e.g. through neuroscience and better financial modeling).
