
* 1007889
* Statistical Modeling and Learning in Vision
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2010,06/18/2012
* Yingnian Wu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Finding statistical models that capture the regularities and variabilities of
the bewildering varieties of visual patterns in natural scenes is at the heart
of understanding the mystery of vision. Continuing the pattern-theoretical
approach pioneered by Grenander and advocated by Mumford, and building on the
active basis model that the PIs have recently developed, the PIs propose
research projects to further develop statistical models as well as associated
learning and inference algorithms for vision. The active basis model is a
mathematical representation of deformable templates of object patterns. Each
template is a sparse composition of selected Gabor wavelet elements that are
allowed to perturb their locations and orientations. The template can be learned
from training images by a shared sketch algorithm. The learned template can then
be used to recognize objects from testing images using a cortex-like
architecture of sum-max maps. The proposed research develops hierarchical
compositional models with active basis models as building blocks or part-
templates. The proposed research studies unsupervised learning of dictionaries
of active basis templates from natural images or images of objects from multiple
categories and viewpoints. The proposed research also studies a shape script
model where the part-templates are designed elementary geometric shapes that are
represented by the active basis models. Moreover, the proposed research compares
generative and discriminative approaches to learning, using active basis model
as an example of generative model. In addition, the proposed research extends
the active basis model by coupling wavelet sparse coding for shape patterns and
Markov random fields for texture patterns.

Biological visual cortex can learn and recognize huge number of visual patterns
in its environment effortlessly. One may consider the visual cortex as an
extremely sophisticated statistical model equipped with extremely efficient and
robust learning and inference algorithms. What this model looks like and how it
learns from its visual environment is still a deep mystery. The proposed
research has the potential to contribute to advancing our understanding of this
issue. It also leads to concrete models and algorithms that can be used for
learning and recognizing a wide variety of object patterns.
