
* 1007454
* Inference with Survey Data Having Nonignorable Nonresponse
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2010,08/16/2010
* Jun Shao,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 221,586.00

Item nonresponse exists in most surveys and nonresponse rates are often
appreciable. Nonresponse is ignorable if it is related to the observed data
only; otherwise, it is nonignorable. Research for nonignorable nonresponse is
far from complete. This investigator focuses on statistical estimation and
inference in cross-sectional or longitudinal surveys with nonignorable
nonresponse. Methods for deriving approximately unbiased and consistent survey
estimators for parameters such as population totals and quantiles will be
developed. In addition, the efficiency and robustness of estimators will also be
studied. Effort will be made to study multivariate or longitudinal survey data,
and problems with nonresponse in not only the main survey variables but also the
covariates. This investigator will also study variance estimation for valid
estimators, using methods such as linearization, substitution, replication or
resampling such as the jackknife, the balanced half samples, the random groups,
and the bootstrap.

Many statistical and government agencies collect data through surveys. In most
of these surveys, there are typically people who do not respond to the survey,
or give partial answers; such cases are called nonresponses. Often a nonresponse
is related to the nonrespondent; for example, males under the age of twenty-five
years may be more likely not to respond than older males. In this case, the
statistical methodology is not well developed. The investigator plans to study
methods for estimation and inference in the presence of nonresponse for various
types of surveys. To increase the precision of estimators, effort will be made
to use all observed data, to utilize auxilliary information, and to
statistically model the nonresponse rate and/or distribution of the survey data.
Methods of assessing the varibility of the derived estimators will also be
studied. Since most of the proposed research topics are motivated by problems in
survey agencies such as the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Westat, and Statistics Canada, results obtained from the proposed research will
have significant impacts on the methodology for handling noresponse in these
survey agencies.
