
* 1007634
* Statistical learning with high-dimensional structured data: a regularized boosting approach
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,07/20/2010
* Lifeng Wang,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 99,792.00

The proposed project aims to develop new statistical learning theories and
methodologies for the analysis of high-dimensional data with complex structures.
The central problem is how to effectively incorporate the a priori information
on data structures to reduce statistical uncertainty in high-dimensional
learning. In particular, the PI will investigate: a) a novel general framework
based on regularized boosting for flexible high-dimensional modeling adaptive to
data structures, and the associated learning theory; b) a new regularized
boosting method that performs bi-level variable selection in presence of
grouping structures in the predictors; c) a new boosting method for function
estimation and subnetwork selection in presence of graphical structures in the
predictors.

With advances of technology, high-dimensional data analysis becomes increasingly
important in various scientific disciplines, including genomics, medicine,
engineering, environmental studies, and economics. Conventional statistical
methods suffer from the high-dimension, low sample size, as well as the high
correlation among these data. For such ill-posed problems, it is crucial to
incorporate the complementary a priori structural knowledge in data analysis in
order to achieve more robust models and more consistent discoveries. For
example, in many genomic researches, the information on data structures, such as
grouping or graphical structures of the genes, are widely available in forms of
gene pathways and regulatory networks. The investigator's work will contribute
new statistical methods and computational tools, in forms of free software, to
efficiently integrate these structural information in high-dimensional modeling.
It will facilitate the analysis of high-dimensional data to achieve a
substantial improvement on predictive accuracy, as well as to build more stable
and interpretable models. It will also promote collaborations between
statisticians and scientists from other fields. Moreover, the proposed project
includes an educational program that involves development of new courses,
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students and exposing them to the state-of-
the-art research in this project.
