
* 1007794
* Precise Conditions for Permutation Tests to Control Multiple Testing Error Rates
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,07/20/2010
* Jason Hsu,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 86,399.00

The purpose of this project is to improve the control of multiple testing error
rates. A popular approach to multiple testing is based on permutation. One
motivation for the use of permutation-based testing is to reduce the
conservativeness of the tests while still controlling error rates. Permutation-
based tests are thought to achieve this by incorporating the multivariate
distribution of the multiple test statistics. However, the hypotheses for which
permutation testing is known to be appropriate are different from those usually
considered in multiple testing. In this project, the investigators precisely
describe model assumptions and conditions for permutation testing to control
multiple testing error rates. In particular, the investigators study precise
model assumptions connecting the marginal distributions of interest in multiple
testing to the joint distributions known to be appropriate for permutation
testing.

While the methods studied in this project can be used in many fields, they will
be particularly applicable to genetic association studies. Genome-Wide
Association Studies (GWAS) are conducted to discover biological pathways and
prognostic biomarkers, and to guide treatment. Some GWAS discoveries have failed
to replicate, possibly due to statistical testing procedures lacking error rate
control. In this project, the investigators study the conditions under which
currently used methods are guaranteed to appropriately control statistical error
rates. Such control will lead to better return on investments in developing
drugs and treatments.
