
* 1007507
* Optimal Design for Non-Linear Models, With an Emphasis on Categorical Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2010,05/04/2012
* John Stufken,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 219,388.00

The investigator identifies optimal and efficient designs for non-linear models.
The focus is on (1) generalized linear models (GLMs) for binary data or count
data; and (2) non-linear models for Event Related functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (ER-fMRI) experiments. For the first of these, recent results are mostly
restricted to models with a single covariate. The investigator studies common
GLMs, such as logistic, probit and loglinear models, with multiple covariates
and higher order terms. He develops novel theory and computational tools for
identifying locally optimal designs under various optimality criteria as well as
for identifying robust designs. For the second problem, the investigator
identifies optimal and efficient designs under more realistic non-linear models
for the combined objectives of estimation of the hemodynamic response function
(HRF) and detection of brain activity. Traditionally, two separate linear models
have been used for these disparate objectives. The use of a single non-linear
model for modeling the hemodynamic response facilitates the simultaneous pursuit
of both objectives. This approach provides not only a more natural formulation
of design optimality criteria, but also results in better designs for ER-fMRI
experiments.

Binary data and count data are very common in many scientific fields, such as
drug discovery, clinical trials, social sciences, marketing, etc. While models
and methods of analysis for such data are well established, the study of optimal
design for the efficient use of available resources lags considerably. For
example, when planning a dose-response study, it is important to know which dose
levels of a drug should be used in the study, and how many subjects should be
assigned to these levels in order to get the most information for questions that
are of scientific interest. Recent advances and new tools developed by the
investigator and his collaborators make it possible to derive optimal designs
for a variety of commonly used models. For a second part of the project, the
investigator finds efficient designs for ER-fMRI experiments. These experiments
are part of a cutting edge approach for studying brain activity caused by
certain simple tasks. A subject in an MRI scanner is presented with a series of
tasks, each of them repeated multiple times, and the hemodynamic response is
measured. The investigator identifies optimal and efficient orders for
presenting the tasks to a subject in order to gain as much information as
possible for the scientific goals of the experiment.
