
* 1007874
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Analysis and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2010,08/13/2013
* Dongchu Sun,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Five research areas in Bayesian analysis, involving theory, methodology and
application, will be pursued: objective Bayesian analysis, multiplicity
adjustment, search and approximations in model selection, analysis of complex
computer models, and differences between Bayes and empirical Bayes analysis.
Research in objective Bayesian analysis will focus on the development of
objective priors, together with their computational implementation, in semi-
invariant contexts, which include spatial problems and problems arising in
psychiatry. The Bayesian approach to multiplicity correction has the attraction
that it does not depend on the error structure of the data; multiplicity
correction is done only through the prior probabilities assigned to models or
other multiplicity features. Understanding which probability assignments do, and
do not, adjust for multiplicity will be an important feature of this research. A
focus of the research on model selection will be the development of a
generalization of BIC which is much more widely applicable than the standard
version, especially overcoming the major hurdle of defining effective sample
size for a parameter. Advances in these areas will have application to research
involving the analysis and use of complex computer models of processes. Also,
surprising differences between Bayes and empirical Bayes analysis arise in
several of the above settings, and better understanding of these differences
will also be a focus of the research.

Objective Bayesian analysis has existed for over 250 years, but interest in the
field has increased markedly in recent years. A major reason is that many of the
significant scientific problems today (such as much of climate change research)
involve some type of assimilation of data and physical modeling, typically done
by Bayesian methods. Many of today?s most challenging problems ? including
microarray and other bioinformatic analyses, syndromic surveillance, high-
throughput screening, and many others ? involve consideration of multiple-
testing with a huge number of possible tests, and require major multiplicity
adjustments. For instance, the work on multiplicity will be done in the context
of subgroup analysis in clinical trials, providing major new insights into HIV
vaccine trials, and in refining detection methodology in high-energy physics.
