
* 1007457
* Sampling from Distributions with Intractable Integrals
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,05/07/2012
* Faming Liang,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

During the past five decades, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods have been
developed as a versatile and powerful tool for scientific computing. However, as
known by many researchers, conventional MCMC methods suffer from the inability
to sample from distributions with intractable integrals. The goal of this
project is to develop some innovative Monte Carlo algorithms which are capable
of sampling from distributions with intractable integrals. To achieve this goal,
the PI proposes a new population Monte Carlo algorithm---Monte Carlo dynamically
weighted importance sampling (MCDWIS). In simulations, MCDWIS replaces the ratio
of intractable integrals by its Monte Carlo estimate, and the bias introduced
thereby is counterbalanced by giving different weights to new samples produced.
MCDWIS allows for the use of Monte Carlo estimates in MCMC simulations, while
leaving the target distribution invariant with respect to important weights.
Unlike auxiliary variable MCMC methods, MCDWIS avoids the requirement for
perfect samples, and thus can be applied to many statistical models for which
perfect sampling is unavailable or very expensive. As discussed in the proposal,
MCDWIS can also be used to sample from incomplete posterior distributions for
missing data and random effects-related models (e.g., generalized linear mixed
models), which are traditionally treated with the expectation-maximization (EM)
or Monte Carlo EM algorithms. In addition to providing a fully Bayesian analysis
for these models, the MCDWIS can potentially overcome, due to its self-adjusting
mechanism, the local-trap problem suffered by the EM and Monte Carlo EM
algorithms. In this proposal, the PI also proposes an importance sampling-
targeted stochastic approximation Monte Carlo algorithm, the so-called
importance stochastic approximation Monte Carlo algorithm, which can be used for
Bayesian inference for the models with intractable normalizing constants.

The intellectual merit of this project is to provide some innovative
computational methods, which are expected to play a major role in statistical
inference for an important class of scientific models, including random graph
models used in social network analysis, autonormal models used in spatial data
analysis, autologistic models used in disease mapping, and generalized linear
mixed models used in biomedical data analysis, among others. Successful
inferences of the models will enhance people's underderstanding to the
underlying natural, social, or biological systems. This project will have
broader impacts in both communities of statistical methodology and scientific
computing. The research results will be disseminated to these communities via
direct collaboration with researchers in other disciplines, conference
presentations, books, and papers to be published in academic journals. The
project will have also significant impacts on education through direct
involvement of graduate students in the project and incorporation of results
into undergraduate and graduate courses.
