
* 1007683
* Data Depth: Multivariate Spacings and DD-Classifiers for Nonparametric Multivariate Classification
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2010,08/07/2012
* Regina Liu,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 169,999.00

Data depth has provided a systematic nonparametric multivariate framework and
given rise to a powerful multivariate analysis tool set. However, its full
potential in spacings and classification is yet to be fully explored. Motivated
by several real applications, the investigator plans to: 1) develop
nonparametric classification procedures based on DD (Depth-vs-Depth) plots.
These procedures are referred to as DD-classifiers, and they are to be compared
with the so-called support vector machine procedures; 2) use the multivariate
spacings derived from data depth to: (2a) construct tolerance envelopes for
functional or time series data and (2b) develop a class of multivariate
goodness-of-fit tests.

Classification is is an important task in all scientific domains, such as
identifying new species in archaeological investigations or distinguishing
disease types in medical studies. Applying the notion of data depth, the
investigator proposes to develop effective classification procedures, which can
automatically yield the best separating power for classification purposes and
compete well with the highly calibrated existing classification procedures. The
classification outcomes can be easily visualized in a two-dimensional plot
regardless of the dimension of the data. The investigator also introduces
multivariate spacings for the analysis of multi-dimensional data. These
multivariate spacings should have a wide range of utilities. In particular, the
investigator applies these spacings to develop both tolerance envelopes for
tracking multivariate data and a class of multivariate goodness-of-fit tests.
She plans to apply the proposed tolerance envelope to the monitoring of aircraft
landing patterns and to ensure landing safety. She also plans to apply the
proposed classifications to disease identification. These applications are
motivated by the investigator's ongoing collaborative research projects with the
Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Psychiatry of the Robert
Wood Johnson Medical School. The proposed projects involve real databases and
are ideally suited for engaging students and postdocs.
