
* 1007506
* Intensity-Based Image Registration and 3-D Image Denoising
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2010
* Peihua Qiu,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This project focuses on two important image analysis problems. One is on image
registration, which is to match up images or image volumes for structure
localization, difference detection, and other purposes. It is widely used in
medical imaging, remote sensing, finger print or face recognition, and so forth.
The second major focus is on 3-D image denoising with edges and major edge
features preserved. Because of fast progress in image acquisition techniques,
3-D images become increasingly popular in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
functional MRI (fMRI), and other applications. However, observed 3-D images
often contain noise, due to hardware imperfection and other reasons, which
should be removed beforehand so that subsequent image analyses would be more
reliable. In the literature, existing image registration (IR) methods can be
roughly classified into two categories: feature-based IR methods and intensity-
based IR methods. Because feature selection is often a time-consuming and
challenging process, intensity-based IR methods have become popular in various
applications. However, most existing intensity-based IR methods require a
parametric model for describing the image matching transformation, which is
often difficult to verify in practice. In this project, the investigator and his
colleagues propose an intensity-based IR procedure without imposing any
parametric form on the matching transformation. Therefore, the proposed method
has the potential to greatly improve the intensity-based IR techniques and
greatly broaden their applications. In the literature, most existing image
denoising methods are for analyzing 2-D images. They often have certain ability
to preserve planar parts of the edges, but cannot preserve angular parts of the
edges well. Their direct extensions to 3-D cases generally cannot handle 3-D
images efficiently, because the structure of 3-D images is often substantially
more complicated than that of 2-D images. This project proposes a novel 3-D
image denoising method which can preserve edges and major edge features well.
Therefore, it would provide a reliable tool for 3-D image denoising.

Images are used everywhere in our society, ranging from medical diagnostics by
CT, MRI, and other medical imaging techniques to satellite monitoring of global
environmental changes. This project aims to improve image registration and 3-D
image denoising techniques, which are used broadly in various imaging
applications. Thus, it will have broader impacts on our society through its
direct impact on improvement of medical diagnostics, security systems involving
fingerprint and face recognition, remote sensing techniques, and so forth. This
project also aims to contribute to the development of human resources in science
and engineering through its educational activities. For instance, the
investigator offers an advanced topics course on image analysis, from which
graduate students from various departments can receive systematic training in
scientific research. Several graduate students are doing their thesis research
with the investigator on image processing. Some computer software packages
developed by the investigator and his graduate students would be posted on a
project web page for other researchers to download and use. The major research
results obtained from this project would be presented in national and
international conferences, and be submitted for publication in academic
journals.
