
* 1007167
* Collaborative Research: Nonparametric Smoothing for Data with Multiple Components
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2010,05/18/2010
* Hua Liang,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2013
* USD 99,994.00

Over the decades, nonparametric smoothing has become a standard tool for many
classical statistical problems owing partly to the boom of computing power.
Relatively little work has addressed nonparametric smoothing in more complex
settings where data have multiple components and the analysis requires
nontrivial integration of techniques from different statistical domains. This
project concerns three types of such complex data that are common in practice,
and propose a suite of nonparametric statistical models in the framework of
smoothing spline ANOVA models. Existing methods for these three types of data
are mainly parametric and semi-parametric, whose practical uses are limited by
their strong assumptions on the dependence structure of response on predictors
or covariates. The nonparametric methods proposed in this project, combining
nonparametric Gaussian regression, nonparametric logistic regression and
nonparametric hazard rate estimation, offer much more flexibility and are
extremely useful at the exploratory stage when researchers are not certain of
the pattern of dependence. Accompanied with the proposed models are useful
inference tools such as model selection and confidence intervals. Asymptotic
properties of the estimates are investigated through a combination of asymptotic
analysis techniques for nonparametric smoothing splines, semiparametric
estimation, and measurement error models.



Major challenges to today's federal government, such as health care reform,
education reform and financial system improvement, provide data with complex
structures that call for accurate, informative and flexible data analysis
methods. The proposed nonparametric smoothing methods provide an innovative
direction for developing analysis tools appropriate for tackling these
challenges. These types of data can also be found in a broad spectrum of
scientific fields such as biological sciences, economics, social sciences,
psychological sciences, and biomedical studies. This research will advance
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the relevant
statistical areas.
