
* 1007618
* A new approach of statistical modeling and analysis of massive spatial data sets
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2010,04/09/2012
* Huiyan Sang,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,660.00

This proposal focuses on the development of a new approach to tackle the
challenges in statistical modeling and analysis of massive spatial data sets.
Due to the complexity and enormousness of the data, conventional statistical
methods for analyzing, modeling and making inference of large data become
indispensable in current research and application of environmental, earth and
biological sciences. Two approaches have been recently proposed but have their
own drawbacks. One approach, based on low rank approximation of covariance
functions, works well to model large scale spatial variability but may fail to
adequately capture small scale behavior. The other approach, based on sparse
matrix approximation, appears to work better when the spatial data have only
relatively small scale dependence. The investigators propose a new approach that
combines these two approaches to provide a high quality approximation to the
covariance function at both the large and small spatial scales. Specific
research projects will include parameter estimation of various geostatistics
models, data imputations for missing satellite measurements, spatial-temporal
modeling for detection and prediction of global climate change, multivariate
spatial models for multivariate satellite measurements, and non Gaussian spatial
models for characterization of extreme environmental events.

With rapid advances of science and technology, large amounts of spatial data are
generated from various sources including remote ground sensors, satellite
images, scientific climate computer models, Geographic Information Systems, and
public health and spatial genetics. The proposed methods will make it possible
to analyze, model and make inferences about massive spatial data sets and
benefit researchers and practitioners in environmental, earth and biological
sciences. Research results will be disseminated through collaborative work,
academic presentations, and journal publications. Web pages will be created to
enable quick access to user-friendly and accessible software implementations of
new methods as well as technical reports and relevant references.
