
* 1007478
* Hierarchical Bayesian Random Sets with Applications to Growth Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2010,05/10/2010
* Athanasios Micheas,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2014
* USD 115,000.00

Knowing if a medical treatment is effective or anticipating the path of a severe
storm is of great importance to the public in terms of potential loss of life
and property. Such experiments or phenomena can be described by defining
appropriate random sets, which can be done is several ways. A "hitting function"
approach involves calculation of the probabilities that the set intersects a
given class of test sets, e.g., discs. The major difficulty is that a likelihood
cannot be specified in a simple way in order to provide inference on model
parameters, while the choice of test set can potentially alter the parameter
estimates. In addition, random sets can often be viewed as marked point
processes (MPP), where the marks define the characteristics of a well known
geometric object, e.g., the radius of a disc centered at an event from the point
process. However elegant this view might be, it does not eliminate the
aforementioned problems in obtaining a likelihood for the random set and
conducting a statistical analysis. In this proposal, the investigator considers
an approach that models a point in the random set and not the entire set
directly. In this way, random sets are viewed as if they were created by an
underlying process that helps realize the observed data, and thus the observed
data are modeled hierarchically, given the underlying random process. The
hierarchy can be described as [Data|Process]x[Process|Parameters]x[Parameters].
Thus, an alternative approach, such as a MMP, serves as the second stage in this
hierarchical formulation. This approach is more general with its major advantage
being that it easily facilitates inference on model parameters. The investigator
studies several models for random sets based on the general setting of a Boolean
model, as well as, models to capture the evolution of the random object over
time. The inclusion of relevant covariate information is also considered. The
investigator efficiently models a random set via a multistage hierarchical
Bayesian framework. Several novel growth models are proposed, as well as the
corresponding Bayesian formulation that provides inference and prediction. The
models are applied to modeling forestry (random tree objects) as well as storm
cell development as obtained from weather radar over time (storm cell
evolution).

Every experiment or phenomenon can be described by defining appropriate objects
that describe its main characteristics. Thus, understanding the characteristics
of an object and its evolution is needed in almost every scientific discipline.
From observing tumor growth to assess the effectiveness of a medical treatment,
studying the movement of storm or tornado systems based on radar images, to the
investigation of an epidemic as it spreads through a populated area, defining
and studying growth models has become an increasingly critical research topic.
Such research is of great importance to the public in terms of potential loss of
life and property, since knowing, for example, the path of a tornado or a
hurricane can then be used to provide ample warning to the population of the
area, in an effort to minimize the effects of these disasters. The proposed
methodology not only helps to better understand the evolution of objects in the
four dimensional world we live in, but also provides a measure of uncertainty in
the forecasts, whereas, traditional deterministic models require perfect
knowledge of the phenomenon of interest, which is typically an unrealistic
assumption, and thus are often inadequate to describe the phenomenon. The
investigator's major concern is the development and study of statistical models
that capture the evolution of such random objects.
