
* 1007547
* Envelope Models and Methods for Efficient Multivariate Analysis with Applications to Tissue Engineering
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2010,05/04/2012
* Ralph Cook,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 309,922.00

The investigator and his colleagues propose to develop a new class of
statistical tools -- called envelopes -- for studying multivariate data.
Enveloping is based on novel parameterizations that use reducing subspaces to
link a location matrix L with a dispersion matrix D. For instance, the outer
envelope is the smallest reducing subspace of D that contains the span of L,
while the inner envelope is the largest reducing subspace of D that is contained
within the span of L. In multivariate linear regression, the maximum likelihood
estimator of the coefficient matrix L based on an envelope model can be
substantially less variable than the maximum likelihood estimator under the
classical normal model, particularly when the mean function varies in directions
that are orthogonal to the directions of maximum variation for the dispersion
matrix. It is expected that similar results will hold in other multivariate
areas, like discriminant analysis and functional data analysis. Enveloping is a
new paradigm for addressing multivariate statistical problems that has the
potential to facilitate interpretation, to improve analyses that might otherwise
be tenuous and to produce truly massive gains in efficiency relative to standard
methods.

Technological advances in many scientific fields have been followed by
configurations of multivariate data that strain or are beyond the capabilities
of standard statistical theory and methods. More than ever before, understanding
experimental evidence and exploring scientific hypotheses require methods to
meaningfully study contemporary data. This is particularly true in the life
sciences, where the ability to extract the relevant information from a complex
body of data is paramount. The investigator and his colleagues plan to study a
new class of multivariate statistical methods that are capable of efficiently
extracting relevant information for a given purpose from complex data. For
instance, the overarching goal in tissue engineering is to gain the ability to
replace damaged human connective tissue with viable tissue patches fabricated in
vitro. Current technology has failed to reach this goal because tissues grown in
vitro lack adequate mechanical integrity for in vivo applications. The
mechanical integrity of tissues is controlled by a network of several hundred
intercellular signaling proteins that shape long-term tissue growth and can be
measured by mass spectrometry. The statistical objective here is to identify the
most important stimuli and to extract the relevant information by reducing the
signaling proteins to a few key protein indices that can be monitored during in
vitro growth and directed by the external stimuli.
