
* 1007682
* Knowledge-Driven Bayesian Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2010,07/10/2010
* Christopher Hans,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,878.00

The research concerns the development of Bayesian regression models that are
carefully designed to include specific forms of knowledge common to many data
analytic settings. Researchers who work in specialized fields accumulate
quantifiable, problem-specific expert knowledge about model features based on
their repeated experience designing experiments and analyzing the resulting
data. The ability to build models that respect such knowledge is a critical
component to good data analysis. In the Bayesian modeling paradigm, such
knowledge is incorporated in the analysis through prior distributions on model
parameters. Unfortunately, many standard prior models compete against this
knowledge, assigning significant prior probability to events that researchers
know are implausible, if not impossible. A major focus of the research is the
identification of the types of information that are available to researchers for
specific classes of models and the development of new prior distributions whose
structures are driven by this knowledge. The project considers data-analytic
settings ranging from linear regression models to models arising from conjoint
choice experiments. Particular forms of prior knowledge range from information
about the coefficient of determination in a linear regression model to more
complex information about collinearity and grouped predictor variables. The
research places emphasis on understanding how such prior information affects the
comparison of competing models, and how properties of the new prior
distributions affect the questions of Bayesian model comparison and variable
selection. The research in new classes of prior distributions for regression
problems includes investigations of new and emerging ideas about parameter
regularization. Generalizations of new Bayesian regularization priors will be
developed that allow empirical knowledge about correlation structures in the
predictor variables to be incorporated in the regression models. Such priors
will be useful in high-dimensional problems, where extensive information is not
always readily available and where regularization is known to help stabilize
inference.

The motivation for the research comes from the social sciences, in particular
Psychology and Marketing. A key question in Psychology is how the brain
perceives, reacts to, and processes stimuli. Extensive experimentation in this
field has led to the development of a large base of knowledge about how
manipulation of particular stimuli affects the brain. Analysis of these
experiments provides insight into how the brain works. A common experiment in
Marketing involves assessing the attractiveness of product offerings to
different groups of consumers. These assessments are then used to design
products that will be successful in the marketplace. In order to provide new
insights into these processes in Psychology and Marketing, researchers require
methods of data analysis that are tailored to incorporate knowledge about these
processes that has been accumulated by researchers. The statistical methodology
developed in this research will provide investigators with sophisticated data-
analytic tools that will allow them to perform focused data analysis, leading to
a more accurate understanding of individual and consumer behavior.
