
* 1007719
* Flexible Statistical Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,05/09/2013
* Trevor Hastie,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,999.00

This project studies methods for analyzing large datasets using L1 and related
regularization. Coordinate descent algorithms are developed to provide entire
families of solutions for L1 and more aggressive concave penalized regression
problems. Applications include generalized linear regression models for very
wide datasets, and structure-finding algorithms for undirected graphical models.
L1 regularization is used as well to develop efficient convex algorithms for
finding low-rank approximations (SVDs) to extremely large, sparsely populated
matrices.

This project develops tools with a wide variety of applications, illustrated
here in medicine and merchandising. Modern technologies in genomics produce
measurements of half a million or more genotypes at particular locations (SNPs)
along an individual's genome in a few hours. Armed with such measurements on a
few thousand individuals, some sick and some healthy, this project develops
powerful statistical tools for identifying groups of SNPs associated with
diseases such as Alzheimer's or breast cancer. Online movie renters or book
buyers are often asked to rate their purchases. Although each individual sees a
minuscule fraction of the selections available, the investigators are able to
develop recommender systems that exploit the overlap to learn genres of movies,
and assign viewers to like-minded cliques, and which allow them to make
recommendations for products not yet seen.
