
* 1007535
* Collaborative Research: Extension of Quantile Regression and Empirical Likelihood Analysis for Censored Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2010,09/20/2010
* Mi-Ok Kim,OH,Children's Hospital Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2013
* USD 120,838.00

Linear models analysis is one of the most appealing statistical methods for its
directly interpretable results. The accelerated failure time (AFT) and censored
quantile regression (QR) model serve counterparts of the classical linear and
uncensored QR model for censored data, and complement the Cox-proportional
hazards model. Censored QR, in particular, enriches linear models analysis for
censored data by allowing non-constant covariate effects across the distribution
of event times. Other regression methods unduly constrain the covariate effects
to be constant and fail to provide consistent results. In contrast censored QR
allows the treatment effect to be negative for more severe cases (with shorter
event-free survival times) but positive in other cases. The AFT and censored QR
model are, however, under-utilized as flexible and general methods for
estimation, variable selection and inference do not exist. This investigation
includes developing (A) flexible estimation methods that work under less
stringent conditions than those for existing methods, (B) methods for variable
selection, including high dimensional data, and (C) general empirical
likelihood(EL) methods parallel to uncensored case. In addition, the general
ideas of the proposed research and method developed are applicable to truncation
or other censoring types, although they are developed under random right
censoring mechanism.

Improving statistical models for predicting medical outcomes is always an
important part of statistical research. Thanks to recent advancement in high
throughput technologies, a vast amount of potentially useful information,
including patient's gene profile, is available and anticipated to lead to much
improved prediction. The proposed study investigates novel methods to
incorporate those data in building a better statistical model to more accurately
predict a patient survival. The type of models to be investigated are also more
sophisticated: instead of predicting only an "average" person's survival, they
allow prediction for "top 10%, or "bottom 10%", while allowing the survivals can
be very differently impacted by the gene profile.
