
* 1008884
* Travel Support for the 4th International Joint IMS-ISBA Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/15/2010,04/07/2010
* Bradley Carlin,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,000.00

This grant provides support for the Fourth International Joint Meeting of the
IMS (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) and ISBA (the International Society
for Bayesian Analysis), to be held on Wednesday, January 5 to Friday, January 7,
2011. A central theme of the conference will be Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
and related methods and applications. The lion's share of the funding will be
used to support the travel expenses of junior biostatistical investigators,
i.e., persons pursuing a PhD or DrPH in statistics, biostatistics, or a closely
related field, or who have received such a degree within the five years
preceding the conference. Such investigators are often doing research that is
among the most novel, interesting, and important for international
dissemination, yet lack the travel funds necessary to attend such a conference,
since they have not yet established a publication track record sufficient to
attract external travel and other funding for their work. We have a commitment
from ISBA to provide partial travel support for 10 young recent PhDs from
economically disadvantaged countries, and are also seeking support from NSA for
support for 10-15 additional young investigators. Specific goals and anticipated
benefits of the conference include promoting the continued development of
statistical theory and applications in finance, technology, environmental
science, biomedicine and other areas, and a fuller exploration of the interplay
of classical and Bayesian statistical methods in the context of specific areas
of research.

Statisticians play an indispensable role in the analysis of biomedical,
environmental and public health data, from the study design stage all the way
through to final analysis and report-writing. Statisticians also serve on a
myriad of scientific review and advisory panels, as well as provide statistical
training and consulting to substantive area researchers. Finally, the
development of new statistical methodology for interpretation of data from
clinical, observational, and laboratory studies is a key area of statistical
endeavor. As a result, scholarly conferences where new ideas can be exchanged
are important for statistical science to move forward. The benefit of and need
for attendance at such meetings by junior statistical researchers is
particularly great, since they contribute mightily to their professional
development and help "level the playing field" with more established senior
investigators. This grant provides support for the Fourth International Joint
Meeting of the IMS (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) and ISBA (the
International Society for Bayesian Analysis), to be held Wednesday, January 5 to
Friday, January 7, 2011. The lion's share of the support we seek is to support
the travel expenses of junior investigators.
