
* 1045137
* Travel Support for the 58th Session of the International Statistical Institute, August 2011, Dublin, Ireland
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2010,09/08/2010
* Martha Aliaga,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 24,145.00

The American Statistical Association (ASA) will use this grant for 20 United
States participants to attend the 58th Session of the International Statistical
Institute (ISI) in Dublin, Ireland from August 21-26, 2011. The ISI meeting
includes the meetings of the Bernoulli Society, International Association for
Official Statistics (IAOS), International Association for Statistical Computing
(IASC), International Association of Survey Statisticians (IASS), and the
International Association for Statistical Education (IASE). Thus it is an
umbrella meeting with sessions of interest for thousands of statisticians. The
travel grant will provide support to defray transportation costs for individuals
selected from institutions and non-profit associations. An emphasis of the award
is to encourage and provide the opportunity for younger statisticians to
participate in the meeting. Participants will be notified of the availability of
the travel grant through Amstat News, a membership publication of the ASA, and
on the ASA Home Page on the Internet. Notices will be provided to university and
college statistics and mathematics departments to encourage younger
statisticians to apply for the travel grant. A review and selection committee
will be established to review the applications and select grantees. The
committee will be comprised of three or more ASA members and will convene at the
ASA office in Alexandria, Virginia. Special consideration will be given to
statisticians who have recently received their Ph.D.?s and to women and
minorities.

The American Statistical Association (ASA) will use this grant for 20 United
States participants to attend the 58th Session of the International Statistical
Institute (ISI) in Dublin, Ireland from August 21-26, 2011. The ISI meeting
includes the meetings of the Bernoulli Society, International Association for
Official Statistics (IAOS), International Association for Statistical Computing
(IASC), International Association of Survey Statisticians (IASS), and the
International Association for Statistical Education (IASE). Thus it is an
umbrella meeting with sessions of interest for thousands of statisticians. The
travel grant will provide support to defray transportation costs for individuals
selected from institutions and non-profit associations. An emphasis of the award
is to encourage and provide the opportunity for younger statisticians to
participate in the meeting. Participants will be notified of the availability of
the travel grant through Amstat News, a membership publication of the ASA, and
on the ASA Home Page on the Internet. Notices will be provided to university and
college statistics and mathematics departments to encourage younger
statisticians to apply for the travel grant. A review and selection committee
will be established to review the applications and select grantees. The
committee will be comprised of three or more ASA members and will convene at the
ASA office in Alexandria, Virginia. Special consideration will be given to
statisticians who have recently received their Ph.D.?s and to women and
minorities.
