
* 1053252
* Diagnostics and Experimental Design in Nonlinear Dynamics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2011,05/19/2015
* Giles Hooker,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This grant is focused on developing statistical methodology for the parameters
of ordinary differential equations and non-linear stochastic models that
describe the evolution of physical and biological systems. The proposed
methodological development can be broadly divided into two parts: (i)
inferential methods and (ii)design of experiments. In inferential methodology,
the investigator proposes diagnostic tests to assess mis-specification of the
drift processes and the presence of state variables that have not been included
in a proposed differential equation model. For the design of experiments,
control-theoretic methods are suggested for experimental dynamical systems.
Specifically, methods to choose system inputs so as to maximize the Fisher
Information concerning the parameters of interest for the observed system are
described. While models for rapid evolution in experimental ecologies provide
real-world a real-world application, the proposed methods have much wider
applicability, for example in chemical engineering, pharmacokinetics and
neurodynamics.

The research in this grant will provide new, improved methods for making
statistical inferences about real-world systems that change over time. As a
specific example, we consider models that describe an experimental ecology in
which different species of micro-organisms are grown together in a laboratory
tank. However, this research has broader applications in areas as diverse as
human immune systems, models for drug absorbtion by the body and chemical
engineering. (I) A first task is to answer the question "Is the proposed model
adequate to describe the data observed from this system and, if not, how should
it be improved?" A particular question in experimental ecology is whether the
models are missingspecies that are present in the system and which must
therefore have evolved during the experiment. This research will provide the
first statistical test of recently-advanced theories that evolution can occur at
the same time-scales as ecological processes; theories that have profound
implications for environmental protection, the management of algal ponds
producing biofuels and many other domains. (II) A second focus of this work is
to develop tools to improve the design of these experiments so as to obtain
maximal information about the system from the data they generate. In ecological
experiments, system inputs such as nutrients can be manipulated over time so as
to produce the behavior that is most informative about the system's dynamics.
Similar experimental design problems exist in neural dynamics, chemical
engineering and pharmacokinetics. This grant will support the development of
novel mathematical, statistical, and computational methods for addressing these
issues.
