
* 1055214
* CAREER: A flexible design and modeling framework for computer experiments and beyond
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2011,07/15/2015
* Peter Chien,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to develop a flexible framework for
design and modeling of large-scale simulations with broad applications to other
areas of statistics. The investigator studies a multi-step method for fitting
massive data from computer simulations that can simultaneously mitigate
singularity and improve accuracy of interpolation. Theoretical bounds on numeric
and nominal accuracy of this method will be derived. The investigator also
proposes new designs inspired by Sudoku to efficiently pool data from multiple
sources and employs sliced Latin hypercube designs to enhance stochastic
optimization and cross-validation.

Large-scale simulations are widely used for studying complex phenomena in
sciences and engineering. The trend of replacing physical experiments with
simulations to save cost and time has accelerated recently. The proposed
research draws impetus from computer simulations but applies broadly to other
areas of statistics for modeling massive data and for borrowing information from
multiple sources. Beyond statistics, the research will make significant
contributions to discrete mathematics, computer science and high-performance
computing. Dissemination through journal publications, industrial collaborations
and release of open source software will result in broad adoption of the
developed research to significantly improve the use of complex simulations in
U.S. industries. The research will be of considerable added value to rigorous
uncertainty quantification efforts by national laboratories to support national
security. Training students from under-represented groups will be accomplished
through a puzzle based learning approach. Graduate students will benefit through
multidisciplinary training on the interface between statistics and optimization.
Ph.D. students will be supervised by following the Wisconsin model of balancing
statistical theory and practice, and obtain first-hand research experience they
can draw on for their careers.
