
* 1056125
* CAREER: Bridging dynamical and statistical models of neural circuits -- a mechanistic approach to multi-spike synchrony
* DMS,STATISTICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Robust Intelligence
* 03/01/2011,02/20/2011
* Eric Shea-Brown,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2017
* USD 469,114.00

Questions of neural synchrony -- correlations in cell-to-cell spiking -- have
driven decades of research. However, recent technological and theoretical
advances have thrust open two lines of inquiry. The first is understanding the
combinatorial scale of the correlations that occur in natural and model neural
networks. It is well known that describing neural activity requires pairwise
statistical interactions -- but we do not yet understand when network dynamics
produce patterns of correlations that extend beyond this pairwise description,
when the pairwise descriptions will be complete, and what the overall
implications are for neural coding and signal processing. The Principal
Investigator will address these questions for a set of "canonical" neural
circuits, or motifs, and will build toward networks of gradually increasing
complexity in their dynamics and architecture. Further, extending beyond
intrinsic network dynamics, he will ask how these basic network properties
determine the ways in which patterns of synchrony can be controlled by external
stimulation. Answering these complementary questions requires synergies between
methods of stochastic processes, dynamical systems, and statistical inference.

How do how networked neurons work together to produce the brain's astonishing
computational ability? Such coordinated neural dynamics are characterized by
synchrony among different neurons. One prospect is that this coordinated
activity opens new channels for signal processing: there is a combinatorial
explosion in the number of possible multi-neuron patterns that can occur in
increasingly large networks. However, we only have the first hints at whether
and when these patterns systematically occur in the brain's networks, and what
information they might (or might not) carry. Shea-Brown will study the
fundamental properties of neural dynamics, connectivity, and noise that
determine the level and impact of multi-neuron synchrony in a series of networks
of gradually increasing complexity. He will use interdisciplinary tools from
both deterministic and statistical branches of applied mathematics to understand
how levels of synchrony are created, destroyed, and manipulated by external
stimulation. These findings will contribute to experimental and clinical
neuroscience: working in collaboration with experimentalists, the investigator
will make predictions for light stimuli that evoke higher-order correlations in
the retina, and for electrical stimuli that suppress pathological synchrony in
neurodegenerative disease. These questions, as part of theoretical neuroscience
-- an emerging field that is rich in open questions and highly varied
interdisciplinary techniques -- present a strong opportunity for recruiting,
engaging, and training undergraduates in the mathematical sciences. Shea-Brown
will direct this opportunity toward the underrepresented groups from which new
scholars are most urgently needed, through an integrated four-year research
pathway for undergraduates. This will be developed together with newly designed
units in the computational science and mathematical biology courses taught by
the investigator.
