
* 1102482
* International Conference on Design of Experiments (ICODOE-2011)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2011,02/28/2011
* Manohar Aggarwal,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Haiyan Cai
* 03/31/2012
* USD 18,000.00

The third International Conference on Design of Experiments (ICODOE-2011) will
be hosted by the Department of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Memphis
during May 10 ? 13, 2011. The principal aims of the conference are to bring
together leading researchers from all over the world in the area of design and
analysis of experiments and practitioners in the pharmaceutical, chemometrics,
physical, biological, medical, social, psychological, economic, engineering and
manufacturing sciences. The conference will also provide support and
encouragement to junior researchers in the field of design and analysis of
experiments. The focus of ICODOE-2011 is on emerging areas of research in
experimental design, as well as novel innovations in traditional areas. The
conference will cover topics of importance to the academic and industrial
community, such as design and analysis of experiments in Genomics, dose ?
finding studies, adaptive designs for clinical trials, event related fMRI,
designs for linear, non-linear and generalized linear mixed models, screening
experiments, computer experiments and multi ? stratum designs.

The design and analysis of experiments is at the foundation of the scientific
method. It is used in applications across all scientific disciplines and
engineering. It is used throughout business and industry to improve the
reliability of processes and equipment and to identify and understand how
process factors affect output. It is used in many scientific disciplines such as
in medicine, especially in the design of clinical trials, dose ? finding studies
and biomedical experiments. The advancement of statistical theory and
methodology over the past years has resulted in the development of sophisticated
methods capable of analyzing complex experiments. This has given rise to a
demand for efficient designs for these experiments. At the same time, a new
generation of enthusiastic and talented researchers in design of experiments is
needed in the years to come to carry out original theoretical and applied
research in the emerging areas. The junior researchers of today need to be
nurtured and encouraged to assume this role. The researchers in the area of
experimental design from the Universities and industry will also get an
opportunity to meet together and discuss problems of mutual interest.
ICODOE-2011 will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, mainly
minorities and women.
