
* 1103263
* Doctoral Student Forum and Student Travel at the 2011 SIAM Data Mining Conference; Phoenix, AZ
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 02/15/2011,02/14/2011
* Marina Meila,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2013
* USD 29,140.00

The 2011 SIAM Data Mining (SDM 2011) Conference is being organized by the
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in cooperation with the
American Statistical Association. SDM 2011 will be held in Phoenix (AZ), USA
from April 28th to April 30, 2011. This conference is the foremost venue for
researchers who are addressing problems in data mining to present their work in
a peer-reviewed forum. It is widely attended by researchers and practitioners in
the field. Funds are sought to provide travel support for approximately 16 Ph.D.
students from universities in the United States to attend SDM 2011 and to
participate in a Ph.D. student forum that is to be held as part of SDM 2011.
Funds are requested to provide travel support for approximately 15 graduate
students from universities in the United States to attend SDM 2011. Special
efforts will be made to attract candidates who are women or belong to minority
groups that are currently under-represented within the data mining research
community.

Participation in high quality research conferences is an integral component of
the training of Ph.D. students in data mining and related fields. The SDM 2011
Ph.D. Student Forum is aimed at providing an opportunity for Ph.D. candidates to
present their work and receive constructive feedback and mentoring from
established researchers in data mining. Such feedback and mentoring is expected
to improve the quality of the students thesis research. Similarly, students
recipient of a travel award will be able to attend technical sessions, plenary
talks, panels, tutorials and workshops. They will interact with peers who share
similar interests from other universities, as well as hundreds of leading
researchers in data mining from around the world. This experience will be
extremely formative and fruitful towards the shaping of their Data mining is
playing an increasingly important role in many emerging data-rich sciences and
application domains, such as bioinformatics, computational biology, link
analysis, counter-terrorism and security. The SDM 2011 Ph.D. student forum will
enrich the education and training of student researchers at early stages in
their careers. This is especially true for statistics students, since
traditionally in statistics, conference publishing is considered less important
than it is for instance in computer science. Experiencing and being mentored in
this activity has the potential of culture shift, of improving overall
communication between statistics and computer science and engineering, in a
domain that lies at the boundary between the two. Both the student forum and
travel awards will also help broaden the representation of women and members of
underrepresented minority groups within the Data Mining research community.
