
* 1104474
* Saddlepoint and Bootstrap Accuracy with Applications to General Systems Theory
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,04/24/2013
* Ronald Butler,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 154,395.00

This project has two major goals: (a) to find explanations for the remarkable
accuracy of saddlepoint approximations, and (b) to continue development of a
framework for implementing nonparametric statistical inference in stochastic
systems. Consideration of objective (a) uses two mathematical tools: the
Ikehara-Weiner theorem, more commonly used in analytic number theory to prove
the prime number theorem, and complex integration methods applied to inversion
formulas of moment generating functions (MGFs). Both methods focus on the
analytic continuation of MGFs and their properties outside of the convergence
strip. These two tools will be used to streamline and extend what is known
concerning the uniformly relative accuracy of saddlepoint approximations.
Objective (b) continues previous work on the development of a framework for
implementing bootstrap inference in stochastic models that are finite-state
semi-Markov processes. These models include most of the commonly used stochastic
models in reliability, multi-state survival analysis, epidemic modeling, and
communication and manufacturing systems. Three tools are required to complete
the framework: cofactor rules specifying the Laplace transforms for performance
characteristics, saddlepoint approximations to invert these transforms, and the
bootstrap to provide statistical inference in conjunction with the two previous
tools. Modern statistical methods use models that involve complicated
distributions from which the computation of probabilities can be a formidable
task. This task is often simplified by using saddlepoint approximations. Such
approximations generally provide probabilities with very little effort and most
often achieve 2-3 significant digit accuracy. Explanations for this remarkable
accuracy have continued to elude researchers. Part (a) of this proposal outlines
two new approaches the investigator will consider to explain this accuracy.
Among the modern methods that require probability computations from complicated
distributions are the procedures the investigator considers in part (b) of the
proposal. This work concerns the development of a framework for implementing
nonparametric statistical inference in complex stochastic systems some of which
began with the complex systems formulated in engineering during the cybernetics
movement. These stochastic systems include most of the standard stochastic
models used in reliability, multi-state survival analysis, epidemic modeling,
and communication and manufacturing systems. No such general methodology
currently exists for implementing statistical inference in the context of
general stochastic systems models so the framework proposed by the investigator
would provide tools that are currently unavailable. The proposal also addresses
significant questions in other disciplines where answers are lacking due to
certain computational difficulties. In ocean and electrical engineering accurate
approximations are given for distributions of extreme hull stress during heavy
seas and distributions for extreme responses in signal processing; in quantum
physics, approximations are proposed for "gauge" functions, the computation of
which are fundamental in quantum theory, and whose computation is difficult even
in the simplest cases.
