
* 1105634
* Dimension Reduction, Model Selection and Classification in Functional Data Analysis.
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2011,08/30/2012
* Yehua Li,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 119,999.00

Functional data analysis aims to model and analyze data sets where a datum is a
random function, e.g. a curve or a high dimensional image. Due to the fast
growth of modern data collection methods, such data sets become more and more
prevalent in many biological, medical and industrial applications. Functional
data are viewed as infinite dimensional vectors in a functional space, and are
usually observed on discrete points and measured with error. Due to the infinite
dimensional nature of functional data, dimension reduction is essential for
visualizing, modeling and making inference on these data. In the proposed
project, the investigator will study new, computationally efficient dimension
reduction methods for functional data based on spline approximations, and use
asymptotic theory to develop new statistical devices for model selection and
inference. The investigator will also study classification problems in
functional data, by combining the proposed dimension reduction techniques with
modern machine learning methods.

The proposed research is motivated by data from colon carcinogenesis
experiments, hypertension studies, AIDS clinical trials and functional magnetic
resonance imaging experiments. The proposed project will benefit the society by
advancing knowledge in these scientific fields. To achieve broader dissemination
of the research results, the investigator will provide free and user friendly
software to all scientific researchers. A new course on functional data analysis
will be developed in the investigator's institute. The new course aims to
nurture the ability of students to analyze real and innovative data sets and
help them gain deeper understanding of modern statistical methods and theory.
