
* 1106772
* Statistical Methods for Network Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,06/18/2013
* Elizaveta Levina,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 290,000.00

Network data have become common in a wide range of fields, and a large and
diverse community of researchers have studied various aspects of networks, yet
statistical methods are rarely applied. This project proposes new theory,
methodology, and algorithms that take a principled statistical approach to these
problems, assess uncertainty, and establish conditions for desirable properties
such as consistency. The focus is primarily on discovering community structure
in networks, a common phenomenon in practice and a fundamental question in
network analysis. New pseudo-likelihood algorithms are proposed for fitting the
block model for networks, as well as several generalizations that allow for non-
uniform degree distribution within blocks, removing the main limitation of the
classic block model. The pseudo-likelihood based on aggregated data
substantially speeds up computation, allowing fitting these models to larger and
sparser networks than previously possible. The asymptotic distribution of
criteria used for community detection is also studied, which leads to
development of significance tests for community structure, consistency
conditions, and asymptotically correct partition thresholds, which have
important practical implications. New, more robust criteria are also proposed,
consistent under weaker conditions. The proposal also develops a formal non-
parametric test for comparing two networks, a problem that arises frequently in
practice but is currently addressed only through informal comparisons of summary
statistics. Finally, covariates on nodes and edges are incorporated into the
models and used for predicting unobserved links in the networks. Many of the
proposed methods provide the first statistical solutions to the corresponding
network problems.

Development of statistical methods for community detection in networks, while
contributing to the development of core statistical theory and methodology, has
direct impact on the interdisciplinary field of network analysis and the study
of complex networks. The applications of these are wide-spread, covering such
diverse areas as infectious disease modeling, national security, communications,
sociology, and genomics. The new statistical tools proposed take a more formal,
rigorous approach, and have the potential to change how many scientists approach
network analysis.
