
* 1106450
* Modeling, Computational and Inferential Issues in Fingerprint and Health Monitoring Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2011,03/18/2013
* Chae Young Lim,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 169,495.00

Complex data structures with intrinsic multivariate and multilevel
characteristics arise frequently in various scientific disciplines. This
proposal discusses two such application domains, namely, the areas of health
monitoring and fingerprint based authentication. The scientific questions posed
are usually associated with high-dimensional parameter spaces, such as spaces of
point patterns and functions, and are addressed in a conceptually unified and
meaningful way with the development of novel hierarchical models on general
object spaces. These hierarchical models are flexible and adept at capturing
salient data characteristics, such as clustering and spatial dependence, whose
forms vary from one application to another. The proposal develops statistical
methodology utilizing parametric multivariate generalized linear mixed models
and non-parametric Dirichlet process priors, extended to the space of objects,
for studying attributes and the effect of covariates encountered in fingerprint
and socio-economic-health applications. Due to the high-dimensionality of the
intrinsic spaces, several innovative procedures are developed to overcome
ensuing computational challenges in the Bayesian framework, including
theoretically justified approximations to the likelihood and predictive
inference. An added feature of these inferential tools is to extend posterior
analysis of quantities such as means, variances and credible sets, in a
meaningful way to the space of objects. The scientific goals addressed in this
proposal will benefit research in public and social health, engineering and
legal forensics. The impact on societal and demographic policy making, for
example, will be in the discovery of socio-demographic regions with extreme
health and economic conditions, the identification of their potential causes and
in the decisions made to mobilize resources accordingly. The proposed research
has impact on how forensic evidence should be reported as well. Many forensic
scientists as well as legal scholars have become increasingly aware of the
shortcomings of fingerprint evidence as is presented in a court of law, and that
methodology for assessing the extent of uniqueness of fingerprints requires
further scientific validity. Several of these issues are addressed by developing
quantitative methods for reporting fingerprint evidence, for example, when
additional fingerprint attributes such as quality are available. This research
will have broader impact in health and security surveillance, and their
monitoring.
