
* 1106084
* Collaborative Research: Objective Bayesian Model Selection and Estimation in High Dimensional Statistical Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2011,09/20/2011
* Kshitij Khare,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2015
* USD 100,809.00

It is widely accepted that in many high dimensional situations, model selection
has to be performed either before parameter estimation or simultaneously, in
order to reduce the number of parameters under consideration. Indeed, model
selection is one of the major challenges facing statisticians working with high
dimensional data. Tools such as regularization and sparsity are some of the
common notions employed to obtain parsimonious models to explain observed data.
In recent years, the field of statistics has witnessed an explosion of
frequentist and Bayesian methods for high dimensional problems. Despite these
and other advances, Bayesian model selection in an "objective" sense in high
dimensional problems remains an important problem that has yet to be solved
satisfactorily. The need for objectivity translates into a need for specifying
noninformative improper priors, which in turn renders the traditional Bayes
factors unusable. The project proposes to derive objective Bayesian estimation
and model selection procedures in a large class of high dimensional graphical
models. The methodology that is proposed in this project therefore aims to
contribute to much needed theory in the area of objective Bayesian model
selection for high dimensional graphical models. In the process the methodology
studies the benefits and shortcomings of objective Bayesian methods in this
context. The theory that is developed feeds into developing algorithms and
computational techniques for model selection/estimation in high dimensional
settings.

The availability of throughput or high dimensional data has touched almost every
field of science. The need to formulate correct models that explain observed
high dimensional data permeates through many scientific fields. Indeed, such
data where the number of variables is often much higher than the number of
samples, referred to as the "large p small n" problem, is now more pervasive
than it has ever been. Discovering statistical signals in high dimensional data,
proposing correct models that can explain such data, and parameter estimation in
these high dimensional settings are some of the major challenges that modern day
statisticians have to contend with. Moreover, such challenges also feature in
high stakes debates such as climate change, effectiveness of certain drugs in
clinical trials, and relevance of various biomarkers in cancer studies. This
project proposes to develop statistical methodology which is specifically
targeted towards identifying models which explain high dimensional data in an
objective manner. In particular the project is designed to develop better
objective Bayesian model selection and parameter estimation methods in high
dimensional problems, and has widespread applications. The PI and co-PI
collaborate with scientists in applied fields, especially with
faculty/researchers in their Medical Schools, Schools of Engineering and
Environmental Sciences. Training of graduate students and mentoring is an
integral part of this collaborative research. Scientific output from the project
is intended for publication in high impact peer-reviewed journals.
