
* 1106956
* Nonparametric Inference for Complex Physical Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2011,08/05/2011
* Chad Schafer,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The recent years have seen rapid growth in the depth, richness, and scope of
scientific data, a trend that is likely to accelerate. At the same time,
simulation and analytical models have sharpened to unprecedented detail the
understanding of the processes that generate these data. But what has advanced
more slowly is the methodology to efficiently combine the information from rich,
massive data sets with the detailed, and often nonlinear, constraints of theory
and simulations. This project will bridge that gap. The investigators develop,
implement, and disseminate new statistical methods that can fully exploit the
available data by adhering to the constraints imposed by current theoretical
understanding. The central idea in the work is constructing sparse, possibly
nonlinear, representations of both the data and the distributions for the data
predicted by theory. These representations can then be transformed onto a common
space to allow sharp inferences that respect the inherent geometry of the model.
The methodology developed in this project will apply to a wide range of
scientific problems. The investigators focus, however, on a critical challenge
in astronomy: using observations of Type Ia supernovae to improve constraints on
cosmological theories explaining the nature of dark energy, a significant, yet
little- understood, component of the Universe.

Crucial scientific fields have enjoyed huge advances in the ability both to
gather high-quality data and to understand the physical systems that generated
these data. Nevertheless, the full societal and scientific value of this
progress will only be realized with new, advanced statistical methods of
analyzing the massive amounts of available data. The investigators develop
statistical methods for combining theoretical modelling and observational
evidence into improved understanding of these physical processes. The analysis
of these data will requirenot only new methods, but also the use of high-
performance computing resources. There is a particular need for these tools in
cosmology and astronomy, and this project will bring together statisticians and
astronomers to combine expertise, but this research is motivated by problems
that are present in other fields, such as the climate sciences.
