
* 1106570
* Bayesian methods for structure detection in analysis of object data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2011,04/17/2013
* Subhashis Ghoshal,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Complex data objects such as images, functional data, random sets, shapes,
graphs and trees are nowadays commonly used to represent information present in
observations. Bayesian methods are well suited for detecting meaningful
structures hidden underneath these complex data sets. The structure may come in
the form of sparsity, setting many parameter values to a null value like zero,
or by making adjacent values equal, thus effectively reducing the number of
parameters to handle. This project will provide definitive guidelines for
constructing prior distributions on the parameters controlling the distributions
of object data, and for computing the resulting posterior distributions in an
efficient manner. The main idea of the research is to use an auxiliary
stochastic process to control ties in object data. The project connects diverse
concepts such as multi-scale modeling, feature sharing, multiple testing, random
geometry, machine learning and nonparametric Bayesian paradigm, and synthesizes
these different concepts into a powerful approach for analyzing object data. The
project also stimulates the development of computing strategies that exploit
structural niceties such as conditional conjugacy, thus providing fast and
accurate computational approaches.

This project develops methodologies that will provide a foundation for finding
structures in collections of data, with a wide range of applications in
astronomy, medical sciences, engineering, finance, and various other fields. The
research will help process astronomical images in a more accurate and efficient
manner, and thus help identify events in distant supernova remnants and other
astronomical bodies. The research will also have a significant impact in medical
imaging, by providing a method of accurate processing of scans of sensitive
organs with very little exposure to harmful rays. The project will impact human
resource development in the form of graduate student advising. The project will
have subprojects that will be suitable topics for undergraduate research
projects. Efforts will be made to involve students from under-represented groups
to promote diversity.
