
* 1106891
* Advances in Bayesian Model Choice
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,07/28/2013
* Merlise Clyde,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The investigator considers new default prior distributions for Bayesian model
selection and model averaging in linear and generalized linear models. Prior
choice for model specific parameters and for prior model probabilities is of
critical importance, particularly for modeling high dimensional relationships
where subjective specifications are impractical or where an ``objective''
analysis is desired. New families of objective priors that have desirable risk
properties, adapt to unknown degrees of sparsity, and also permit tractable
computations for large scale model search are studied. In high dimensional
problems, the dimension of the model space is astronomical. Innovative
methodology and algorithms for large scale stochastic search and model averaging
for high dimensional model spaces are developed, with an emphasis on algorithms
that exploit the architecture of Graphical Processing Units (GPUs). GPUs provide
the computing power of a distributed cluster, but at a fraction of their cost
and space/cooling requirements, but require care in the development of
statistical algorithms that take advantage of their architecture.

Advances in technology have led to the collection of high dimensional data
structures, spawning an increasingly complex array of statistical models for
data. Goals of data analysis may include prediction and/or selection of a subset
of models to test particular theories or to reduce attention from many
speculative models to a few well chosen models; these are fundamental problems
in statistics and throughout the sciences. In such settings, model uncertainty
is ubiquitous. Bayesian methods offer an effective and conceptually appealing
approach for addressing model uncertainty through Bayesian model averaging,
incorporating both parameter and model uncertainty, while still permitting
selection of a model via coherent decision-theoretic principles. The
methodological developments are driven by issues that arise from the following
applications 1) identifying important factors to predict protein activity; 2)
predicting risk of international conflict; 3) health effects of criteria
pollutants; and 4) identifying single nucleotide polymorphisms that are
associated with ovarian cancer risk. As prediction and model selection are some
of the most fundamental and widespread problems in the sciences and beyond, the
project's impact extends beyond the applications listed above. The development
and distribution of software ensures that these methods are widely available.
