
* 1106975
* Exploration, Modeling and Inference for Complex Data Objects
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2011,05/23/2011
* Haonan Wang,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 159,398.00

This proposal aims to develop new statistical learning tools geared towards the
challenging problem of understanding population level variation, extracting
features and gaining knowledge from a set of complex data objects. Object
Oriented Data Analysis (OODA) is an outgrowth of Functional Data Analysis, in
which the basic elements of data analysis are curves. The basic elements of OODA
are complex data objects including tree-structured objects. In medical image
analysis, tree-structured objects are found to be efficient for data
representation when the focus of the medical study involves variation in
branching structures. The proposed work is driven by a data set of human brain
artery systems and will clearly have an impact on many other scientific fields
involving populations of tree-structured objects. Analysis of complex data
objects, such as trees, general graphs, networks and shapes, poses serious
challenges towards methodological development since traditional statistical
models for multivariate data and functional data rely on linear operations in
Euclidean spaces or vector spaces. Thus, it requires the development of novel
and nontraditional techniques in a whole new statistical paradigm for extracting
patterns and information from data objects. The proposed work is targeted to
address some fundamental issues, including one-dimensional representation in
tree space. The first goal of this project is to provide tools for data
exploration and summarization. Next, the investigator will study probability
distributions (mixture models), which can be used as the basis of statistical
inference. The investigator will further study modeling of tree-structured data
to explain the relationship between tree-structured covariates and numerical
response, and/or between numerical covariates and tree-structured response.
Kernel based methods and logistic regression will be implemented for
classification in tree spaces.

Highly sophisticated data collection processes in science and technology from
the last two decades motivate the study of complex data objects. The proposed
work will open up a new area of statistical research, lay down a foundation and
enrich the toolkit available for the analysis of object oriented data. The
investigator will continue to implement newly developed modeling procedures to
the human brain artery data, and help to improve existing brain tumor diagnosis
procedure. This will also have a major impact on object oriented data analysis
by developing interdisciplinary research among various scientific fields. It is
expected that the ideas and methods resulting from this proposal will go beyond
the motivating example of analyzing human brain artery data, and will provide
researchers deeper insights in the discipline where the data were collected.
