
* 1106535
* Statistical Methodology and Applications to Economics, Engineering and Genetics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,04/18/2013
* Tze Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 399,939.00

An important objective of the proposed research is to develop methods for gene
mapping, i.e., the identification of genomic regions containing a gene (or
genes) affecting a trait of interest in either humans or in experimental
organisms. Searching a parameter set for the location of one or more signals in
a noisy background arise in gene mapping where the signals indicate the presence
of a gene. Similar problems arise in brain mapping, astronomy, and
bioinformatics. An important part of their solution involves the probability
that a random field exceeds a high threshold. A unified analytic approach and
sequential Monte Carlo methods will be developed to evaluate these boundary
crossing probabilities. Other methodological innovations of the proposed
research are new dynamic empirical Bayes models and methods, sequential
surveillance procedures, and adaptive control schemes for input-output systems
that may undergo occasional abrupt structural changes. The dynamic empirical
Bayes approach under development has applications to insurance rate-making,
dynamic panel data in economics, longitudinal data in biomedical studies, and
risk management. Sequential surveillance and adaptive risk control are of timely
relevance in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis and oil spill
disaster. Sequential Monte Carlo methods have important applications to
nonlinear filtering and to rare event simulation in communication networks and
risk management. Gene mapping provides an important tool in the study of human
diseases, and in agriculture and animal husbandry. The broader implications of
the proposed research include (i) direct implications in genetics, engineering,
finance, insurance, risk management and surveillance, and (ii) training of the
next generation of scientists in academia, industry, and government by
developing new advanced courses and involving graduate students in all phases of
the research.
