
* 1106816
* Novel nonparametric methods for prognosis studies with missing covariates
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2011,05/27/2011
* Xiao Song,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,966.00

Survival data with missing time-independent or time-dependent covariates are
commonly encountered in prognosis studies. Existing approaches mostly focus on
the standard proportional hazards model, which may be too restricted in some
applications. To obtain a comprehensive understanding of data, it is also
important to identify variables that are associated with survival time. In this
study, the investigators will develop nonparametric approaches for more flexible
models with missing covariates, and investigate variable selection in this
complicated setup.

The proposed research is expected to have broad impacts and application in
biomedical studies, econometrics, environmental studies, behavioral and social
sciences, where information is collected on time to an event of interest and
multiple covariates. This proposed study will foster collaborations among
investigators from different institutions/departments and backgrounds. It will
promote teaching, training and learning in the Statistics Department and the
newly founded Epidemiology and Biostatistics Department at the University of
Georgia. Research conducted in this study will help develop advanced graduate
courses in survival analysis, missing data and variable selection. It will
create challenging statistical projects for graduate students that the
investigators are supervising. Research results from this proposal will be
disseminated through presentation at major statistical meetings. Software
developed will be made publicly available, so that the proposed methods can be
readily used in practice in various fields.
