
* 1106564
* Laplace Deconvolution and Its Application to Analysis of Dynamic Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,05/23/2011
* Marianna Pensky,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The present proposal is motivated by analysis of Dynamic Contrast Enhanced
Computed Tomography (DCE-CT)data. DCE-CT provides a non-invasive measure of
tumor angiogenesis and has great potential for cancer detection and
characterization. It offers an in vivo tool for the evaluation and optimization
of new therapeutic strategies as well as for longitudinal evaluation of
therapeutic impacts of anti-angiogenic treatments. The difficulty of the problem
stems from the fact that DCE-CT is usually contaminated by a high-level of noise
and does not allows to directly measure the function of interest.
Mathematically, the problem reduces to solution of a noisy version of Laplace
convolution equation based on discrete measurements, an important problem which
also arises in mathematical physics, population dynamics, theory of
superfluidity and fluorescence spectroscopy. However, exact solution of the
Laplace convolution equation requires evaluation of the inverse Laplace
transform which is usually found using Laplace Transforms tables or partial
fraction decomposition. None of these methodologies can be used in stochastic
setting. In addition, Fourier transform based techniques used for solution of a
well explored Fourier deconvolution problem are not applicable here since the
function of interest is defined on an infinite interval while observations are
available only on on a finite part of its domain and it may not be absolutely
integrable on its domain. In spite of its practical importance, the Laplace
deconvolution problem was completely overlooked by statistics community. Only
few applied mathematicians took an effort to solve the problem but they either
completely ignored measurement errors or treated themas fixed non-random values.
For this reason, estimation of a function given noisy observations on its
Laplace convolution on an a finite interval requires development of a completely
novel statistical theory. The objective of the present proposal is to fill in
this gap and to develop a path-breaking transformative statistical methodology
for solution of various aspects of Laplace deconvolution problem: formulation of
fundamental theoretical results, algorithmic developments and, finally,
application of the newly derived techniques to analysis of DCE-CT data.

The current proposal presents an integral effort of merging applications and
theory. Results of this effort will be greatly beneficial for a) the medical
practice since development of novel path-breaking methodologies for analysis of
DCE-CT data will potentially improve clinical outcomes by providing non-invasive
tool for cancer detection and characterization as well as for longitudinal
evaluation of therapeutic impacts of anti-angiogenic treatments. First, DCE-CT
can be used used for assessment of intra-tumor physiological heterogeneity, thus
offering an in vivo tool for the evaluation and optimization of new therapeutic
strategies. Second, DCE-CT provides a non-invasive tool for cancer detection and
characterization as well as for longitudinal evaluationof therapeutic impact of
anti-angiogenic treatments, and therefore, can act as a tool for improvement of
those treatments. b) the medical research since algorithmic developments and the
software for interpretation of DCE-CT data will contribute to design of new
methodologies for non-invasive longitudinal evaluation of tumor angiogenesis,
cancer detection and characterization. Software will be freely available to
anyone who carries out examination of such data and can be used in cancer and
medical imaging research. c) various fields of science since data in the form of
noisy measurements of the Laplace convolution of a function of interest with a
known or estimated kernel appear in many areas of natural science. Analysis of
decay curves in fluorescence spectroscopy is one but not the only example.
However, due to the theoretical and methodological challenges associated with
the solution of Laplace deconvolution problem, these data are usually analyzed
in an "ad-hoc" manner, or the formulation is abandoned overall in favor of a
much less precise but easier treatable set-up. Novel path-breaking methodologies
which will be constructed as a result of this proposal will benefit all those
applications. d) training and development of the future work force and promoting
interdisciplinary research by carrying out various educational activities,
attracting and training Ph.D., M.S. and undergraduate students, teaching a
Special Topics graduate course, organizing interdisciplinary seminars and
promoting interdisciplinary research and diversity.
