
* 1106668
* New Dimension Reduction Approaches for Modern Scientific Data with High Dimensionality and Complex Structure
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2011,07/15/2011
* Lexin Li,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 100,000.00

With the recent explosion of scientific data, and its unprecedented size and
complexity, dimension reduction is becoming a central ingredient in any modern
statistical analysis. This project aims to couple dimension reduction
methodology with current statistical learning techniques, which results in an
entirely new class of flexible and effective dimension reduction solutions for
modern data with both high dimensionality and complex structure. From the
coupling, the investigator establishes a framework for dimension reduction that
incorporates prior information regarding the known structural relationships
between the variables. Within this framework, the investigator plans to develop
a family of dimension reduction solutions so that the results are more readily
interpretable and accurate. Such a framework is to greatly facilitate the
analysis of neuroimaging, climate, and genomic data where prior structural
information is often available.

Modern technologies routinely produce massive amounts of data and such a data
deluge now engulfs every branch of science and public life. As a result,
scientific progress now heavily depends on the ability to process and analyze
complex high-dimensional data. At the heart of these analyses are methods that
reduce the dimensionality of the data, sometimes dramatically, by identifying a
small set of variables that are important, or obtaining a few combinations of
the original measurements. This project aims to develop a host of novel
dimension reduction methods to address these pressing challenges in high-
dimensional data analysis. The proposed research is expected to make significant
contributions on two fronts: enabling scientists to quickly and effectively
extract useful information from massive data, and at the same time, benefiting
the discipline of statistics with advances in theory, methods and applications.
