
* 1106577
* New Developments in Sufficient Dimension Reduction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2011,08/17/2011
* Yuexiao Dong,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 99,999.00

This proposal aims to develop new theory and methodology for sufficient
dimension reduction. Through a series of well-defined research problems, the
investigator develops specific dimension reduction methods for many important
applications. In particular, this research proceeds in three main directions.
First, the investigator proposes a general approach based on estimating
equations to facilitate sufficient dimension reduction. Under this effective and
flexible estimating equations framework, the investigator relaxes a restrictive
distributional assumption for the classical dimension reduction techniques, and
proposes a novel sufficient dimension reduction methodology that handles
challenging problems such as missing observations and heteroscedastic modeling.
Secondly, outliers are commonly observed in high-dimensional data and yet
studied occasionally in the sufficient dimension reduction context. The
investigator develops new sufficient dimension reduction procedures which are
robust to outliers in the observations. Thirdly, most variable selection
techniques in the current literature are model-based. The investigator proposes
to extend sufficient dimension reduction methodology that can be applied to
variable selection and testing the significance of subsets of predictors in a
model-free fashion. The success of this project not only provides effective
practical tools for high-dimensional data analysis but also represents an
advance in the theory and methodology of semiparametric inference.

The scale and complexity of data sets have increased drastically in light of the
development in modern technology. High-dimensional data that involve a large
amount of variables are nowadays routinely generated and collected in areas such
as environmental studies, human health and medical research, homeland security,
government and business administration. High-dimensional data pose many
challenges for statisticians and provide considerable momentum in the statistics
community to develop new theories and methodologies. Sufficient dimension
reduction methodology effectively transforms a high dimensional data problem to
a low dimensional one, and thus facilitates many existing statistical methods
which used to be hindered by the curse of dimensionality. The investigator
proposes a new paradigm that synthesizes and broadens the theories and
methodologies of sufficient dimension reduction. The results from this project
can be widely applied for regression and classification problems in areas which
involve a large number of variables, such as econometrics, finance and
bioinformatics. The investigator also has the plan to provide free software
packages to academic and industrial users of the proposed procedures. The
support of the proposed research helps the investigator in the training of the
students at Temple University, where few senior faculty members are available to
supervise a large number of graduate students, including many minority and
female students.
