
* 1107004
* Causal Inference from Two-level Factorial Designs
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2011,09/20/2011
* Tirthankar Dasgupta,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The investigators develop a framework for causal inference from two-level
factorial and fractional factorial designs with particular sensitivity to
applications to social, behavioral and biomedical sciences. The framework
utilizes the concept of potential outcomes that lies at the center stage of
causal inference and extends Neyman's repeated sampling approach for estimation
of causal effects and randomization tests based on Fisher's sharp null
hypothesis to the case of 2-level factorial experiments. The framework allows
for statistical inference from a finite population, permits definition and
estimation of parameters other than ``average factorial effects'' and leads to
more flexible inference procedures than those based on ordinary least squares
estimation from a linear model. It also ensures validity of statistical
inference when the investigation becomes an observational study in lieu of a
randomized factorial experiment due to randomization restrictions.

Factorial designs allow efficient and cost-effective assessments of the relative
effects of several factors and their interactions on output variables of
interest. Such designs have been successfully applied in several scientific,
engineering and industrial endeavors, but not often used in the social,
behavioral or biomedical sciences in spite of several potential applications in
these fields. The proposed methodology addresses the complications associated
with multi-factor experiments in the aforesaid fields and has a wide range of
applications. It can be applied, for example, to assess the impact of several
new initiatives on high-school education; or to conduct cost-effective clinical
trials to study individual and combined effects of different treatments offered
to patients suffering from a certain disease; or to identify critical factors
that affect yield of complex physical processes in material science like
synthesis of nanostructures. It can also be applied to comparative effectiveness
research (e.g., in evidence-based medicine).
