
* 1107053
* Collaborative Research: New directions in nonparametric inference on manifolds with applications to shapes and images
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,04/25/2013
* Rabindra Bhattacharya,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 180,000.00

Projective shapes of 3D configurations, not their Kendall type similarity
shapes, are the most appropriate objects for general image analysis in machine
vision and robotics. The present project will develop registration free
nonparametric inference by constructing an appropriate equivariant embedding of
the full projective shape manifold, and by providing two-sample and multi-sample
inference procedures based on the extrinsic mean under the embedding. On the
other hand, data analysis on size-and-shape reflection-similarity manifolds are
important in virtual reconstructions of proteins and of various configurations
of bone structures in humans. Another focus of the project is on certain special
spaces which are not manifolds, but are spaces with manifold stratification, and
which arise in many applications, e.g., in geometric representations of
phylogenetic trees. Apart from the landmarks based shape analysis as described
above, continuous shapes such as given by boundary contours in 2D will be
investigated as elements of infinite dimemsional (Hilbert) manifolds. Finally,
proposed nonparametric Bayesian procedures for density estimation, regression
and classification on shape manifolds will be a significant point of departure
from nonparametric inference based so far primarily on Fre'chet means and
dispersions. Together these projects aim at providing comprehensive robust
procedures for shapes which are of wide applicability in many fields of science
and technology.

Digital images today play a vital role in science and technology, in
intelligence gathering and defense, and in many aspects of everyday life. The
present proposal seeks to advance the analysis of digital camera images via the
statistical study of shapes and other non-Euclidean objects. Nonparametric
statistical methods developed by the PIs and others over the past twelve years
have had a significant impact on statistical inference for 3D scene recognition
from regular digital cameras, on medical diagnostics, and on many other forms of
image analysis. The proposal aims not only to consolidate this theory. The
objective is also to develop new methodologies for machine vision and robotics,
for dynamic scene recognition, for medical diagnostics from CT scans for
planning reconstructive surgery for the severely injured, and for the detection
of elusive health impairments from DNA sequences via shape configurations of
proteins.
