
* 1107012
* New Developments on Confidence Distributions (CDs) and Statistical Inference: Theory, Methodology and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2011,07/15/2013
* Minge Xie,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 179,141.00

Basic statistical methods, such as point estimators, confidence intervals and
p-values, are common inferential tools for analyzing information and data.
Confidence distribution (CD), also known as a "distribution estimator," contains
a wealth of information and is a useful device for constructing all types of
frequentists' statistical inferences. Some recent developments have highlighted
promising potentials of the CD concept as an effective inferential tool. As an
emerging new field of research, there are many important topics and interesting
questions yet to be answered. The proposed research addresses several issues
related to the theoretical framework of CD inference, and provides useful
inference tools for a number of problems where frequentist methods with good
properties were previously unavailable or difficult to obtain. Specifically, it
proposes to: 1) Develop a general and new framework for resampling, utilizing a
concept called CD random variables, and investigate theoretical issues related
to the development. This resampling approach can be considered as an extension
of the well-studied and widely-applied bootstrap methods, albeit one which is
much broader. 2) Develop a new and effective meta-analysis approach to combine
CDs of multivariate parameters. This development not only provides solutions to
several existing problems in conventional meta-analysis, but also is extended to
form a "split and conquer" strategy, with supporting asymptotic theory, which
has potential applications in mining data of huge size and large dimensions. 3)
Develop and generalize the theoretical framework for CD inference including:
developing an exact CD concept and inference procedure for small samples from
discrete distributions, and introducing a CD probability measure for infinite
dimensional parameters (processes) and exploring its applications in survival
analysis and growth curve models.

Advanced data acquisition and storage technologies have made it easy for
gathering of data and information. The demand for effective statistical
inference methods for processing and analyzing those information and data has
never been greater. The proposal addresses several fundamental theoretical
issues in statistical inference as well as a set of important practical problems
arising from various disciplines. Advances in statistical theory and
methodological developments are key aspects of the proposed activities. These
advances not only solve the specific set of problems set forth in this proposal,
but also bring about new perspectives to frequentist, fiducial and Bayesian
approaches. Progress from this proposal should further advance theory of
statistical inference and development of statistical methodology. It can also
facilitate many applications in a variety of fields, including medical research,
agriculture, industry, decision making, among others. The proposed research
activities are also ideal for engaging student participation and training.
Through these projects, students can acquire hands-on experience with real life
problems. Such training is essential for them to become effective statisticians
in the future.
