
* 1107206
* Geometry, Shape and Objects
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,07/28/2013
* Wolfgang Polonik,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 169,972.00

Filaments, ridges, graphs, contours, and paths are examples of geometric objects
in modern data analytic challenges. The development and the analysis of
statistical methodology to tackle challenges related to such objects is the
overarching goal of this project. In particular, the principal investigator and
his collaborators will (i) develop statistical methodology and algorithms for
the estimation of ridge lines and/or filamentary structure involving path
smoothing methodologies. Here, paths are estimates of integral curves of
gradients or of appropriate eigenvectors of Hessians. (ii) They will also
develop dimension reduction methodology for subsequent clustering of high-
dimensional data, where projection onto non-linear manifolds will be considered.
Further goals are (iii) the adaptation of model selection methodologies for
high-dimensional graphical models to incorporate spatial and temporal
smoothness, and (iv) the investigation of commonalities and differences between
statistical density/regression level set methodology and depth contour
approaches. Besides the intrinsic geometric nature of the problems under
consideration, geometry also comes into play via the choice of an appropriate
distance measure, for instance.

This project will lead to new statistical methodologies underpinned by relevant
theory, and to corresponding numerical algorithms in the area of geometric
statistics. In this field of statistics, the objects of interest itself are
genuinely geometrically motivated. One important guiding instance of a relevant
scientific problem is the analysis of the cosmic web, which consists of
locations of galaxies in the space. The web-like structure of these locations
requires the use of nonstandard methodologies. Geometrically motivated objects
also play a major role in several other scientific areas, such as medical
imaging, fingerprint identification and remote sensing. The findings of this
project will advance the field of statistics, and they will directly impact the
relevant fields of application. The education of graduate and undergraduate
students in a modern field of statistics is another important goal of this
project.
