
* 1107029
* Collaborative Research: Penalization Methods for Screening, Variable Selection and Dimension Reduction in High-dimensional Regression via Multiple Index Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2011,06/06/2011
* Peng Zeng,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

The project aims to develop effective penalization methods for screening,
dimension reduction, and variable selection in high dimensional regression. The
investigators focus mainly on multiple index models, because this type of models
combines the strengths of linear and nonparametric regression while avoiding
their drawbacks. A novel penalization approach is employed for model fitting,
which regularizes both the parametric and nonparametric components of a multiple
index model. A pilot study shows that this approach is more advantageous than
other existing ones. When facing ultra-high dimensionality, the investigators
use a forward variable screening procedure to reduce the dimension to a
manageable size before applying the proposed penalization. The investigators
plan to study the theoretical properties of this approach and develop fast and
efficient computing algorithms for its implementation. The proposed approach is
further extended to applications involving categorical responses or random
effects.

Advances in science and technology have led to an explosive growth of massive
data across a variety of areas such as bioinformatics, climate research,
internet, etc. Traditional statistical methods for clustering, regression and
classification become ineffective when dealing with a large number of variables.
Lately, a tremendous amount of research effort has been dedicated to the
development of statistical methods such as dimension reduction and variable
selection for analyzing this type of massive data. The investigators join the
effort by proposing a novel penalization approach and developing efficient
computing algorithms. The results from this project not only advance statistical
research but also help other scientists and researchers better understand and
analyze their massive data and hence enhance their scientific discovery.
