
* 1107000
* Sparse and structured networks: Statistical theory and algorithms
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,07/28/2013
* Martin Wainwright,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

The proposal focuses on Markov random fields and directed graphical models,
classes of statistical models that are based on a marriage between graph theory
and probability theory, and allow for flexible modeling of network-structured
data. The core of the proposal consists of multiple research thrusts, all
centered around the goal of developing practical algorithms and theory for
statistical estimation with network-structured data. One research thrust
concerns various issues associated with model selection in undirected graphical
models, also known as Gibbs distributions or Markov random fields. Problems
include determining the information-theoretic limitations of graphical model
selection in high dimensions (where the number of vertices may be larger than
the sample size), not only for i.i.d. data but also dependent data; developing
methods for tracking sequences of networks that evolve over time; and developing
methods for data with hidden variables. Another research thrust concerns various
statistical problems associated with directed acyclic graphical structures
(DAGs), including estimating equivalence classes of DAGs in the high-dimensional
setting; estimating causal relationships via designed interventions; and
efficient computational methods for DAG selection using the Lasso and related
methods. Overall, the proposed research is inter-disciplinary in nature, drawing
on techniques from mathematical statistics, convex optimization, information
theory, concentration of measure, and graph theory.

Science and engineering abounds with different types of networks. Examples
include social networks such as FaceBook and Twitter, networks of genes and
proteins in molecular biology, network models for economic and market dynamics,
neural networks in brain imaging, networks of disease transmission in
epidemiology, and information networks in law enforcement. In the real-world,
the structure of the underlying network is not known, but instead one observes
samples of the network behavior (e.g., packet counts in a computer network;
instances of infection at given time instances of an epidemic; emails or text
messages sent among a group of people), and the goal is to infer the network
structure. Methods for solving this network inference problem have a broad range
of applications. Examples include inferring brain connectivity and disease
etiology in neuroimaging studies, detecting terrorist cells in social networks,
monitoring intrusions in computer networks, and understanding the basis of gene-
protein interactions in systems biology.
