
* 1107067
* High-dimensional Discrete Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,06/22/2011
* Luis Carvalho,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 64,495.00

Recent advances in the last decade have brought attention to the analysis of
high-dimensional data and, in particular, to estimation on high-dimensional
spaces. Such spaces are often structured by either exhibiting constraints on
specific space components or by the incorporation of prior information
identifying co-dependence patterns between components in order to help carrying
out the inference. Given the recent predominance of discrete inference problems
in many influential fields, the investigator takes on the critically important
task of discrete estimation in high-dimensional settings and aims at laying
foundational principles upon which estimation and characterization of high-
dimensional discrete spaces can be efficiently performed and where structural
properties of the space are adequately taken into account. More specifically,
the PI explores estimators formally derived from statistical decision theory and
based on loss functions that more naturally capture the features of the discrete
space and are thus arguably better representatives of the ensemble. If the
discrete space is constrained, obtaining an efficient procedure for estimation
is of prime concern given the large size of the space; to this end, the PI also
proposes to develop a general framework that can be explored to design efficient
procedures for inference, assess the computational complexity of the proposed
estimation, and further derive approximation schemes when needed. In addition,
the investigator applies the proposed foundations to highlight important
features of the discrete space such as regions of high concentration of
probability mass, and studies a method to jointly elucidate features and
identify good subspace representatives.

Many problems from fields like genetics, social sciences, molecular biology, and
environmental studies can be casted as statistical inference problems on a large
number of unknowns. Even though modern, high-throughput technology has enabled
the collection of large datasets, these problems remain hard since the number of
parameters describing the data generating process grows with the number of
observations. In this setting, it is helpful to associate structure to the model
in order to guide the inference. The investigator studies novel, principled
estimators that address two issues under this high-dimensional regimen:
effectively capture structural relationships among variables in the model, and
efficiently derive solutions through computationally feasible routines. The PI
intends to implement and publish the resulting methods as open-source software
that benefits both academia and industry, and further fosters the development of
algorithms and practical implementations. Through this research project the PI
also intends to promote the integration of research and education by developing
new courses and raise awareness for statistical analysis of high-dimensional
data and inference on discrete spaces with state-of-the-art methods. Finally,
the PI expects to encourage collaborations between statisticians and researchers
from other fields and promote statistical methods in interdisciplinary areas.
