
* 1115654
* Funding for Graybill 2011 Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2011,03/03/2011
* Mary Meyer,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The statistics department at Colorado State University has hosted the Graybill
conference since 2001. The theme of the conference differs from year to year,
but the objective is to bring together researchers, practitioners, and graduate
students, in a relaxed and stimulating atmosphere focused on research and
applications. For the 2011 conference, the theme is ``Modern Nonparametric
Methods.'' The program consists of a workshop, invited plenary talks, and a
poster session. The intimate nature of the conference allows for concentrated
discussion and interaction among the participants, which can be especially
valuable for young researchers and graduate students. The conference will
continue the series of topical conferences co-sponsored by the ASA Section on
Nonparametric Statistics initiated in 2007, furthering the goal of establishing
a biannual conference tradition on a topic of interest to this important segment
of the statistical community.

The continued development of practical nonparametric and semiparametric methods
is crucial to the advancement of modern sciences, medicine, economics,
agriculture, environment or global change, health and medicine, and many other
fields. In many disciplines, the increasing availability of large amounts of
high quality data has outpaced the methods available to analyze them. Flexible
and robust tools such as modern nonparametric methods are increasingly necessary
to address many questions encountered in practice, so that continued research in
this area as well as education of future researchers will benefit the statistics
discipline as well as the many disciplines that rely on it.
