
* 1135257
* MCQMC 2012
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2011,08/04/2011
* Art Owen,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This project funds the travel expenses of US based researchers to the tenth
International conference on Monte Carlo and quasi-Monte Carlo methods, to be
held in Sydney Australia in February 2012. The meeting will consider advanced
methods for psuedo-random number generation, construction of low discrepancy
point sets, and complexity of algorithms. There will be tutorial sessions on
Monte Carlo, quasi-Monte Carlo and Markov chain Monte Carlo.

The Monte Carlo (MC) method is a computer based simulation using random number
generators. The name was given by atomic researchers in the 1940s who likened
their simulation methods to keeping score in a casino in order to learn some
odds. Monte Carlo methods are used in every branch of science and engineering
because they allow brute force computer power to be used on problems that are
too complicated to solve mathematically. Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) methods replace
simulated random numbers by strategically chosen ones. By leaving less to
chance, large improvements in accuracy are possible. MC and QMC methods are
widely applied in computer graphics to make animated movies and other images, in
computational finance to control risks, in statistical inference to separate
real findings from chance fluctuations, and in many other areas. Much of the top
QMC work is done in Europe, Asia, Canada and Australia. This conference will
bring together leading researchers from around the world to share results. This
project will support travel expenses of US based researchers to participate in
this exchange of knowledge. Two of the researchers to be supported are US
experts giving major(plenary) talks. Of the other researchers to be supported
priority will be given to academically young US researchers in the mathematical
sciences, especially postdoctoral students and junior faculty, but also
including PhD students.
