
* 1150435
* CAREER: Nonparametric methods in multiple dimensions: shape restrictions, bootstrap and beyond
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,07/01/2016
* Bodhisattva Sen,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,032.00

This proposal deals with some problems on estimation and inference using
nonparametric methods. Nonparametric procedures have become increasingly popular
in the theory and practice of statistics in recent times primarily because of
their fundamental advantages over parametric methods: greater flexibility and
more 'data-driven' features. In this proposal, the investigator studies three
core directions of statistical research in this area: (A) Nonparametric function
estimation under shape restrictions, (B) Dimension reduction using semi/non-
parametric techniques, and (C) Bootstrap based inference in non-standard
problems. The main motivation for this research is in developing nonparametric
procedures that are completely automated (free from tuning parameters, e.g.,
smoothing bandwidths) but still flexible enough to incorporate data-driven
features. A major part of this proposal deals with nonparametric methods
applicable to multivariate data, an area that has received relatively less
attention, though often felt to be necessary in performing real data analysis.

With the advancement in modern computing facilities and the explosion in
collection of large scale data sets, the use of more complicated/intricate
statistical procedures involving numerical optimization techniques are becoming
increasingly popular. However, a complete theoretical analysis of most of these
procedures is still largely unavailable. This research aims at understanding the
theoretical and computational aspects of some of these statistical procedures,
and quantifying the uncertainties involved in such stochastic optimization
problems. The intended applications of the proposed research are diverse,
ranging from detecting the advent of global warming, to estimating the radial
velocity distribution of stars in a galaxy, to developing inferential techniques
for binary choice models (of special interest to econometricians), and would
involve collaborations at different levels with statisticians, biostatisticians,
epidemiologists, econometricians and astronomers.
