
* 1150318
* CAREER: High-Dimensional Variable Selection in Nonlinear Models and Classification with Correlated Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2012,06/13/2016
* Yingying Fan,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Estimation and prediction with large-scale data sets commonly arise in
statistics and related fields and pose great challenges. To address these
challenges, four interrelated research topics are proposed for investigation.
First, the investigator proposes robust variable selection methods for heavy-
tailed data in the ultra-high dimensional setting of dimensionality increasing
exponentially with the sample size. To address the heavy-tailedness,
regularization methods with robust losses and general penalty functions in
various model settings are investigated. The risk properties of these methods
are studied and the optimality of penalty function and loss function is
characterized. Robust independence screening methods are also proposed and
studied. Second, variable selection in high-dimensional functional regression
models with functional predictors and/or functional response is investigated.
Model fitting procedures are proposed and sampling properties of the proposed
methods are thoroughly investigated. Third, the investigator studies the
regularization parameter selection in penalized empirical risk minimization in
both settings of correctly specified and misspecified models in ultra-high
dimensions. The appropriate tradeoff between the model fitting and model
complexity is characterized. This study also answers the question on whether
conventional model selection criteria such as AIC and BIC continue to work in
ultra-high dimensions. Fourth, high-dimensional classification with correlated
features is extensively studied under the unified framework of thresholding
classification rules, and the optimal choice of threshold that minimizes the
classification error is identified. The investigator studies Gaussian
classification and generalizes the methods and results to the case of correlated
discrete features.

Thanks to the advent of modern technologies such as the handwritten digital
recognition and single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping experiments,
massive data sets with a large number of variables are becoming more and more
common in various scientific fields such as computational biology, economics,
finance, machine learning, and climatology. How to effectively analyze these
data sets poses great challenges in both methodology and computation that are
not present in smaller scale studies. A major goal of this proposal is to
propose new or extended methodologies and investigate their sampling properties
in depth and width for high-dimensional model building and model evaluation in
various settings of regression and classification problems. The PI has broad
research interests in many fields outside statistics such as computational
biology, finance, econometrics, and machine learning. The proposed methods will
be tested on real data sets and extended to these different areas. In addition,
the PI plans to develop software packages to implement the proposed methods, and
make them publicly available. The proposed work will benefit a broad range of
scientists and researchers in various fields. The PI also plans to integrate
education activities with the proposed research, such as involving minority
students, undergraduate students, and graduate students in the proposed projects
and incorporating cutting-edge high-dimensional statistical methods into new
courses.
