
* 1159005
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Unified statistical theory for the analysis and discovery of complex networks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2012,03/29/2012
* Elizaveta Levina,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 206,579.00

The investigators will develop a unified nonparametric theoretical framework to
study stochastic network models and design scalable algorithms (and software) to
fit these models. They intend to carry out the development and validation of
their methods with collaborators in biology who have gathered extensive new data
for the assessment of protein structure and determination of biological pathways
particularly in Drosophila. Such problems are omnipresent in genomics and they
expect their methods to carry over widely. They will also use networks with
uncertainty measures to study relationships between words and phrases in a
newspaper database in order to provide media analysts with automatic and
scalable algorithms. In all cases they will focus on methods of general
statistical confidence which have been lacking in work so far.

Our world is connected through relationships, among "actors" who can be people,
organizations, words, genes, proteins, and more. Advancements of information
technology have enabled collection of massive amounts of data in all disciplines
for us to build relationships between these actors. These relationships can be
effectively described as networks, and properties or patterns in these networks
can be random or knowledge. Responding to this recent data availability and a
huge potential for knowledge discovery, research in networks is attracting much
attention from researchers in physics, social science, computer science, and
probability. While contributing to the development of core statistical research,
the proposed research will directly impact the interdisciplinary field of
network analysis and the study of complex networks. The applications of their
research results are diverse and well beyond the two fields studied in the
proposal: genomics and media analysis. They include national security,
communications, sociology, political science, and infectious disease. The
statistical tools developed are unifying and could change how many scientists
approach network analysis. As a result, statistical research will become more
prominent in the networks community.
