
* 1203076
* Travel Support for the 11th ISBA World Meeting on Bayesian Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2012,12/08/2011
* Vanja Dukic,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

In this application, the PI requests support for the World Meeting of the
International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA), to be held in Kyoto, Japan,
June 25-29, 2012. A central theme of the conference will be Bayesian modeling,
Bayesian theory, and applications. The applications will range from biology to
finance to technology, with specific focus on challenging large-scale problems.
The funds sought are to support the travel expenses of junior investigators,
i.e., persons pursuing a PhD or DrPH in statistics, biostatistics, applied
mathematics, or a closely related field, or who have received such a degree
within the five years preceding the conference. Such investigators are often
doing research that is among the most novel, interesting, and important for
international dissemination, yet lack the travel funds necessary to attend such
a conference, since they have not yet established a publication track record
sufficient to attract external travel and other funding for their work. Refereed
versions of the conference's best papers (both invited and contributed) will be
published in Bayesian Analysis, the official journal of ISBA (available online
at ba.stat.cmu.edu). Further disseminatation of conference-related materials
will be done as widely as possible, by posting some of the presentations on the
ISBA web site at www.bayesian.org.

Statisticians play an indispensable role in the analysis of biomedical,
environmental, financial, and public health data, from the study design stage
all the way through to final analysis and report-writing. Statisticians also
serve on a myriad of scientific review and advisory panels, as well as provide
statistical training and consulting to substantive area researchers. Finally,
the development of new statistical methodology for interpretation of data from
clinical, observational, and laboratory studies is a key area of statistical
endeavor. As a result, scholarly conferences where new ideas can be exchanged
are important for statistical science to move forward. International meetings --
like the World Meeting of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA)
-- while of course rarer due to their size and expense, are particularly
beneficial since they permit exposure to ideas and colleagues the attendee might
not ordinary see or even read about in the familiar journals of one's own
country. The benefit of and need for attendance at such meetings by junior
statistical researchers is particularly great, since they contribute greatly to
their professional development and help ``level the playing field'' with more
established senior investigators. The anticipated benefits from the conference
include promoting the continued development of statistical theory and
applications in engineering, finance, technology, environmental science,
biomedicine and other areas, and exploring the interplay of classical and
Bayesian statistical methods in the context of specific areas of research, with
particular emphasis on large-scale computation. Disseminatation of conference-
related materials will be done as widely as possible, by publishing in "Bayesian
Analysis", the official journal of ISBA available online at ba.stat.cmu.edu, and
posting some of the presentations on the ISBA web site at www.bayesian.org.
