
* 1203216
* Conference on Statistical Learning and Data Mining
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2012,12/05/2011
* Ji Zhu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2012
* USD 25,000.00

An international conference on "Statistical Learning and Data Mining" will be
held June 4-7, 2012 on the Ann Arbor campus of the University of Michigan. The
objective is to bring together researchers in statistical learning and data
mining from academia, industry, and government in a relaxed and stimulating
atmosphere focused on the development of statistical learning theory, methods
and applications. The conference will feature three plenary talks by
internationally prominent researchers whose work are cutting-edge in the field
of statistical learning and data mining. Eighteen invited breakout sessions,
each with three talks, will cover additional topics with great interest to the
field. These include Computational Advertisement, Function Estimation, High-
dimensional Methods, Structured Learning, Graphical Models, Learning Theory,
Model Selection, Covariance Estimation, Network Analysis, Computational Biology,
Signal and Image Processing and Data Mining Applications. There will also be
seven contributed paper sessions and two contributed poster sessions where
junior investigators and graduate students are expected to participate.

Statistical learning is a relatively new discipline, evolving from machine
learning methods of artificial intelligence and multivariate statistics. The
general goals of statistical learning are discovery, classification and
prediction, often in very high, effectively infinite, dimensional contexts. The
advent of powerful computers with accompanying massive data sets has brought the
discipline to the forefront of statistical theory and practice. The major goal
of the proposed conference is to present some of the most important recent
advances in the field and to discuss future research directions. A major part of
the conference focuses on bringing statistical research leaders together with
students, postdoctoral fellows, and young academics in a stimulating
environment. The funding from the NSF will mainly support graduate students and
junior researchers in American universities to attend the conference and present
either a talk or a poster. The conference is expected to accelerate interactions
and collaborations among researchers in the important area of statistical
learning and data mining, and thereby lead to the development of new and more
effective methods of modeling and inference.
