
* 1206522
* First Conference of the International Society for NonParametric Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/01/2012,02/14/2012
* Dimitris Politis,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2013
* USD 18,000.00

A 5-day international conference,``The First Conference of the International
Society for NonParametric Statistics'' is being planned to be held in Halkidiki,
Greece, June 15-19, 2012.

NonParametric Statistics is not a new subject. Nevertheless, it has become more
prominent in the 21st century since data have become abundant, and the computing
power to analyze them is generally available. The aim of the PI and his
collaborators is to bring together researchers from the U.S., Europe and other
parts of the world in order to foster research on nonparametric inference with
special emphasis on emerging fields such as: a) Nonparametric methodology for
high dimensional data. b) Bootstrap, Empirical Likelihood, and related methods.
c) Data depth and and related multivariate nonparametric methods. d) Dimension
reduction, model selection, and related methods. e) Nonparametric machine
learning. f) Nonparametric models for high dimensional mixed and random effects
designs. g) Empirical process and semiparametrics. h) Bayesian Nonparametrics.
i) Nonparametric methods for time series and Econometrics. j) Nonparametric
methods for spatial processes. k) Wavelets and nonparametric functional
estimation. l) Nonstandard Asymptotics in nonparametric inference.

The purpose of the conference is to facilitate the exchange of research ideas on
all actively growing areas of nonparametric statistics, thereb giving the
development of this important field of statistics a timely boost. This will also
be the first conference of the newly formed International Society for
NonParametric Statistics (ISNPS) whose mission is "to foster the research and
practice of nonparametric statistics, and to promote the dissemination of new
developments in the field via conferences, books and journal publications."
ISNPS has a distinguished Advisory Committee that includes R.Beran, P.Bickel, R.
Carroll, D. Cook, P. Hall, W. Hardle, R. Johnson, B. Lindsay, E. Parzen, P.
Robinson, M. Rosenblatt, G. Roussas, T. SubbaRao, and G. Wahba, as well as a
Charting Committee consisting of over 50 prominent researchers from all over the
world. In particular, theprogram will provide a forum for junior and senior
researchers alike to gain valuable experience interacting with leaders in their
respective sub-areas,and for building new collaborations between researchers in
Nonparametric Statistics from the US with researchers from all over the world.
