
* 1206464
* Statistical Inferences on Massive Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2012,04/25/2016
* Jianqing Fan,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

The proposal plans to develop novel statistical theory and methods for
processing massive data. Four interrelated avenues are proposed for theoretical
research and methodological developments: High-dimensional variable selection,
large covariance estimation, large-scale hypothesis testing, and nonparametric
statistical learning. In particular, novel statistical techniques are proposed
to answer the following important questions: how to screen genes and risk
factors with some acquired knowledge, what are the advantages of folded concave
penalized methods, how to estimate the benchmark for classifications and
regressions, how to deal with outliers, dependence data, and endogenous
measurements, how to use homogeneity of geographical neighborhoods to enhance
forecasting and inferences, how to assess uncertainty of risk measurements, how
to conduct sparse principal component analysis, how to control the false
discovery rates under arbitrary dependence, how to use nonparametric methods to
enhance the flexibility of high-dimensional statistical learning. In addition, a
novel statistical model, motivated from a financial economics theory, is
proposed for estimating large covariance matrices for better understanding risk
correlations and for better assessment of risks. The methods for testing the
presence of endogenous variables and the celebrated multifactor pricing models
are also presented and will be thoroughly investigated.

Massive data collections have become routine in exploring the frontiers of
science, in one case genomic studies and in another case measuring economic
risks. The proposed research will advance our knowledge on understanding
molecular mechanisms, biological processes, genetic associations, brain
functions, social networks, economic and financial risks, supply and demands,
and hence increase economic and global competitiveness. In addition, the
proposed novel statistical techniques can be applied to other biological and
engineering problems. The project will integrate research and education by
working closely with senior undergraduate students, graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, and increase the collaborations between academia and
industry by working closely with industrial partners and developing publicly
available computer code for processing massive data with sound theoretical
supports. The results will be disseminated broadly through presentations at
seminars, conferences, professional association meetings, and the internet.
