
* 1207771
* Mining structured tensor data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,04/01/2014
* Xiaotong Shen,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 200,165.00

Structured modeling situations, with multivariate data involving tensors, are
treated using constrained likelihood approaches, as an efficient means to
exploit lower-dimensional structure for high-order analysis. In gene network
analysis, for example, a constrained approach helps reveal gene-gene relations
in a context of multiple graphical models. Special attention is devoted to the
appropriate choice of the constraints for adaptation to a variety of structures.
The general theme of the proposed project is the development of statistical
methods of practical utility, both in prediction and estimation. In particular,
the proposed project develops methods for (a) multiple graphical models for
structure extraction, and for (b) high-order analysis of tensor data. The
proposed research is primarily motivated by challenging problems that arise in
gene network analysis and collaborative filtering, where one central issue is
how to leverage and utilize lower-dimensional structure to battle high
statistical uncertainty in a discovery process. New techniques are proposed and
investigated, both computationally and statistically, which target biomedical
and engineering problems. In (a) and (b), our effort will be on classification
and regression, and on structure adaptation through tensor decomposition and
factorization, with most effort focused towards condition specific extraction of
lower-dimensional structure.

Modern scientific and engineering investigation, as in biomedical research and
computer vision, now produces enormous data that aim to simultaneously explore
relations among hundreds and thousands interacting units. This project proposes
methods for treating the new scientific environment. The project develops
technology that is directly applicable to applied research, particularly in
automatic machine processing and data mining, biomedical research,
advertisement, and economics. Plans for technology transfer are described, in
addition to an educational program that will train students in statistical
learning and data mining. Educational activities include developing a course,
and attracting undergraduate students to research.
