
* 1207711
* Association, Regression and Diagnostic Accuracy Analyses of Competing Risks Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2012,08/29/2012
* Yu Cheng,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,935.00

Competing risks commonly occur in analyzing time-to-event outcomes with
composite endpoints. Due to dependent censoring imposed by competing events,
standard methods for dealing with usual independent censoring, such as censoring
imposed by time limits on the duration of observation, may not be applicable. In
this proposal, the investigator discusses two projects that address challenges
arising from the analyses of competing risks data. The first project aims to
quantify the association between two lung infection times using the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation registry data, where the event times are left truncated and
competing-risk censored. Conditional cause-specific hazard (CSH) functions and
conditional cumulative incidence function (CIFs) are considered to incorporate
left truncation. An extended Dabrowska method is proposed to estimate the
bivariate conditional survival function, and then used to estimate the bivariate
conditional CIF. Nonparametric association analysis is subsequently carried out
based on association measures that are quantified through conditional cumulative
CSH functions and CIFs. The goal of the second project is to explore an
important intrinsic relationship between CIFs in a regression setting, and
propose a flexible parametric regression model that explicitly takes into
account the additivity constraint on the CIFs. The parametric model adopts a
modified logistic model as baseline CIFs and a generalized odds-rate model for
covariate effects. This model explicitly takes into account the constraint that
a subject with any given prognostic factors should eventually fail from one of
the causes so the asymptotes of the CIFs should add up to one.

There is limited research on association analysis of bivariate competing risks
data and no prior work for left-truncated competing risks data, a common
situation when registry data are used to quantify the association between two
events of interest. Regression models based on CIFs have been well studied to
evaluate covariate effects on the event of interest in the presence of
competing-risk censoring. However, existing methods do not explicitly account
for the additivity constraint on CIFs, resulting in interpretation issues. The
proposed two projects address each of these methodological gaps and are expected
to enhance our understanding of the two areas. The proposed projects have been
motivated by real problems that the PI encountered in collaborations with
researchers from other areas, and are designed to address those practical
issues. The projects can be applied in such diverse fields as medicine, public
health, reliability studies in engineering, actuarial sciences and finance. The
PI is actively working with graduate students and expects some of them will get
involved with the proposed research for their dissertations. Hence the proposed
work will be naturally integrated with education through graduate student
advising and training.
