
* 1208841
* Collaborative Research: Prior-free probabilistic inferential methods for "large-p-small-n" linear regression problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2012,05/10/2013
* Chuanhai Liu,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 85,000.00

The investigators study prior-free probabilistic inference with "large p, small
n" regression analysis. This is made possible in the new framework of
Inferential Models (IMs) proposed recently by the investigators. Statistical
results produced by IMs are probabilistic and have desirable frequency
properties. In this study, the investigators develop IM-based methods for linear
and certain non-linear regression analysis. A sequence of topics in the context
of large-p-small-n regression to be investigated include (1) variable selection
in Gaussian regression models; (2) robust Student-t regression; and (3) binary
regression models.

Linear regression is one of the most commonly used methodologies in statistical
applications. However, desirable prior-free and frequency-calibrated
probabilistic inference, particularly in the important variable selection
context, has not been available until the recent development of IMs. The IM
framework provides a new and promising alternative to the well-known Bayesian
and frequentist methods for various high-dimensional problems researchers
currently face. In this study, the investigators develop new statistical methods
and computing software, generating useful tools for applied statisticians and
scientists who are challenged by very-high-dimensional data in carrying out
regression analysis.
