
* 1208952
* Collaborative Research: New Developments for Analysis of Two-way Structured Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Jianhua Huang,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,104.00

Most existing methodologies of functional data analysis are limited to data
structured in one domain, such as time. Two-way structured functional data are
indexed by two functional domains, such as space and time, and each domain has
its own notion of regularity, such as smoothness or sparsity. Fully considering
the two-way structure of the data will lead to more accurate analysis results.
Recent work by the lead PI on two-way regularization has provided some
preliminary results and a good starting point for investigating new methodology
of dimension reduction, feature extraction, regression and classification for
two-way functional data. This research team plans to further develop the
methodology for two-way functional data in several important directions:(a)
Develop a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space theory for two-way regularized
singular value decomposition (SVD); (b) Develop novel dimension reduction
methods for data that are indexed by general domains such as manifolds; (c)
Develop dimension reduction methods that effectively analyze discrete two-way
functional data; (d) Develop two-way regularization methods for solving the
magnetoencephalography (MEG) inverse problem; (e) Develop new classifiers for
diagnosis of mental disorders using dynamic MEG images as predictors; (f)
Develop robust methods that are resistant to outliers. The success of the
research will add a new dimension to functional data analysis and significantly
enrich the field.

Two-way structured functional data arise in various disciplines, including
medicine, social sciences, earth sciences, economics, and business. But few
existing methodologies fully take into account the two-way structure of this
type of functional data. The novel statistical methods developed in this
research will provide valuable tools for efficient use of such data. They will
provide better understanding of scientific, social and economic phenomena and
make more accurate predictions. In particular, the two-way reguarlized SVD
provides a new analysis of variance method for analyzing high throughput
bioinformatics data and for discovering interactions among biomarkers and
clinical variables that are associated with a disease phenotype. The new MEG
inverse solvers will facilitate noninvasive presurgical mapping of functional
areas of the brain. The new classifiers will help diagonosis and assessment of
mental diseases using dynamic MEG images. The proposed activities involve
training of Ph.D. students who participate in the proposed projects and
mentoring of the female, junior statistician P.I. in a psychology department.
Research results will be disseminated through collaborative work, academic
presentations, and journal publications. Web pages will be created to enable
quick access to user-friendly and accessible software implementations of new
methods as well as technical reports and relevant references.
