
* 1208771
* Novel statistical models for text mining with applications to Chinese history and texts
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,07/02/2014
* Jun Liu,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

In this project, the investigators study a series of challenging problems of
extracting information from Chinese text, including: (1) word/phrase discovery,
(2) text segmentation, (3) technical term recognition, and (4) association
discovery among technical terms. Different from alphabetical languages such as
English, Chinese has many special properties: no word boundaries, no clear
definition of words, traditionally no punctuation, and a unique grammar. Thus,
it is problematic to apply most methods developed for alphabetical languages
directly to Chinese. Moreover, the available methods for analyzing Chinese text
in the literature have many limitations. Instead the investigators propose an
advanced word dictionary model (AWDM) that can simultaneously achieve word
discovery, text segmentation and technical term recognition, which are
traditionally studied separately. The idea is to build up a word dictionary
first by enumerating all word candidates satisfying a certain criterion from the
texts and assign to each word candidate a latent word type label representing
different types of technical terms (such as names, addresses, office titles,
time labels, as well as background texts) and corresponding word usage
frequencies. Then, a Markov dependence model among different words and word
types is given to model the potential grammatical and semantic structure of the
texts. With the help of the training data (i.e., lists of known technical
terms), the AWDM can automatically select the most meaningful words from the
huge space of word candidates, determine the word type for each word based on
not only the content of the word but also the context around the word, and
segment the texts based on both grammatical and semantic information. Compared
to the existing methods in the literature, the AWDM enjoys a better efficiency
due to the joint modeling of the grammatical and semantic information and the
integrated analysis of word discovery, text segmentation and technical term
recognition. Combined with other text mining tools, such as topic models and
theme dictionary models, the proposed method will lead to a powerful multi-level
(Chinese character level, word/phrase level, theme level, topic level) analysis
platform for Chinese texts.

With the explosive growth of the internet and digital technologies, large
quantities of digitalized Chinese texts can be easily collected. For example,
lots of Chinese historical documents written in traditional Chinese are now
available in digital form; and, public media such as new papers, forums, blogs
and microblogs, are producing huge amounts of Chinese text every day. Thus there
is great appeal in developing text mining tools to automatically extract
information from these data and create new knowledge. The ideas and approaches
in this project may have significant impacts on how Chinese history will be
studied. An efficient and reliable method for extracting information from the
ever growing databases of digitized historical documents will enable researchers
to analyze change over time based on large numbers of disaggregated data points,
something impractical in the past. Furthermore, although originally designed for
Chinese, these approaches have the potential to be applied to other Asian
languages similar to Chinese, such as Japanese and Korean, and thus provide a
powerful multi-language platform for the study of Asian history. In addition,
the novel way of combatting the challenges in recognizing named entities studied
in this project also has the potential to be extended to alphabetical languages
such as English. Finally, the ideas and approaches studied in this project have
the potential to be generalized into a systematic tool that digests any data
flow of Chinese texts, and outputs a structured database that contains key
information about the individuals and organizations described by the input data,
thus making it easier for researchers to discover social network of all kinds of
"units" in our social life. Various item association patterns discovered by our
algorithms are also invaluable to the study of public media and sociology, and
may help reveal new important epidemiological events and societal trends in a
timely fashion. These types of information can have important implications in
business decision making and governmental policy making.
