
* 1208939
* Composite Estimating Function Approaches to GeoCopula Models for Complex Spatially Correlated Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,05/23/2012
* Peter Song,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Recent advances in technologies have given subject-matter scientists powerful
tools to conduct large scale experiments and collect complex spatially
correlated data. This proposal focuses on the development of statistical models
and methods of composite likelihood for analyzing such high-dimensional complex
data. In particular, the investigator plans to achieve three research goals: To
develop a unified framework of multivariate copula models with flexible and
desirable correlation structures for spatio-temporal data, spatial-clustered
data and spatial-network data; to develop a feasible and computationally
tractable estimation and inference methods as well as algorithms in the proposed
models; and to establish the large-sample theory for the proposed composite
estimating function (JCEF) estimator. All the proposed statistical models and
methods will be applied to analyze data from practical studies to facilitate the
understanding of subject-matter sciences and ultimately to improve human
knowledge and quality of life. The investigator has close connections with
researchers in other fields such as Epidemiology, Environmental Health Sciences,
Infectious Diseases and Policy in Transportation Safety at University of
Michigan. He has been working closely with these scientists who will serve as
local users of the methodologies and provide valuable feedback. The project is
also devoted to substantial educational initiatives that will involve
undergraduate and graduate students and expose them to state-of-the-art research
in various interdisciplinary topics related to the proposed research. These
include new courses, short courses at major conferences, summer workshops,
mentoring, and software development. These and other dissemination activities
will increase awareness of modern powerful methods for data analysis among
scientists from other fields.
