
* 1208994
* Collaborative Research: Estimation, Inference, and Computation for Finite Nonparametric Mixtures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2012,06/02/2014
* Michael Levine,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 86,537.00

This project aims to develop theory and methods for estimation of the functional
components and weights in the nonparametric multivariate finite mixtures. These
mixtures only assume that the components are drawn from some family of
multivariate density functions without any parametric specification. The
investigators, who are already active in this emerging area of research, adapt a
number of estimation methods that are known from finite parametric mixture
theory to the nonparametric context. The PI and the co-PI propose a number of
practically feasible and fast algorithms that can be used to compute the
resulting estimators in practice. Finally, both investigators show how to obtain
large-sample asymptotic results for the proposed estimators.

Finite nonparametric mixtures of distributions can provide answers to many
practically important questions. As an example, they can be used to help a
physician in establishing the definitive diagnosis in case of a complex medical
condition with a number of possible diagnoses. An example of such a situation is
a patient with a possible heart attack where other differential diagnoses are
also possible. Developmental psychology provides another useful example. Indeed,
study of cognitive development in children, in particular identification of
strategies used by children to accomplish various tasks, can also be modeled
easily using these mixtures. This has important implication for developmental
psychology, providing answers to many difficult questions faced by child
psychologists while helping children mature and develop in an optimal way. The
PI and the co-PI propose a number of efficient algorithms to estimate these
mixtures and accomplish the practical tasks mentioned above. These algorithms
will be publicly available and easy to use as part of the R software package
called mixtools.
