
* 1208959
* A New Paradigm in Joint Registration, Analysis and Modeling of Function Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,05/21/2012
* Anuj Srivastava,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The dual problems of registration and analysis of functional data are very
important in statistical analysis. They play important roles in applications
involving phase-amplitude separation of real-valued functions, shape analysis of
curves and surfaces, registration of 2D and 3D images, and analysis of
longitudinal data with values on nonlinear manifolds. The PIs develop a novel
framework that will lead to statistically consistent functional analysis and
will substantially improve algorithmic performances over the current methods.
The key novelty is to use Riemannian methods and distance-based objective
functions that are: (1) designed for measuring registration levels of functions
explicitly, (2) studied in the quotient spaces of functions modulo the
registration groups, and (3) formulated for ensuing statistical
analysis/modeling. Here one represents registration variability by actions of
the domain-warping groups on function spaces, chooses an appropriate Riemannian
metric (such that the group actions are by isometries) and studies novel
mathematical representations that enable statistical analysis under such
metrics. The main advantage is that both registration and analysis, e.g,
computation of mean, covariance, PCA, are performed jointly under the same
metric rather than the current practice of using sequential and disjoint steps.
Preliminary results on some subproblems including real-valued function
registration and shape analysis of curves are shown to be superior, both
empirically and theoretically, to the current approaches. The goal is to broaden
this research to a larger class of registration problems with similar
fundamental solutions.

High-dimensional functional data is becoming omnipresent in today's society and
one needs to nonlinearly align such observations in time and space, in order to
improve data analysis, statistical modeling, and inferences. This project
represents a multi-disciplinary effort that will develop both basic statistical
science and computational tools for registration of functional data. This, in
turn, will impact such data-rich applications as development of accurate growth
charts for children, gene expression analysis, face recognition using images and
videos, detection and evaluation of brain disorders (e.g. Alzheimer) using
medical images, and human activity recognition using surveillance video data.
The novelty and potential high returns of this project come from the variety of
tools utilized---from differential geometry and statistics to imaging science.
