
* 1208785
* Dense and Sparse Methods in High-Dimensional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2012,07/02/2012
* Lee Dicker,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 159,995.00

Many methods for high-dimensional data analysis begin with the assumption that
the parameter of interest is, in some sense, sparse. Furthermore, the
performance of many of these methods depends on the sparsity of the underlying
parameters. However, statistical methods for checking sparsity assumptions and
determining the implications of the absence or near-absence of sparsity are
lacking. The driving goal of this project is to develop practical statistical
tools for identifying situations where the relevant parameters are in fact
sparse, or where sparse methods for high-dimensional data analysis may be
applied effectively. Problems considered in this project will primarily be
studied within the context of the linear model and the Gaussian location model.
Methods will be assessed by decision theoretic-like criteria (e.g. asymptotic
minimaxity). A null model based on dense (non-sparse) signals and dense
estimation and prediction methods will be developed and thoroughly studied. This
will provide a rich framework for sparsity testing, where the aim is to identify
settings in which sparse methods are likely to be successful. Specific sparsity
testing procedures will be proposed and analyzed.

High-dimensional data analysis is one of the most active areas of current
statistical research. Much of this research has been driven by technological
advances that have enabled researchers to collect vast datasets with relative
ease in a variety of scientific disciplines, including astrophysics, geological
sciences, molecular biology, and genomics. In high-dimensional datasets, many
features are measured for each unit of observation (e.g. thousands of gene
expression levels may be measured for each individual in a genomic study).
Sparsity plays a major role in much of the research on high-dimensional data
analysis. Broadly speaking, sparsity measures the degree to which a specified
outcome may be described by relatively few features. Sparse methods for high-
dimensional data analysis attempt to leverage sparsity in the underlying dataset
and have proven to be very effective in many applications, especially in
engineering and signal processing. On the other hand, the performance of sparse
methods has been more mixed in other important applications where high-
dimensional data are abundant, such as genomics. In this project, the
investigator will develop statistical methods for characterizing and identifying
situations where sparse methods can be successfully applied. This will be
achieved by developing tools for determining the level of sparsity in high-
dimensional datasets. These methods, when applied to a given dataset, will help
researchers determine the validity of subsequent statistical analyses and the
potential benefits of using sparse methods for these analyses. This research is
likely to have significant implications for understanding reproducibility in
high-dimensional data analysis and broad applications in the analysis of genomic
data. The methods developed during the course of this project will be utilized
in collaborative work with highly experienced researchers in genomics.
