
* 1209136
* Collaborative Research: Numerical algebra and statistical inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,08/29/2014
* Lek-Heng Lim,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The investigators have two aims in this proposal that fall at the interface of
numerical algebra and statistical inference. The first aim is to extend the use
of randomized approximation in a variety of dimension reduction methods that
rely on numerical linear algebra both supervised and unsupervised as well as
linear and nonlinear and develop a statistical bases for these methods in
addition to the computational motivation of being applicable to massive data.
The other motivation is to extend these statistical methods for dimension
reduction to multiway data using numerical multilinear algebra, a recent new
development in numerical analysis. These projects will increase interaction
between statistical inference and numerical analysis and benefit both fields,
providing new perspectives to how we view and perform data analysis.

Numerical methods with statistical implications are central to a variety of
technologies used by the general population. These technologies include Google's
pagerank algorithm, genetic methods used to find genetic variation related to
disease, compressing of medical images for storage and treatment, as well as
applications in geostatistics. In all the previous cases the fundamental idea is
to condense massive data in a useful summary with respect to a desired goal. The
two ideas in this proposal are (1) to study how numerical methods that scale to
the massive data generated in modern scientific, engineering, and social
applications impose statistical assumptions or models on the data, (2) to study
more complex interactions or properties of the data than examined in current
methods. The motivation behind the first aim is to understand how numerical
approximations required for computational scaling as we collect more data impact
the information that can be extracted from these data -- for what type of data
and applications do certain numerical approximations work well. The motivation
behind the second aim is to go beyond the broad category of standard statistical
methods take into account the relation between pairs of objects -- two web pages
that are linked for Google's pagerank, the correlation between two genes or two
loci in genetics applications. The question behind this aim is whether richer
sources of information can be extracted by examining the links between three web
pages or three loci. The research involved in this aim consists of the
development of computationally efficient algebraic methods to extract this
information and understanding the statistical models implemented by these
methods.
