
* 1209226
* Functional Linear Models and Functional Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2012,09/03/2014
* Alexander Aue,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The proposed research provides innovative methodology for the statistical
inference for functional data with a focus on functional regressions and
functional time series. The investigators will thereby extend the range of
functional data analysis beyond the currently available models. This is relevant
because the proposed models arise in a natural way in a number of applications
such as engineering, geophysics, economics and finance. A characteristic common
to many functional data applications is the presence of dependence. The theory
of functional data, however, is as of today mainly focused on independent
processes with notable exceptions being given by the functional autoregressive
and linear processes. This proposal represents a comprehensive research plan for
developing new estimation and model selection methods for different classes of
functional linear and (novel) functional time series models. It contains the
following parts: (1) develop practical algorithms for partitioning a sequence of
functional data into subsequences of homogeneous curves, (2) develop methods for
parameter estimation for general functional autoregressive processes of known
orders, (3) develop automatic methods for selecting the order of a functional
autoregressive process, (4) apply model selection techniques to select best
fitting models in the fully functional linear model setting, (5) construct
estimation and model selection methods for the novel functional autoregressive
model with exogenous covariates, and (6) develop online monitoring procedure for
both functional linear and autoregressive models. This will require the
development of sophisticated new statistical methodology, requiring the
refinement and extension of the theory of (vector-valued) Hilbert space-valued
observations. The research will also include a significant innovative
computational component. To aid the dissemination of results, the investigators
plan to make the relevant software freely available via the Internet. Completion
of the proposal will give statisticians and practitioners new tools for
analyzing different forms of functional data.

The research in this proposal is interdisciplinary in nature, with applications
in diverse fields such as engineering (floodplain management), geophysics
(magnetic field readings of magnetometers), finance and economics (tick-by-tick
transaction data). The research is therefore of immediate interest for
practitioners and will further connect statistics and fields of science with a
significant statistical component. It will also advance mathematical and
computational statistics. The proposed research will produce doctoral students,
among them female and minority students, theoretically and practically versed in
both statistics and an area of application. The training and involvement of
undergraduate students in this research is also included through regular
coursework, independent study and projects.
