
* 1209057
* Dimension Reduction Through Index Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2012,05/21/2012
* Peter Radchenko,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 129,585.00

Historically statistics has dealt with extracting as much information as
possible from a small data set. However, much of modern statistical research
focusses on data sets that have enormous numbers of predictors. This phenomenon
is a direct result of recent technological advances that have affected various
fields of research, such as image processing, computational biology, and
finance. This proposal addresses a very important question of fitting nonlinear
regression models in high-dimensional situations, where the number predictors
may be much larger than the number of observations. Unlike linear or generalized
linear models, high-dimensional nonlinear regression is a very young research
area that requires systematic and extensive development. Due to the curse of
dimensionality, most of the work in this area has been conducted under the
assumption that the regression function has a simple additive structure. The
investigator proposes novel methodology for fitting index type regression models
in high dimensions. The new methods cover models that are either complimentary
or strictly more general than the additive models studied before. For each of
the methods the proposal presents a computationally efficient fitting algorithm
and lays out a plan for establishing theoretical results.

The proposed research is expected to have a broad impact on the practice and
education of statistics and related fields. Disciplines such as Computational
Biology, Finance, Marketing and Machine Learning are highly interested in the
type of methodology that is targeted in this proposal. The investigator plans to
systematically develop software for implementing the proposed methods through
free software packages and then make them readily available to researchers in
the aforementioned fields. The proposed research will also have an impact on the
growth and development of the new USC Statistics Ph.D. program. Several students
in this young program will be involved in methodology research, algorithm
development, and theoretical investigation. They will get hands on experience
and guidance in the very important field of high-dimensional statistical
inference.
