
* 1209017
* Multivariate Methods for High-Dimensional Transposable Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2012,05/30/2012
* Genevera Allen,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

High-dimensional data is prevalent in areas such as medicine, finance,
environmental studies, imaging, networking, and the Internet. Making sense of
this massive amount of data holds the key to critical scientific questions such
as discovering biomarkers related to disease and evaluating the effects of
climate change. The proposed research will use statistical learning techniques
to develop novel multivariate approaches incorporating sparsity (variable
selection), smoothness, and accounting for known structure in high-dimensional
data. Extending multivariate methods for structured data improves signal
recovery and feature selection. These techniques will be useful in spatio-
temporal and image data, for example, where strong correlations from known
structure obscure dimension reduction. Much attention has been given to
multivariate methods for matrix data. The proposed research will extend many
modern multivariate techniques such as sparse principal components analysis to
the multi-dimensional or tensor framework. Finally, this proposal seeks to
generalize much of the existing literature on regularized multivariate methods
such as principal components analysis, canonical correlations analysis and
linear discriminant analysis by illustrating how to encourage many types of
regularization. This proposal also seeks to develop algorithmic and
computational frameworks that will allow researchers to apply these methods to
modern massive data sets.

As multivariate analysis techniques enjoy nearly universal application, the
theory and methods developed in this proposal will have wide ranging
significance in many applied fields. The methods developed are in part motivated
by and will have immediate impact in neuroimaging studies, cancer genomics, and
metabolomics studies. Other areas where this methodology will prove beneficial
include climate studies, remote sensing, networking, engineering, finance, and
imaging. Results of this research will be disseminated through the release of
open-source, publicly available software and will be incorporated in course
material of an advanced graduate course on statistical learning.
