
* 1209023
* Statistical methods for screening individual childhood growth paths
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2012,09/11/2012
* Ying Wei,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

Pediatric growth charts have been widely used in clinics and medical centers to
monitor the growth of infants, children, and adolescents to compare individual
values with the reference population. The existing methods focus on screening of
a single measurement at a fixed time. As infants and children are often followed
up regularly to ensure normative growth, each child usually exhibits a growth
path. The main objective of the proposed research is to develop statistical
methods to construct growth charts for screening individual growth paths. The
key challenge here is to rank the underlying growth paths, which are only
observed limited number of times with varying measurement time spacings. Two
potential approaches are proposed. The first one obtains a lower dimensional
approximation of growth paths, and ranks the individual growth paths based on
their projection scores in this lower space. The second one defines statistical
depth for growth paths, which in turn provides a ranking of individual paths.
For both approaches, the investigators will study their theoretical properties,
such as consistency, convergence rate, and asymptotic distributions, and develop
related inference tools. As growth data are often collected nation wide, they
have large sample sizes. To make the proposed methods feasible in practice,
computing time is a critical issue. Therefore, the investigators also plan to
develop fast algorithms for both methods to improve the computational
efficiency. In addition, as shown in previous studies, covariate-adjusted
methods can effectively enhance screening performance. For example, parental
information plays a significant role in children's growth. The investigators
will extend the developed methods for the two approaches to incorporate
covariate information. Overall, the statistical methods to be employed for this
proposal cover: statistical methods for growth chart construction, longitudinal
data analysis, functional data analysis, singular value decomposition and
principal component analysis, statistical depth, quantile regression,
nonparametric and semi-parametric modeling, and mixed effect models.

The proposed research will produce broad interdisciplinary contributions.
Although the study was motivated by pediatric growth screening, the applications
of the proposed methods certainly go beyond that. Both the PI and the co-
investigator have been involved in various collaborative projects in
epidemiology, HIV research, genetics, cancer research and environmental science.
Growth data can be viewed as varying-location longitudinal data, which commonly
exist in those applications. Hence, the proposed methods can lead to more
accurate and more comprehensive approaches for problems in these areas of
research. Additionally, the general methodologies to be developed are of
definite statistical importance and have not been studied satisfactorily to
date. The research plan described in this proposal has both broad methodological
and applied merits. The results obtained from this project are expected to be
widely disseminated through publications in international scientific journals in
statistics, public health and medicine, presentations in domestic and
international conferences, seminar talks in universities, and collaborations
with clinical researchers. The investigators plan to develop new courses related
to quantile regression and data depth, and part of the course materials will be
based on the proposed research. In addition, the investigators also believe that
an important way of disseminating new methodology is to provide easily available
and user-friendly computer software. The proposed methods will be implemented as
an R package which will be freely available on-line.
