
* 1209124
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Analysis of Fracture Network for Shale Gas Development and Its Environmental Impact
* DMS,STATISTICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG
* 09/01/2012,08/12/2013
* Guan Qin,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Hydraulic fracturing stimulation is one of the key technologies in shale gas
development. Though it has been widely used in oil and gas industry for many
years, it remains a great challenge to quantitatively characterize the hydraulic
fracturing induced fracture network in shale gas development due to the complex
shale gas formation and the lack of observational data. Consequently, it is
extremely difficult to evaluate and predict its efficiency and environmental
impacts. In this collaborative research project the investigators study the
hydraulic stimulation induced fracture network through advanced statistical
analysis and mathematical modelling. Armed with micro-seismic data and
production yield curve, they develop a statistical dynamical system for the
fracture network, mimicking the network formation process under imposed
hydraulic pressure. A Bayesian framework is used for parameter inferences,
utilizing prior knowledge of the geological structure of the field under study.
A mathematical subsurface flow model and an advanced numerical method, the sub-
region method, is used to link a given fracture network to the production yield
curve, providing vital information of the unobservable fracture network
underground.

By combining creative statistical analysis with advanced mathematical modelling
and numerical method, the project addresses a very challenging application with
important national interests. The project yields a better understanding of the
hydraulic stimulation process, provides useful guidance for control and
optimization of hydraulic fracturing process as well as assessing its
environmental risks and consequences. Such knowledge helps policy makers to make
more informed decision and more accurate cost analysis. The project spans both
research and education aspects, including training of undergraduate, doctoral
and post-doctoral students in interdisciplinary research, crossing the boundary
of statistical analysis and numerical analysis, on an important application. The
resulting software, available in public domain, will be used as an educational,
research, and engineering tool well beyond the project duration.
