
* 1209161
* Bayesian Methods for Socio-Spatial Point Patterns and Networks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2012,09/11/2012
* Catherine Calder,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

This project seeks to make contributions to statistical science in the areas of
spatial statistics, network analysis, and Bayesian parametric and nonparametric
modeling. Underlying the methodological aspects of the research is a particular
area of application, contextual effects and exposure analysis research.
Statistical methodology will be developed to improve the ability to characterize
human activity patterns and social networks using state-of-the-art large-scale
sample survey data. Specific contributions include the development of novel
Bayesian stochastic models for multivariate spatial point patterns based on
dependent nonparametric latent intensity functions. Statistical models will also
be developed for spatially-referenced social networks; these models describe
relational ties based on proximity in a random deformation of geographic space.
Both classes of models will be thoroughly studied from both a theoretical and
empirical perspective.

The statistical research focus of this project is deeply rooted in an area of
application bridging the social, geographic, and health sciences. Research on
contextual effects aims to understand the consequences of social and
environmental exposures on individual outcomes. Efforts to quantify the
influence of the multiple contexts to which individuals are exposed are limited
due the inherent complexities of existing data sources, as well as those
currently being collected using state-of-the-art GPS-based technologies. This
project aims to overcome these data challenges by introducing novel statistical
methods and is expected to contribute generally to the field of statistics, as
well as the motivating area of application. Educational and training components
of the project will reflect this multidisciplinary research setting.
