
* 1209014
* STATISTICAL INFERENCE WITH HIGH-DIMENSIONAL DATA
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2012,03/29/2012
* Cun-Hui Zhang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 357,024.00

The proposed research will develop new methodologies and algorithms for
statistical inference of low-dimensional parameters with high-dimensional data.
A low-dimensional projection estimator will be further developed in linear
regression and extended to more general high-dimensional statistical models,
including generalized linear models, the proportional hazards model, large
matrix models and more. The project will investigate consistency and asymptotic
normality of the proposed estimators, test of significance, confidence intervals
and regions, their efficiency in terms minimum Fisher information, and their
tolerance to multiplicity adjustments. This research will directly connect the
fields of semi-parametric methods and high-dimensional data, producing a locally
uniform and efficient framework of statistical inference.

High-dimensional data is an area of intense current interest in statistical
research and practice due to the rapid development of information technologies
and their applications to modern scientific experiments. Important fields with
an abundance of high-dimensional data include bioinformatics, signal processing,
neural imaging, communications networks and more. In many such scientific and
engineering applications, the number of unknowns, and thus the complexity of the
problem, is a function of the number of features: genetic components in
bioinformatics, brain regions or voxels in neural imaging, or computers and
routers in the Internet. A longstanding challenge in high-dimensional data is
statistical inference in situations where the number of features is far greater
than the number of samples in the data. Existing methodologies for testing the
significance of a feature commonly rely on a uniform signal strength assumption:
Each feature has either no effect or an effect stronger than an inflated noise
level after adjustments for the uncertainty of the set of effective features.
However, this uniform signal strength assumption is, unfortunately, seldom
supported by either the data or the underlying science, especially in
applications in biology, medicine, and communication and social networks. The
proposed research will focus on a new approach to the above mentioned
longstanding problem of statistical inference with high-dimensional data. It
will develop practical methods, efficient algorithms, statistical software, and
solid theory for test of significance and confidence regions for low-dimensional
functions of features, even when the dimension of data is high. The
methodologies developed in the proposed research will be directly relevant to
common applications where modern information technologies prosper.
