
* 1209103
* Bayesian Computation, Guaranteed Efficient (or Intractable)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2012,06/10/2014
* Dawn Woodard,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This research and education program will characterize and reduce the error
associated with Markov chain and other computational methods in Bayesian
statistics. The introduction of simulation-based computational methods has
allowed the field of Bayesian statistics to dramatically expand; despite this,
the biggest challenge for its wider adoption is still its computational
difficulty. Understanding of the error associated with Bayesian computational
methods has lagged far behind their use, and in some cases all available methods
are too inefficient. The goals of this project are (1) distinguish classes of
computationally tractable Bayesian models from those of computationally
intractable models, (2) develop methods for guaranteed efficient computation for
tractable models, and (3) introduce alternatives to intractable models that
allow efficient computation. Tractability means that there exists a
computational method that scales efficiently with the number of parameters,
observations, or other statistical quantities. For motivation and application of
the techniques, statistical problems arising in management of commercial and
nonprofit operations will be used; case studies include Emergency Medical
Services operations and (distributed computing) data-center operations.
Statistical challenges in these contexts include estimation on road networks and
fine-scale spatio-temporal demand estimation.

When statistics are used to guide business, engineering, or public policy
decisions, for instance, there may be large amounts of information and data from
different sources that have to be drawn together to inform those decisions.
These large and various sources of information must be analyzed in a way that
does not require a large amount of computing time. This program advances
understanding regarding what analyses we can expect to be able to do quickly; it
develops more efficient computational methods for those analyses; and in the
case of analyses that are simply too time-consuming it develops easier
alternatives. Case studies and scientific approaches from this project will be
incorporated into the classroom, and Master's and Ph.D. students will be an
integral part of the research process.
