
* 1209112
* Statistical inference for gene regulation with genetical genomic data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2012,04/04/2014
* Yuehua Cui,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 208,886.00

Genetical genomics, the combined analysis of genetic and gene expression data,
holds great promise in elucidating gene regulation and predicting gene networks
associated with complex phenotypes. In this project, the investigators aim to
develop novel statistical inference procedures and computational tools to
understand different gene regulation mechanisms such as cis- and trans-
regulation, nonlinear regulation as well as joint regulation of multiple genes
from a systems biology perspective. Both parametric and nonparametric inference
procedures which incorporate pathway or gene set information are developed to
identify novel regulators and to gain novel insights into gene regulation
underlying developmental diversity. Statistical tests in a high-dimensional
nonparametric regression, and penalized and empirical likelihood methods in
semi-parametric models are proposed while their asymptotic distributions are
evaluated. Dense SNP genotype and next-generation RNA-Seq data are combined
under the proposed framework while accounting for the discrete nature of the
sequence mapping reads.

The genetic bases of complex traits often involve multiple inherited genetic
factors that function in a network basis. Gene regulation is thought to play a
pivotal role in determining trait variations by promoting or reducing the
expression of functional genes directly or indirectly related to the phenotype.
Drawing on methodology from statistics, genetics and systems biology, this
project contributes to knowledge about gene regulation by providing biologically
meaningful statistical infrastructures: developing novel statistical devices to
handle various complexities in genetic and gene expression data (e.g., RNA-seq),
and incorporating pathway information to enhance model biological relevance. The
developed models have particular power to attack long-standing genetic questions
regarding the interplay between gene expression and regulation. The success will
greatly advance the discovery of novel genes, regulators and pathways to
facilitate identification of drug targets to enhance public health, and help
animal and plant breeders to improve trait quality. Computational tools are made
available for public use free of charge. The research is integrated into
education to train new generations in statistical genetics, and is widely
disseminated through publications, presentations, online software and
collaborations with biologists.
