
* 1219417
* Workshop on Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/01/2012,02/14/2012
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2013
* USD 20,000.00

The workshop Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND6) is planned for May
31-June 2, 2012 at the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, run jointly by
Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh. SAND6 will bring
together neurophysiologists, statisticians, physicists, and computer scientists
who are interested in quantitative analysis of neuronal data. There will be 5
scientific sessions, at which 8 keynote investigators and 16 junior
investigators will speak. There will also be a poster session. Authors will be
encouraged to submit papers to the Journal of Computational Neuroscience.

SAND6 is the sixth workshop in a series that began in 2002. The workshops are
held in even years during the spring at the Center for the Neural Basis of
Cognition, run jointly by Carnegie Mellon University and the University of
Pittsburgh. The objectives of the workshop are to define important problems in
neuronal data analysis and useful strategies for attacking them; foster
communication between experimental neuroscientists and those trained in
statistical and computational methods; and provide further dissemination of the
findings presented at the workshop via a set of peer-reviewed articles.
Secondary objectives are to encourage young researchers, including graduate
students, to present their work; expose young researchers to important
challenges and opportunities in this interdisciplinary domain, while providing a
small meeting atmosphere to facilitate the interaction of young researchers with
senior colleagues; and include as participants women, under-represented
minorities and persons with disabilities who might benefit from the small
workshop environment.
