
* 1237234
* Efficient Modeling in Quantile Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2011,08/06/2012
* Xuming He,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 346,244.00

Quantile regression has in recent years emerged successfully as a powerful
supplement to the more conventional least squares regression. By modeling the
conditional quantile functions, the researchers are often able to gain a much
more comprehensive picture of how a response variable is associated with its
covariates. The prevailing approach in quantile regression is to perform
analysis of the conditional quantile functions one percentile level at a time.
This approach offers great modeling flexibility at the cost of statistical
efficiency. The Principle Investigator proposes to develop and study new
approaches to efficient modeling of conditional quantile functions. By
"borrowing strength" across neighboring quantiles and utilizing a Bayesian
empirical likelihood approach, the investigator aims to advance the theory,
methodology, and applications of efficient quantile regression. Efficiency gain
is an important consideration of any statistical research, and the proposed
modeling techniques are especially helpful in the analysis of quantiles in the
data-sparse areas. The Bayesian empirical likelihood approach for quantile
regression can be used in conjunction with optimal weighting for semiparametric
efficiency, and with Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling for effective computation
in a high dimensional parameter space.The proposed models, to be called semi-
local quantile models, strike to balance bias and variance; when the models do
not hold exactly, the proposed estimators follow the spirit of regularization.

Inference in data-sparse areas, including but not restricted to the analysis of
high tails, is highly valuable in a wide range of scientific and social studies.
The proposed research is motivated by the investigator's interdisciplinary
research in climate studies and public health, and will provide researchers in
statistics and other fields novel tools for better understanding and quantifying
relationships between measurements. The proposed activities include new
opportunities for graduate students to participate in transformative research,
and will enable the investigator to continue integration of research with
teaching and mentoring. The investigator pursues active academic exchanges
through lecturers and collaborations, and free distribution of software, for
broad dissemination of the research results.
