
* 1244556
* New Theory and Methodology for Large-Scale Multiple Testing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/31/2011,07/15/2012
* Wenguang Sun,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 163,344.00

Large-scale multiple testing is an important and rapidly growing area in modern
Statistics. The proposed research focuses on new theories, methodologies and
computational algorithms to address the fundamental questions and new challenges
in this field. The investigator develops new concepts, data-driven schemes and
solid theories that promise to improve the statistical efficiency and lay the
foundation for simultaneous inferences in large-scale studies, especially when
heterogeneity, dependence and other complex structures are present. The major
components of the proposed research include: (i) the concept of simultaneously
incorporating statistical significance and effect size in multiple testing and a
new approach to identifying large non-null effects in heteroscedastic models;
(ii) the strategy of exploiting spatial dependency and a new approach to testing
correlated hypotheses in a hidden Markov random field; (iii) the strategy of
grouping hypotheses in sets and a new approach to testing the significance of
multiple groups of important variables; and (iv) the concepts of discovery
boundary and effective screening, and a data-driven approach to reducing
dimensionality by constructing subsets that are optimal in size and adaptive to
unknown sparsity.

The proposed research has significant impact on many scientific applications
such as genome-wide association studies, time-course microarray experiments,
disease mapping in environmental studies, climate modeling, and medical imaging
studies. The multiple testing and screening methods outlined in the proposal
will improve the quality of simultaneous decision-making in complicated
situations, yield more interpretable and reproducible scientific results, lead
to great savings in costs in large-scale investigations, and hence help achieve
the ultimate goal of understanding the underlying mechanisms in complex systems
or human diseases in a precise, fast and cost-effective way. User-friendly
software will be developed and made freely available for public use. Research
results will be disseminated through publications, seminars and workshops. The
investigator is committed to encouraging the participation of under-represented
groups in science, and to integrating the proposed research into educational
activities through developing new courses, and through mentoring and training
students to work on the frontiers in Statistics with important health science
applications.
