
* 1254840
* CAREER: New Directions in Spatial Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2013,07/01/2014
* Debashis Mondal,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2015
* USD 152,239.00

The de Wijs process (also known as the Gaussian free field in statistical
physics) is a fundamental spatial process that arises as the scaling limit of
lattice based Gaussian Markov random fields and generalizes Brownian motion in
two-dimensions. However, at present, there is a wide gap between the theory of
Gaussian free field (including the subsequent theory of random fields) in
statistical physics and modern probability, and the current practice of spatial
statistics via lattice based Gaussian Markov random fields. Thus, there is great
need to bridge this gap to develop a principled framework for statistics and
inference of spatial models and to pursue novel computations that make such
inferences feasible. This project will consider formulating appropriate
functionals of the de Wijs process to construct useful random fields and novel
matrix-free computations via conjugate gradient and other methods, and will
focus on developing new areas of scientific applications. The proposed research
will also shed new light on and allow deeper understanding of theoretical and
computational issues discussed by many researchers in spatial statistics in the
past decades. Novel matrix-free computations will provide further impetus to
study parametric bootstrap methods and multi-scale modeling, and to construct a
new class of non-Gaussian random fields. The project will contribute to
obtaining enhanced scientific understanding in studies of environmental
bioassays, arsenic contamination of groundwater and distributions of galaxies.

Advances in the field of spatial statistics are important because new
statistical methods can be applied to a wide range of scientific questions in
fields such as astronomy, agriculture, biomedical imaging, computer vision,
climate and environmental studies, epidemiology and geology. The de Wijs process
is one fundamental spatial process that generalizes Brownian motion from time to
space. Using the de Wijs process as a fundamental building block, this project
will develop novel mathematics and derive fast, efficient and large-scale
statistical computations so that various scientific questions can be answered in
a practical way. This will lead to new developments for the analysis of
continuum spatial data and spatial point patterns, and will allow us to obtain
enhanced scientific understanding in studies of environmental bioassays, arsenic
contamination of groundwater and distributions of galaxies. The statistics and
the computations that will be developed in this project will also be
particularly relevant for various research problems that arise in environmental
or global change, and in health studies. Finally, this project will integrate
research and educational activities through the development of new graduate and
undergraduate courses and will also provide valuable training and learning
opportunities for students at graduate and undergraduate levels.
