
* 1255406
* CAREER: Simultaneous and Sequential Inference of High-dimensional Data with Sparse Structure
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2013,06/09/2017
* Wenguang Sun,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,001.00

The accurate and reliable recovery of sparse signals in massive and complex data
has been a fundamental question in many scientific fields. The discovery process
usually involves an extensive screening through a large number of hypotheses to
separate signals of interest and also recognize their patterns. The situation
can be described as finding needles of various shapes in a haystack. Despite the
enormous progress on methodological work in data screening, pattern recognition
and related fields, there have been little theoretical studies on the issues of
optimality and error control in situations where a large number of decisions are
made sequentially and simultaneously. These issues are among the central topics
in modern Statistics; hence it is imperative to develop solid theory and
powerful data-driven methods to help understand, regulate and optimize the
dynamic decision process of sparse signal and pattern recovery. The specific
research goals in this proposal are: to study the optimality theory and develop
data-driven methods for a broad class of interrelated problems in signal
detection, multiple testing and pattern classification; to develop a dynamic
scheme for data acquisition, resource allocation and decision making for
effective and accurate signal recovery; and to develop a compound decision
theoretic framework for large-scale simultaneous and sequential inference. The
data screening and pattern recognition problems may arise from a wide range of
scientific applications such as bioinformatics, finance, signal and language
processing, image analysis, and geographical and astronomical surveys. These
problems have significantly contributed to the rapid growth of a new and active
interdisciplinary research area in data mining that has attracted substantial
interests from applied mathematicians, statisticians and computer scientists.
The proposed research provides important insights on some fundamental issues in
these problems such as how the size of large data sets can be reduced
significantly without losing many signals, how the signals can be separated from
noise optimally, how the shapes and patterns of different objects can be
recognized accurately, and how the inflation of errors in a large number of
decisions can be controlled effectively. User-friendly software will be
developed and made freely available for public use. The investigator will
integrate the proposed research into educational activities through developing
new courses for the young USC Statistics program, and through mentoring and
training both undergraduate and graduate students to help them participate
effectively in an information era overwhelmed by massive data.
