
* 1255187
* CAREER: Bringing richly structured Bayesian models into the discrete-data realm via new data-augmentation theory and algorithms
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2013,06/29/2017
* James Scott,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The modern Bayesian toolbox contains many highly structured models tailored for
continuous data. These tools allow us to handle data sets that are not merely
large, but also dense: varying in time or space, rich with covariates, or deeply
layered with hierarchical structure, and indexed in ever more baroque ways. But
the field has not progressed nearly as far in modeling discrete data. Indeed,
many common discrete-data models have long been viewed as too difficult to work
with on a routine basis, due to the analytically inconvenient form of the
likelihood functions that arise. The investigator will develop inferential tools
for discrete-data problems that exploit new data-augmentation schemes as well as
recent advances in parallel and distributed computing.

Discrete data sets typically involve either event-count or categorical outcomes
(yes or no, this choice or that). The goal of the investigator's research is to
leverage detailed spatial information to better model and predict these
outcomes. In many cases this will involve physical space. For example, spatial
patterns are very important when public health authorities look for excess
reports of respiratory infection at a cluster of hospitals, or when law-
enforcement officers deploy equipment that detects radiation anomalies at a
crowded public event. But it may also involve a more abstract notion of space.
For example, patients in a clinical trial can be located in a space defined by
their genes and behavior. This information is useful for personalized medicine:
that is, deciding whether someone belongs to a special sub-group that is helped
by a drug, even if the wider population isn't. Though the proposed research is
in the area of statistical methodology, the work is inherently
interdisciplinary, and seeks to provide statistical solutions for pressing
scientific problems. The PI has very good ideas how to transform the education
of statistics in a more interdisciplinary and more data oriented way so that UT-
Austin can become "one of the most innovative statistics programs in the world"
as the PI writes. His research is integrated into the education of the new
Division of Statistics and Scientific Computation (SSC) at UT-Austin.
