
* 1301845
* 15th IMS New Researchers Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2013,03/26/2013
* Aarti Singh,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The proposed meeting will take place over three days, August 1-3, 2013, at the
Centre de recherches mathematiques in Montreal. This proposal describes plans
for the 15th New Researchers Conference, a conference series organized by and
held for junior researchers under the auspices of the Institute of Mathematical
Statistics (IMS). The primary objective is to provide a much needed venue for
interaction among new researchers in statistics and probability. The proposed
meeting will take place over three days, August 1-3, 2013, at the Centre de
recherches mathematiques in Montreal. The meeting will be held immediately
preceding the Joint Statistical Meetings (JSM). Participants will be
statisticians and probabilists who have received their Ph.D. within the past
five years or are expecting to receive their degree within the same year. Each
participant will present a short expository talk and a poster. Topics will cover
a variety of areas in statistics and probability, from theory and methods to
applications. Senior speakers will give plenary talks for inspiration and take
part in four discussion panels covering topics of importance for young people
embarking on an academic/research career: teaching, mentoring, publishing and
funding. This conference series is explicitly aimed at training the future
leaders and workers in statistics and probability. In helping to create networks
of new researchers, it lays the groundwork for future collaboration and informal
exchange of ideas and knowledge. It is also critical for building professional
cohesion within the fields of statistics and probability and setting new
frontiers for research. Meeting people outside of one's research specialty area,
and learning about their research, favors a more comprehensive view of research,
which is important when taking editor positions and other professional service
activities. The conference attracts participants with different backgrounds and
nationalities, and underrepresented groups (women, minorities and people with
disabilities) are explicitly encouraged to attend. The conference website is
available at http://www.math.mcgill.ca/nrc2013.
