
* 1305474
* Analysis of Longitudinal or Multivariate Data with Nonignorable Missing Values
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2013,09/05/2013
* Jun Shao,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 180,001.00

In many statistical applications, some data from sampled units are missing
because of various reasons. In most survey problems, some sampled units
cooperate in the survey but fail to provide answers to some or all survey items.
In medical or health studies, data are often longitudinal and many patients drop
out before the end of the study. The rates of missing data in surveys or medical
studies are often appreciable, especially when data are longitudinal and/or
multivariate (e.g., many questions in a survey). When data missing depends on
observed data only, the missingness mechanism or propensity is called ignorable.
Otherwise, missing data are nonignorable. There is a rich literature on
methodology for handling ignorable missing data. Nonignorable missing data are
much more difficult to handle compared with ignorable missing data, since
missingness propensity depends on unobserved values and, thus, model fitting is
very challenging. For example, assumptions have to be imposed to ensure the
identifiability and estimability of unknown quantities and these assumptions
cannot be checked using data because of the presence of missing values. The
proposed research focuses on estimation and inference based on longitudinal or
multivariate data with nonignorable missing values. The investigator studies
three general topics. (1) When missing data are nonignorable, applying existing
methods developed for the case of ignorable missing data leads to biased
estimators. Research is needed to derive approximately unbiased and consistent
estimators for parameters of interest. Under some assumptions on the missingness
propensity and/or the data distribution for the case of no nonresponse, the
investigator studies several approaches for constructing asymptotically valid
estimators. These approaches are all semiparametric and make use of a covariate
that helps to identify parameters under nonignorable missingness (and is
therefore named as a nonresponse instrument). Adopted estimation methods include
pseudo likelihood, estimating equations, generalized method of moments, data
transformation, approximate conditional likelihood, imputation, and some
techniques of handling measurement errors. For survey data, the model-assisted
approach is adopted. (2) In addition to the bias and consistency, the
investigator studies the asymptotic efficiency of estimators. For longitudinal
or multivariate data with nonignorable missing values, it is difficult to make
use of observed data from units having incomplete data. Efforts will be made to
use more or all observed data. (3) Most surveys require a variance estimator for
each survey estimator for the purpose of error assessment. Statistical inference
such as setting confidence sets also requires variance estimators. A basic
requirement for variance estimators is their approximate unbiasedness and
consistency. In each proposed research topic, the investigator studies variance
estimation after a valid estimator is derived, using methods such as
linearization, substitution, or resampling.

Since the proposed research topics are motivated by problems in survey agencies
such as the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Statistics
Canada, or by data sets in medical and health studies, results obtained from
this proposed research will have significant impact on the methodology of
handling missing data and variability estimation. Since research on nonignorable
missing data, especially for multivariate or longitudinal data, is far from
complete, results from this proposal will shed light on further scientific
research in this area.
