
* 1305858
* Statistical Inference for Functional and High-Dimensional Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2013,08/09/2015
* Lajos Horvath,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,999.00

The proposed research provides novel methodology for the statistical inference
of functional and high-dimensional time series with a focus on multi-sample
functional data and panel data. The investigators thereby extend the range of
functional data analysis beyond the currently available models. This is relevant
because the proposed models have a number of important applications in economics
and finance, geophysics and engineering. A characteristic common to many
functional data applications is the presence of dependence. The theory of
functional data, however, is as of today mainly focused on independent processes
with notable exceptions being given by the functional autoregressive and linear
processes. This proposal represents a comprehensive research plan for developing
an extended tool-kit for the analysis of functional and high-dimensional time
series data. It contains the following parts:development of fully functional
tests for independence and stationarity, and diagnostic tests that do not
require dimension reduction; advancement of functional principal component
analysis by taking into account that different operators should be used under
the null and alternative hypothesis and by providing novel theory for the case
of an increasing number of principal components; introduction and development of
the theoretical foundation of the concept of functional analysis of variance,
including procedures to cluster functional time series observations into groups;
advancement of the methodology of panel data to more general models, explicitly
allowing for the high-dimensionality of the observations but notably not
requiring stationarity of the panels; and the breaking of new ground by
combining functional series with high-dimensional time series methodology. This
requires the development of sophisticated new statistical methodology, including
the refinement and extension of the theory of (vector-valued) Hilbert space-
valued observations. The research also includes a significant innovative
computational component. To aid the dissemination of results, we plan to make
the relevant software freely available via the Internet. Completion of the
proposal gives statisticians and practitioners new tools for analyzing different
forms of functional data.

The proposal is interdisciplinary in nature, with applications in diverse fields
ranging from finance and economics (tick-by-tick transaction data, joint
movement of several economic indicators, the effect of policy changes on
economic processes), environmental science (monitoring air pollution, changes in
temperature, change in the occurrences of certain meteorological extremes), and
to geophysics (magnetic field readings of magnetometers). In the context of
financial data, independence and stationarity testing can be used to determine
if, for example, the functional autoregressive model is appropriate for high
resolution asset price data. If so then further estimation techniques can be
applied towards predicting asset values as well as other techniques in economic
forecasting. By applying the functional analysis of variance to magnetic field
measurements taken from several different locations one may categorize these
locations according to the magnetic field behavior they exhibit. This may
influence the implementation of radio communication in these areas. The research
is therefore of immediate interest for practitioners and will further connect
statistics and fields of science with a significant statistical component. It
also advances the theory of mathematical statistics. The proposed research
produces doctoral students, among them female and minority students,
theoretically and practically versed in both statistics and an area of
application. The training and involvement of undergraduate students in this
research is also included through regular coursework, independent study and
projects.
