
* 1307178
* Statistical Analysis of High Dimensional Manifold Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2013,05/29/2015
* Sungkyu Jung,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 110,000.00

Manifold-valued data appear frequently in shape and image analysis, computer
vision, biomechanics and many others. Medical imaging data in studies of the
variability of human organ shapes lie on a fairly high dimensional nonlinear
manifolds, where the challenge is two-fold: high dimensionality with a low
sample size (data are expensive to gather) and naturally imposed non-Euclidean
geometry. The proposed research aims to answer scientific questions arising in
object shape analysis and to provide solid mathematical basis for more complex
problems. First, the investigator takes and extends the strategy of backward
dimension reduction with regularization framework. Sparse representation of
shape and directional data are proposed and their properties are studied. In the
regression context, polynomial regression for manifold-valued response to model
and test non-geodesic trends is proposed. An extension of local polynomial
modeling is also considered. The investigator also explores efficient
computational methods.

The study of object shape is crucial for understanding the population of human
anatomical objects and revealing the interplay between biomarkers/clinical
outcomes and object shape variations. Due to the advanced technology, the modern
object shape data become big and complex, but conventional methods lack
considerations on the special geometric structure of the data types. This
research project aims to provide new statistical methodologies for exploratory
and confirmatory analysis of the large-scale non-standard data types, including
the object shapes. The project will also produce statistical tools, which may be
applied in many fields including biomechanics, computer vision, medical studies
and biological sciences.
