
* 1308376
* Monte Carlo methods for complex multimodal distributions with applications in Bayesian inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2013,07/30/2013
* Qing Zhou,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

When a posterior distribution has multiple modes, unconditional expectations,
such as the posterior mean, may not offer informative summaries of the
distribution. Motivated by this problem, the investigator proposes to develop
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods that may generate sufficient samples
from the domain of attraction of every major mode and therefore construct
estimates for the probability mass of and conditional expectations given a
domain. Computational methods will be developed to build the landscape of a
distribution based on an MCMC sample. This project will contribute novel
methodologies on MCMC and Bayesian inference with multimodal posterior
distributions, and generalize theory on adaptive Markov chains. A new algorithm,
based on the framework of the multi-domain sampler, will be developed to group
dynamically domains separated by low barriers and to construct the tree of
sublevel sets for a distribution. The tree includes local modes as terminal
nodes and barriers as internal nodes. This project also develops Bayesian
inference methods via domain-based estimation and algorithms to quantify the
stability of a posterior mode and its domain of attraction, with applications in
Bayesian missing data problems and structure estimation. Convergence and
ergodicity of the multi-domain sampler with global moves will be studied under
the framework of doubly adaptive MCMC. A theoretical model, based on the tree of
sublevel sets, will be developed to facilitate convergence and efficiency
analysis of MCMC algorithms. Scientific problems in many disciplines may be
solved by sampling from a given probability distribution. Monte Carlo methods,
Markov chain Monte Carlo in particular, are a class of stochastic simulation
algorithms that may draw samples from almost any distribution. However, these
algorithms suffer from low efficiency when the distribution has multiple local
modes. Therefore, the first significance of the proposed project comes from its
applicability to many problems in various scientific fields, including
statistical physics, chemical physics, and computational biology. On the other
hand, there are almost no existing methods that can extract useful information
about a multimodal distribution from Monte Carlo samples. The proposed project
includes a systematic development of computational methods for constructing
novel and comprehensive summaries about a multimodal distribution via a unified
graphical representation for the landscape of a distribution. This can greatly
enhance the current understanding of many problems in statistics and machine
learning by, for example, quantifying the difficulty of a problem and providing
visualization of a high-dimensional objective function.
