
* 1308960
* New Developments on Quantile Regression Analysis of Censored Data: Theory, Methodology and Computation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2013,08/29/2013
* Lan Wang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,999.00

Quantile regression has recently emerged as a valuable semiparametric
alternative to the popular Cox model for analyzing censored data. It directly
models survival time; thus is easy to interpret. More importantly, it relaxes
the proportional hazards constraint associated with the Cox model and is
particularly powerful for heterogeneous data. Despite the remarkable recent
progress, several important and challenging statistical problems remain
unsolved. For example, there exists limited literature on censored quantile
regression when the sample arises from an observational study and is not
representative of the target population; when the censored data come from
genomics studies involving high-dimensional covariates; or when random effects
are present due to the incorporation of latent variables. Motivated by these
challenging problems, this project will develop novel methodology, theory and
algorithms, which have the potential to significantly advance the applications
of censored quantile regression. The PI will rigorously study the theoretical
properties of the proposed new procedures and investigate their applications in
practical data analysis.

Censored data arise in diverse fields such as economics, engineering, medicine,
psychology and sociology. The new methodology and theory are expected to make
important contributions to the current body of knowledge on statistical analysis
of survival data. In particular, the proposed research will make timely
contributions to high-dimensional data analysis with censored responses, which
has important applications in modern genomics and is still a relatively
unexplored research area. The PI will develop useful software packages and make
them freely available to the research community. The research results will be
incorporated in different levels of statistical courses. The PI will also
incorporate her research activity with graduate education. Students from
minority groups will be especially encouraged to participate in the proposed
projects.
