
* 1308319
* Computer-intensive methods for nonparametric time series analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2013,05/27/2015
* Dimitris Politis,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

The project focuses on the development of methods of inference for the analysis
of time series and random fields that do not rely on unrealistic or unverifiable
model assumptions. In particular, the investigator and his colleagues are
working on: (a) consistent estimation of the matrix-valued autocovariance
sequence of a multivariate stationary time series, and a subsequent linear
process bootstrap procedure that is valid even in the context of high-
dimensional processes; (b) flat-top kernels and their application to improved
nonparametric estimation of a hazard rate function and to aggregation of
spectral density estimators; (c) testing for the support of a probability
density and testing for over-differencing of a time series; (d) a new block
bootstrap procedure for time series that are periodically or almost periodically
correlated; (e) estimation and testing in the context of locally stationary time
series and resampling inference for possibly inhomogeneous marked point
processes; and (f) different aspects of resampling with functional data,
including the difficult open problem of appropriately studentizing a functional
statistic.

Ever since the fundamental recognition of the potential role of the computer in
modern statistics, the bootstrap and other computer-intensive statistical
methods have been developed extensively for inference with independent data.
Such methods are even more important in the context of dependent data where the
distribution theory for estimators and test statistics may be difficult or
impractical to obtain. Furthermore, the recent information explosion has
resulted in datasets of unprecedented size that call for flexible,
nonparametric, and--by necessity--computer-intensive methods of data analysis.
Time series analysis in particular is vital in many diverse scientific
disciplines, e.g., in economics, engineering, acoustics, geostatistics,
biostatistics, medicine, ecology, forestry, seismology, and meteorology. As a
consequence of the proposal's development of efficient and robust methods for
the statistical analysis of dependent data, more accurate and reliable
inferences may be drawn from datasets of practical import resulting in
appreciable benefits to society. Examples include data from
meteorology/atmospheric science (e.g. climate data), economics (e.g. stock
market returns), biostatistics (e.g. fMRI data), and bioinformatics (e.g.
genetics and microarray data).
