
* 1308877
* Distance and Dissimilarity Information in Statistical Model Building
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2013,05/23/2016
* Grace Wahba,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,002.00

The objective of this research is to greatly expand the collection of
statistical tools that exploit pairwise distance and dissimilarity information
in statistical model building for regression, classification, and
variable/pattern selection at different scales. This includes use of information
that involves non-metric pairwise dissimilarity information. In this work
dissimilarity information may be subjective, noisy, incomplete, confined within
a nonlinear manifold, may come from multiple sources and may be inconsistent.
Previous results have shown how this information may be embedded into a
Euclidean space, so that methods that operate in a Euclidean space can be used.
Two recent novel and very powerful tools, distance correlation and distance
components, have provided for principled testing of correlations between
arbitrary groups of variables and testing of equality of distributions, based
only on pairwise Euclidean distances, and requiring essentially no
distributional assumptions. Thus, combining methods that embed non-metric
information into a Euclidean space followed by use of distance correlation and
distance components that operate on Euclidean data provide an important new
approach to using "messy" pairwise data. Furthermore distance correlation and
distance components are being extended to certain regression, classification and
variable/pattern selection problems via parametrization, tuning and testing
techniques, preceded, when appropriate by embedding techniques. A series of
tasks to implement aspects of this program provides advances in the major
statistical tasks of regression, classification and variable/pattern selection
for non-traditional information in a principled way.

This work provides a vast extension of the set of practical tools available to
the statistician/data analyst and to modelers in a wide variety of scientific
fields to extract information to predict, classify, and select important
variables/patterns from data sets from small to large, that include distance or
dissimilarity information from a variety of structures that are becoming
increasingly available and important in practice. The proposed work provides a
new set of important and useful tools for improved statistical data analysis
that will be widely disseminated, and impact society to the extent that they
provide aid to researchers in the extraction of information in biological,
medical, environmental and other data sets that contain information of public
interest. The project includes high level training of a Ph.D. student in an
important STEM area.
