
* 1308566
* Nonparametric classification, tuning parameter selection, and asymptotic stability for high-dimensional data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2013,05/05/2014
* Yang Feng,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 129,980.00

Technological innovations have provided a primary force in advancement of
scientific research and in social progress. High-throughput data of
unprecedented size and complexity are frequently seen in diverse fields of
science and humanity, ranging from computational biology and health studies to
financial engineering and risk management. Such high-dimensional data have
initiated many important problems in contemporary statistics where feature
selection plays pivotal roles. The proposed project has the following three
interrelated objectives in the theme of high-dimensional data with applications
in classification and variable selection. (1) To introduce a nonparametric
classification framework for high-dimensional data. The target of this research
is to integrate the nonparametric component to the classical parametric methods
for classification (e.g., penalized logistic regression, linear discriminant
analysis) under high-dimensional settings without incurring much computational
burden. Asymptotic properties are investigated regarding the excess risk. (2) To
investigate the asymptotic properties of cross-validation for tuning parameter
selection in high-dimensional variable selection. The goal here is to perform a
systematic study on the asymptotic behavior of major cross-validation methods
for choosing the tuning parameter when various penalty functions (LASSO, SCAD,
MCP, etc.) are used. By delineating the properties of the classical cross-
validation, a new modified cross-validation method for the purpose of choosing
the optimal tuning parameter in the solution path is developed that achieves
model selection consistency. (3) To introduce the notion of asymptotic stability
for maximum penalized likelihood estimators. Despite the extensive literature on
the maximum penalized likelihood estimators in high-dimensional settings, the
research on the stability of the estimators has been very limited. The
investigators aim to introduce the notion of asymptotic stability for a general
class of maximum penalized likelihood estimators, study the behavior and
evaluate the performance of these estimators when different penalty functions
are applied.

The analysis of "big data" now pervasive across many scientific disciplines
poses challenges as well as opportunities to the field of statistics. A major
goal of this proposal is to make methodological and theoretical contributions to
the important and challenging topic of high-dimensional classification and
variable selection. The proposed research will have broad impacts on many
disciplines of science, including health/life sciences, economics, finance,
astronomy and sociology, among others. In these fields, variable selection,
feature extraction, sparsity explorations are crucial for knowledge discovery.
The investigators have been interacting with researchers at New York State
Psychiatric Institute at the Columbia University Medical Center, Computational
Biology Center of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and Center for
Computational Learning Systems at Columbia University. The results of the
proposed investigations will be used for understanding mental health issues, for
identifying risk factors in diseases of cancer and for predicting failures in
complex engineering systems. On the educational side, the proposed work will be
incorporated into new courses on the state-of-the-art high-dimensional
statistical learning. It will also be integrated into the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, especially of under-represented groups, in
terms of Ph.D. dissertations and undergraduate research projects.
