
* 1308462
* Modeling Neural Activity: Statistics, Dynamical Systems and Networks
* DMS,STATISTICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 04/01/2013,03/25/2013
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoming Huo
* 03/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

The workshop "Modeling Neural Activity: Statisics, Dynamical Systems, and
Networks (MONA)" will be held June 26-28, 2013, in Lihue, Hawaii. Computational
neuroscience has grown, in distinct directions, from the success of biophysical
models neural activity, the attractiveness of the brain-as-computer metaphor,
and the increasing prominence of statistical and machine learning methods
throughout science. This has helped create a rich set of ideas and tools
associated with ``computation'' to studying the nervous system, but it has also
led to a kind of balkanization of expertise. There is, especially, very little
overlap between mathematical and statistical research in this area. Important
breakthroughs in computational neuroscience could come from research strategies
that are able to combine what are currently largely distinct approaches. A
workshop "Modeling Neural activity: Statisics, Dynamical Systems, and Networks
(MONA)" will be held June 26-28, 2013, in Lihue, Hawaii, with the purpose of
exploring fruitful interactions of modeling ideas that come from mathematics,
statistics, and biophysics. An additional purpose of the workshop is to bring
together U.S. and Japanese researchers in this area. While computational
neuroscience is represented strongly in both the U.S. and Japan there has been
too little concrete communication and interaction between research groups across
our two countries. Interaction across American and Japanese researchers should
facilitate the advance of cross-disciplinary work.

Many disorders, such as ADHD, autism, and schizophrenia, as well as stroke and
various neurodegenerative diseases, are thought to involve dysfunction of neural
networks. Because computational neuroscience aims to supply principles for
understanding the activity of individual and collective neural firing patterns,
its successes can help in formulating mechanistic descriptions of
pathophysiology. The workshop ``Modeling Neural Activity: Statisics, Dynamical
Systems, and Networks (MONA)" is at the interface between mathematics,
statistics, and neural network analysis, and has as its goal to generate new and
productive lines of research.
