
* 1309960
* Optimal tests for weak, sparse, and complex signals with application to genetic association studies
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2013,08/01/2013
* Zheyang Wu,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 109,999.00

Detection of sparse and weak signals is a key for analyzing big data in many
fields. Recent statistical research has made celebrated theoretical progress in
revealing the detectability boundaries under the Gaussian means model and an
idealized linear regression model. Detectability boundary illustrates the border
in the two-dimensional phase space of signal sparsity and weakness, below which
the signals are asymptotically too weak and sparse to be detectable by any
statistical methods. Certain statistics are optimal for these models in the
sense that they reach the boundary (i.e., the least requirements) for reliable
signal detection. However, there are significant gaps between these theoretical
models and practical meaningful models. In this project, the investigators
extend statistical theory to handle weak, sparse, correlated, and interactive
signals under the framework of generalized linear models. The investigators
develop optimal testing procedures to address the realistic data features in
genome-wide association studies and next-generation sequence studies.

Statistical theory and methodology development for the detection of weak and
sparse signals is foundational for analyzing big data. The goal of this project
is to extend statistical theoretical study to address complex signals that are
correlated and interactively influential to quantitative or categorical
responses. This study is of great interest in data science and is critical to
many applications. For example, one perplexing problem of current genetic
studies is the missing heritability of complex traits even after many genetic
factors have been identified. The proposed work specifically addresses the
features of those hidden disease genes yet to be discovered. Unlike some genetic
studies based on heuristic arguments, this research combines the power of
rigorous statistical theory, first-hand practices in the field, and cutting-edge
data from genome-wide association studies and next-generation sequence studies.
The proposed project is highly promising in the hunt for the missing
heritability. Highly improved gene-detection techniques will help to identify
more causative genes of complex human diseases, which will lead to the
elucidation of disease pathogenesis and design of targeted therapeutics, thus
have a far-reaching impact on improving quality of life.
