
* 1309465
* High-dimensional Multi-stage Statistical Learning with Application to Dynamic Treatment Regimens
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2013,07/17/2013
* Rui Song,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 109,999.00

Dynamic treatment regimens (DTRs) are sequential decision rules for individual
patients that can adapt over time to an evolving illness. The ultimate goal is
to accommodate heterogeneity among patients and find the DTR which will produce
the best long term outcome. The patients receive treatments are often at
multiple decision times. The effects of the covariates are often complex and the
dimension of covariates are often very high. The broad, long-term objectives of
this project are to develop statistical learning methodologies for optimal,
personalized and single-stage or dynamic treatment regimens. Specifically, this
project aims 1) to develop flexible semiparametric modeling tailored in single-
stage or dynamic treatment regimens; 2) to develop a penalized Q-learning and
valid statistical inference for estimating optimal dynamic regimens with
censored outcome; 3) to develop effective variable selection strategies which
can simplify and improve implementation and reproducibility of personalized
treatment regimens. For all the goals, the desired asymptotic properties will be
established rigorously and suitable numerical algorithms will be provided.

The outlined research project will bring more insights into multi-stage, high-
dimensional statistical learning and will benefit future studies in this area.
This study will develop flexible models and Q-learning methods in estimating
personalized treatment regimens. A successful completion of this research will
not only fill important gaps in statistical theory, but will also yield new
tools for applied statisticians and other scientists. This project will foster
more intensive collaborations among investigators from the Department of
Statistics, the Department of Mathematics and the Health Systems Research Group
in the Edward P. Fitts Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering at North
Carolina State University. The proposed study will promote teaching, training
and learning at North Carolina State University. Research conducted in this
study will help develop advanced graduate courses in statistical learning and
semiparametric methodology. It will create challenging statistical projects for
graduate students. The results will be disseminated broadly through
presentations at seminars, conferences and the internet, which may promote
interdisciplinary research among scientists from diverse fields.
