
* 1309619
* Collaborative Research: Inference for Linear Model Parameters in Model-free Populations
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2013,09/11/2013
* Kai Zhang,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

It is common statistical practice to employ a linear, least squares analysis,
even though the assumptions justifying the inference from such an analysis are
not valid. The current goal is to provide a guide to useful inferential
statements that can be justifiably used in the face of this common dilemma. For
this purpose, begin with a nearly model-free description of the data generating
process: the observations are a random sample from a population consisting of
vector-valued covariates and accompanying real responses. Inference is in the
form of a linear description of the relation between the response and the
covariates. The target of inference is the, suitably defined, best linear
description of the population dependence of the response on the covariates. A
first task is to provide a mathematical framework to accurately describe such a
situation and enable its rigorous analysis. Within this formulation possible
forms of inference can then be investigated. It can be shown that the
conventional sample least-squares estimate of the linear coefficients has
certain asymptotic optimality properties. But the conventional standard errors
and confidence intervals for these coefficients are in general not
asymptotically correct. Correct asymptotic inference is provided by suitable
forms of either the bootstrap or the so-called sandwich estimator. The current
research will discuss variations of these inferential procedures. It will also
describe situations in which these inferential procedures provide trustworthy
results for realistic sample sizes. The model-free perspective leads to
additional understanding of other important statistical settings involving
possibly informative covariates. One of these relates to Randomized Clinical
Trials in which interest centers on the Average Treatment Effect, compared to
that of a placebo or alternate, standard treatment. The general formulation
suggests use of a new estimator and related inference, and the properties and
variants of this will be investigated.

Statistical practice is built on and justified by corresponding statistical
theory. That theory has a common overarching paradigm: Statistical data is
observed. A statistical description is adopted for this data and the data is
then analyzed according to this statistical description. There is a presumption
in this paradigm that the analytic model agrees sufficiently well with the
actual model that generated the data. This is often not the case in practice.
The current proposal builds a new, coherent theory that goes beyond the common
paradigm in that it allows the statistical model for the data and the model for
the analysis to be very different. The effect of the proposed research should be
to first warn practitioners of often encountered but rarely recognized dangers.
These are inherent in the common practice of using linear models such as
regression analysis and ANOVA when they may not sufficiently accurately
represent the true nature of the statistical sample. It will then provide
alternate forms of inference that are valid and can be responsibly utilized in
such situations. To complement its theoretical, methodological orientation the
research maintains close connections with applications through the applied
activities of several of the senior investigators in diverse areas including
social science - especially criminology -operations research and health care.
