
* 1309273
* Collaborative Research: New Directions for Research on Some Large-Scale Multiple Testing Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2013,06/11/2015
* Sanat Sarkar,PA,Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2017
* USD 126,575.00

The paradigm shift of hypothesis testing from single to multiple hypotheses,
often large number of them, in statistical applications to modern scientific
investigations, such as brain imaging, microarray analysis, astronomy,
atmospheric science, drug discovery and many others, has generated tremendous
upsurge of research in the field of large-scale multiple testing in the last one
and half decades. Nevertheless, some fundamentally important theoretical as well
as methodological issues arising in many of these investigations still remain to
be fully addressed before developing the necessary statistical tools. For
instance, in clinical pharmacogenomics involving multiple testing, methods
controlling false discoveries are yet to be developed in non-asymptotic setting
when these hypotheses are tested group sequentially which is often required in
order to meet economical and ethical concerns, or when these hypotheses belong
to tree-structured hierarchical families which often happens due to importance
based ordering of different sets of hypotheses. Also, in many practical
applications of multiple testing where the order in which the tests are to be
performed is pre-specified or can be assessed based on available data, but the
potential improvements of the existing FDR methodologies exploiting this pre-
ordering are yet to be explored. The project seeks to develop new and innovative
multiple testing methods tackling these outstanding and related issues by
focusing on the following three broad areas of research: (i) group sequential
multiple testing, (ii) fixed sequence multiple testing, and (iii) testing
multiple families of hypotheses. The project covers a wide spectrum of important
multiple testing problems statisticians face in many practical settings. These
problems are new and pose several technical challenges, as the existing theory
and methodologies on multiple testing controlling false discoveries need to be
extended from the framework of single stage or single family to that of multiple
stages or multiple families. The proposed research has the potential to open up
the door for research on multiple testing in newer directions. It not only aims
at advancing the theory of multiple testing but also pays special attention to
applications of the developed theories.

This project is expected to have a broad impact on the theory and practice of
statistics. It aims at modernizing the field of statistics by advancing research
in areas of importance in modern scientific experiments, and thus can benefit
the society. For instance, the project can potentially pave the way for novel
techniques to address statistical issues faced in modern drug discoveries and
biomedical experiments. It would also benefit education through training of
graduate students and incorporation of the developed methodologies in statistics
courses. The results will be disseminated through presentations and discussions
at national and international conferences, and visits to other institutions. The
software to be developed under this project will be made available, free of
charge, to the scientific community.
