
* 1309312
* Conference on Advanced Statistical Methods for Underground Seismic Event Monitoring and Verification
* DMS,STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2013
* Minge Xie,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2015
* USD 31,040.00

The Conference on Advanced Statistical Methods for Underground Seismic Event
Monitoring and Verification will be held March 7-8, 2013 in Washington DC area.
The ability of monitoring and verification of underground seismic events is
vital to national security and disaster preparation and prevention. The research
and development of monitoring and verification technology have been extensive.
Significant advances have been made in sensor development and also in the
development of seismic signal processing methodologies that have the ability to
verify any underground seismic events as well as distinguish signals generated
from different mechanisms with sensors placed a vast distance away from the
event site. The research and development is highly interdisciplinary, involving
geophysics, sensor development, signal processing, and statistics. To further
enhance the collaboration between statisticians and other scientists in the
field and to investigate the potential approaches of combining state-of-art
statistical methods with advanced sensor technology, we propose to organize a
conference on advanced statistical methods for underground seismic event
monitoring and verification. The conference will bring statisticians and the
other experts in the field together to discuss the current status of field, to
exchange ideas, and to brainstorm novel approaches. The conference will also
serve a venue to generate new interests among statisticians to this field, to
enlist statisticians to bring in their new statistical ideas and approaches to
deal with this important problem.

The conference will be collaboration between academics and federal agencies. The
experts in the federal agencies will share their vision and experience and also
any urgent specific problems. The conference will consists of general sessions
where plenary speakers and discussants present their research findings and
proposals of future research, with floor discussion encouraged, and a study
group session where participants are separated into several groups and discuss
and deliberate specific topics. At the end, the conference organizer will
produce a report to be shared with federal agencies and participants, and be
published in scientific community newsletters such as ASA news to generate
interests in the larger community. The conference will attract, engage, educate
and train students and next generation scientists to work in the area of
research and development of underground seismic event detection technology using
advanced statistical and mathematical tools. Such exposure and training is
essential for them to become statisticians capable of collaborating effectively
with scientists and researchers in the field and to generate new innovative
approaches to real problems that have been difficult to tackle in underground
event detection and related fields.
