
* 1309057
* Bayesian Recursive Partitioning and Inference on the Structure of High-Dimensional Distributions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2013,04/09/2015
* Li Ma,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 159,873.00

This research concerns one of the most important and pervasive classes of
problems in modern data analysis---inference on the structure of probability
distributions. Specific inference problems to be addressed fall into two broad
categories. The first involves inference on the structure of a single
probability distribution, including estimation of joint and conditional
densities, variable selection in linear regression, and the testing of
independence and conditional independence among variables. The second involves
inference on the relationship across multiple distributions. This includes
testing whether two (or more) data samples have the same underlying
distribution, and learning the structure of their difference, with particular
interest given to finding local structures---differences that lie in small
subsets---in large high-dimensional spaces. To address these problems, the
investigator puts forward a novel framework for constructing Bayesian priors on
multivariate distributions through recursive partitioning. Inference using this
framework is flexible and adaptive. Moreover, the generative nature of these
priors facilitates the modeling of dependence structure across multiple
distributions and this leads to powerful methods for comparing distributions. To
address the computational challenges in high-dimensional problems, the
investigator lays out a set of computational strategies and proposes to develop
several algorithms that can drastically improve the efficiency of Bayesian
posterior inference in high-dimensional problems. These strategies utilize the
recursive nature of the proposed framework to efficiently explore the global
landscape of the corresponding posterior distributions.

Inference on the structure of probability distributions lies at the heart of
many scientific inquiries, and new statistical theory and methods are urgently
needed to accommodate the ever increasing dimensionality of data sets that is
commonplace in modern scientific investigations. Two specific applications that
motivate this project are the analysis of high-dimensional flow cytometry data
in systems biology for unraveling the functional relationships among proteins as
well as the mapping of human genes to various qualitative and quantitative
traits, in particular those of common diseases such as cancer and diabetes. The
concepts, theory, methodology, and algorithms developed in this project will be
directly applicable to these problems, as well as to the analysis of data sets
arising from a wide variety of other fields ranging from environmental science
to economics.
