
* 1310119
* Estimation of High Dimensional Matrices of Low Effective Rank with Applications to Structural Copula Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2013,05/18/2015
* Marten Wegkamp,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The central goals of this proposal are: (a) To provide sharp finite sample
bounds, in various matrix norms, on the accuracy of the sample covariance
estimator of high dimensional covariance matrices of reduced effective rank; (b)
To extend these results to functional data and characterize classes of
covariance operators of reduced effective rank. To use these results to develop
fully data driven methods, with strong theoretical justification, for eigenvalue
and eigenvector selection, in finite samples. To apply these results to modeling
vehicle emissions exhaust; (c) To study factor models of high dimensional
correlation matrices of elliptical copulas. To obtain minimax estimators of
these matrices and to use these results in classification problems in breast
cancer data. There are interesting connections between our proposed research and
existing results on estimation of covariance or correlation matrices under
sparsity constrains. However, estimation under the existing sparsity types
(entry-wise, row-wise, off-diagonal decay) cannot be used for modeling general
types of dependency. The proposed work bridges this gap, and poses different
mathematical and computational challenges.

Modeling high dimensional data and evaluating their variability presents
increasing challenges in many scientific disciplines. For instance, such
challenges occur in modeling network data in genetics and molecular biology;
high dimensional portfolios in economics; and samples of curves in psychology,
public health, transportation and urban planning. Substantially better solutions
can be provided whenever the data is generated by a model with low dimensional
structure. In the statistical problem of high dimensional covariance and
correlation matrix estimation, this proposal will formulate the relevant notion
of low dimensional structure (for instance, low effective rank or approximate
low dimensional factor models). The need for a systematic investigation of
various classes of covariance matrices in high dimensional models, especially in
functional data settings, only begun to be recognized in recent years. This
proposal is therefore a timely addition to the currently limited battery of
methods and theoretical results in this important area. The usefulness of these
techniques will be demonstrated by applications to data from genomics,
proteomics and environmental engineering. Free software that implements the
developed methodology will be made available on the web in a readily
implementable form.
