
* 1310002
* Optimality Landscapes and Exploratory Data Analysis
* DMS,ADVANCES IN BIO INFORMATICS, STATISTICS, Cross-BIO Activities, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2013,07/14/2013
* Andrew Nobel,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

The investigators and their students study the development, implementation and
application of iterative search procedures for unsupervised exploratory data
analysis. In particular, they develop statistically principled procedures for
discovering patterns in high dimensional data, including biclustering and
correlation mining of genomic data, and community detection in complex networks
arising in computational sociology and public policy. Complementing the
methodological component of the research, the investigators and their students
also study the development of general theoretical tools to analyze iterative
data mining procedures, and the properties of their associated local optima.
They develop probabilistic tools, including new variants of Stein's method for
normal approximation and new Gaussian comparison theorems, to understand
asymptotic properties of typical local optima, and the dependence of these
optima under different assumptions on the underlying signal, beginning with the
null setting in which only noise is present. Their research is carried out in
the context of ongoing collaborations with UNC faculty in the Medical School,
and in the Departments of Genetics, Public Policy, and Mathematics.

The broad subject of the proposal is the development, theoretical analysis, and
application of exploratory methods for large data sets. By exploratory methods,
we mean those that search large data sets for significant patterns or
configurations that may be of organizational or scientific interest. Examples
include patterns that may distinguish types of a disease, that help target a
drug or assess its efficacy, and patterns that identify among a large number of
people a smaller community who frequently exchange text messages. In many cases,
a numerical score is used to assess the potential importance of a pattern, and
attention then turns to finding a pattern with a large score. Our primary
interest is in search procedures that begin with a candidate pattern, then
search for closely related patterns in the data that have higher score,
repeating this procedure until they reach a pattern where no further (local)
improvements are possible. Procedures of this sort are routinely applied in
large data problems where finding the ``best'' pattern (the pattern with the
largest score) is computationally prohibitive. We are developing and applying
new, statistically based search procedures for several important tasks arising
in the exploratory analysis of large data sets, including data mining and
community detection. At the same time, we are developing fundamental theory to
justify and inform the application of the iterative search procedures. Our work
is being carried out in the context of ongoing collaborations with UNC faculty
in the Medical School, and in the Departments of Genetics, Public Policy, and
Mathematics.
