
* 1313224
* Distance-based variable selection for high-dimensional biological data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2013,09/09/2013
* Daniel Nettleton,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The overall objective of the research project is to provide statisticians and
biological scientists new and improved statistical tools for measuring variable
importance and selecting key variables in high-dimensional biological data. The
two major ingredients underlying the research are a distance-based procedure
across multiple dimensions and a tilting/weighting-based importance measure for
any specific dimension. The distance-based methods, e.g., the multi-response
permutation procedure and the distance covariance, provide the ability to handle
data even if the number of dimensions is larger than the sample size. The
tilting/weighting-based procedures allow variable importance to be evaluated for
any dimension in the presence of any number of other variables. Thus, variable
importance is evaluated in the multivariate context rather than on univariate
marginal distributions. In addition, the new methods will allow the number of
selected variables to exceed the sample size; allow forward selection, backward
selection, and sparse penalized weighting; minimize perturbation to the
dependence structures actually present in the data; require minimal structural
assumptions; and be sensitive to a wide range of multivariate dependencies,
including some difficult or even impossible to detect with existing methods.

The methods developed as part of this project have a wide range of applications
in biomedical and agricultural industries. Modern genomics tools allow
researchers to simultaneously measure thousands of variables that contain
information about DNA, RNA, and protein characteristics of organisms. The high-
dimensional data generated by these modern high-throughput technologies must be
mined to identify the variables that are most associated with health outcomes or
other important traits. Uncovering of such associations is crucial in a variety
of areas including drug discovery, genetic risk analysis, personalized medicine,
and plant and animal breeding. This research project will provide tools to help
make these discoveries possible. Reliable software implementations of the new
methods will be created, maintained, archived in public repositories, and freely
disseminated to genomics researchers and industry practitioners working with a
diverse range of organisms and different high-throughput technologies. The
research activity will enhance collaborations and partnerships among researchers
from both computational/statistical fields and experimental/biomedical fields.
