
* 1317118
* CAREER: New Topics in Functional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/03/2012,03/09/2016
* Yehua Li,IA,Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2018
* USD 365,156.00

Functional data are random vectors in a functional space, which are usually
observed on discrete points and measured with error. Functional data are also
deeply connected to other types of correlated data, such as spatial data, since
they can both be modeled as stochastic processes. In the proposed research, the
investigator will broaden the applications of functional data analysis by
proposing a new functional data approach to model spatio-temporal point pattern
data from disease surveillance applications, where the spatio-temporal random
effects are modeled as latent functional processes. Motivated by scientific
problems in colon carcinogenesis experiments and hypertension studies, the
investigator proposes new dimension reduction methods, which are widely
applicable to semiparametric regression problems with functional predictors. The
investigator proposes new estimation procedures based on spline approximation
and roughness penalties, and will also investigate the model selection and
inference problems related to these methods. The investigator also proposes to
model longitudinal clinical trial data by the functional analysis of covariance
models, where different treatment effects are represented by nonparametric
functions in time. The proposed nonparametric hypothesis test can be used to
detect the treatment effects. Specifically, the investigator will study the
effect of the within-subject correlation on the power of the test.

The proposed functional data approach to disease surveillance data will help to
model the relationship between disease occurrence and some environmental
variables (such as pollution level), estimate the time trend in the disease
rate, and predict the unknown risk factors represented by latent random effects.
The results will help disease control agencies and local officials to gain
better understanding of the disease risk and develop better public health
policies, such as emission or water quality control policies. The proposed
dimension reduction methods provide the much needed statistical tools in the
semiparametric regression problems in colon carcinogenesis and hypertension
studies. The proposed nonparametric hypothesis testing procedure for functional
analysis of covariance models answers a fundamental question in clinical trials,
which is to compare the effectiveness of different treatments. The investigator
will provide free and user-friendly software to scientific researchers and
incorporate his research activity with graduate education. To further
disseminate the research results and motivate new ideas, the investigator will
develop a new course on functional data analysis and organize a research
workshop.
