
* 1346916
* Travel Support for The Future of Statistical Sciences Workshop, London
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 08/15/2013,08/23/2013
* J. Lynn Palmer,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 45,000.00

"The Future of Statistical Sciences" workshop will be held in London November
11-12, 2013. This research conference is the capstone event of the International
Year of Statistics. It is being organized by the same five societies (American
Statistical Association (ASA), International Biometric Society (IBS),
International Mathematical Society (IMS), International Statistical Institute
(ISI), and the Royal Statistical Society (RSS)) that founded the International
Year of Statistics. The Workshop will bring together not only researchers but
thought leaders from across the globe, including junior researchers in
statistics who are rising stars, scientists from data-intensive fields, funders,
and professional science writers to discuss the current state and future
directions of the statistical sciences and to consider actionable strategies for
advancing the profession. Bringing these statistical and other leaders together
with other participants through this Workshop will provide an extraordinary
opportunity to enhance existing collaborations and build new ones, which will
greatly enhance the future statistical workforce. In addition to these benefits,
a greater online presence and publications in high-profile scientific journals,
a paper on the current state and future directions of statistics and the
statistical workforce will be developed and made widely available. More
information about the conference can be found at:
http://www.statistics2013.org/about-the-future-of-the-statistical-sciences-
workshop/

This award supports the participation of U.S. junior researchers, women, and
members of underrepresented groups in an international workshop to be held in
London November 11-12, 2013. The workshop is being put together by the five
largest professional statistical societies in the world. Statisticians work in a
vast array of fields: advancing science; creating new methodology; providing
information that shapes public policy; making our medicines more effective, our
food safer, and our planet better. Statisticians come from many cultures, speak
many languages, and arrive at statistics as their profession through many paths.
This workshop will showcase the breadth and importance of statistics and
highlight the extraordinary opportunities for statistical research in the coming
decade. The workshop will bring together a diverse group of top statistical
researchers, including many relatively young researchers, women and minorities,
and thought leaders, including non-statisticians in diverse areas, and give them
and other participants an opportunity to think about where statistics should go
as a discipline and the lessons learned that can guide us in the future. It will
be a space in which statistical scientists and scientists in other fields can
interact and develop a shared vision for the future.
