
* 1347844
* CAREER: Nonparametric Models Building, Estimation, and Selection with Applications to High Dimensional Data Mining
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2013,08/14/2013
* Hao Zhang,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 96,133.00

Nonparametric methods are increasingly applied to regression, classification and
density estimation, both in statistics and other related areas such as data
mining and machine learning. However, a key difficulty with nonparametric models
is model fitting for high dimensional data due to the curse of dimensionality.
Another difficulty is model inference and interpretation, i.e., how to evaluate
or test individual variable effects on the complex surface fit. For
heterogeneous data with complicated covariance structure, nonparametric model
estimation is even more challenging. The objectives of this proposal are to
develop novel and widely applicable procedures to simultaneous model selection
and estimation for nonparametric models and their related paradigms in data
mining. In the framework of reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), the PI
proposes a host of new regularization techniques for several families of models:
smoothing spline ANOVA models for correlated data, semiparametric regression
models, support vector machines for supervised and semi-supervised learning. The
proposed methodologies constitute key advances over standard methods through
their unified framework for achieving model sparsity and function smoothing
altogether, their tractable theoretical properties, and their easy adaptation to
high dimensional problems. The PI will study asymptotic behaviors of the
proposed estimators, explore data-driven procedures for tuning regularization
parameters, and develop computation algorithms and softwares to implement the
proposed procedures. The PI will also examine finite sample performance of new
methods via extensive simulation studies and real data analysis.

In the current information era, the volume and complexity of scientific and
industrial databases have been exponentially expanding. As a consequence, the
data form keeps gaining higher and higher dimensionality. Analysis of such data
poses new challenges to statisticians and is becoming one of the most important
research topics in modern statistics. The purpose of this project is to
significantly increase the available tools for analyzing complex high
dimensional data. In this project, the PI aims to accomplish the following three
goals: (1) meet the challenges of nonparametric model estimation and selection
within a unified mathematical framework; (2) develop flexible methods with
desired statistical properties and high-performance statistical softwares for
mining massive data; (3) integrate research opportunities and findings from the
above two activities into disciplinary and interdisciplinary statistical
education at graduate, undergraduate and high school levels. This research will
broaden traditional understanding of nonparametric inferences and model
selection, provide a broad range of researchers and practitioners in various
fields including sociology, economics, environmental, biological and medical
sciences with state-of-the-art data analysis tools, and help to prepare the
next-generation students with the necessary modern statistical perspectives.
