
* 1405174
* Modern Statistical Methods for Ecology
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2014,04/21/2014
* Geof Givens,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the participation of junior researchers in the joint 2014
Graybill/ENVR Conference, titled "Modern Statistical Methods for Ecology" and
co-sponsored by the Department of Statistics at Colorado State University (CSU)
and the American Statistical Association Section on Statistics and the
Environment (ENVR), occurring September 7-10, 2014, at CSU in Fort Collins,
Colorado.

Researchers in statistical ecology seek to understand how animals, plants and
humans interact with each other and with the environment, using empirical
methods that reflect both the evidence and uncertainty inherent in quantitative
data. Such research involves both the theoretical development of advanced
statistical techniques for data analysis, and the application of such techniques
to complex and important real-world datasets. With respect to education, the
conference aims to enhance the knowledge base and enthusiasm of graduate
students and emerging statisticians, encouraging them to pursue continued study
and professional lives in the field of statistics. Scientifically, the continued
development of theoretical and applied statistical results in ecology advances
the state of knowledge in this discipline, propagates to related statistical
research areas, and serves the greater scientific community through
collaboration and application. Inclusion of participants from government
agencies like NOAA and USGS provides an avenue to immediately impact the
scientific foundations supporting national and regional policy making. Many of
today's most pressing problems concern human-induced environmental and
ecological impacts. Statistical ecology provides the methods and language for
interpreting such science and translating it into good policy. By providing a
scientific, statistical basis for the study and management of important
ecological systems, the field of statistical ecology provides society with
insights into what lies ahead for people, communities of all scales, and the
world they inhabit.

The meeting includes a short course, keynote and invited talks, and a poster
session. Speaker topics span diverse areas of statistical ecology including:
abundance estimation techniques; animal movement models; biodiversity estimation
and models; capture-recapture methods; deterministic and stochastic models for
ecosystems; distance sampling methods; ecological monitoring; estimation of
population trends; individual-based modeling; landscape genomics; multi-scale
models; population dynamics modeling; spatial models for ecological problems;
species distribution models; and wildlife disease modeling. The goal of the
conference is to provide an opportunity for statistical researchers,
practitioners and graduate students working in this area to generate and share
ideas for new creative research; to receive practical training; to stimulate
professional networking opportunities; and to provide young researchers exposure
for their work.

Conference website: www.stat.colostate.edu/graybillconference/
