
* 1405698
* New Methods for Sequential Monitoring of Longitudinal Patterns
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2014,05/02/2016
* Peihua Qiu,FL,University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 120,001.00

In many applications, ranging from disease early detection and prevention,
maintenance of airplanes, cars and other durable goods and products, to
pollution control and environment monitoring, we need to monitor the
longitudinal pattern of certain performance variables of a subject. If the
observed values of the performance variables of a given subject are
significantly worse than the values of a typical well-functioning subject of the
same age, then a signal by a statistical method would be extremely helpful so
that some proper adjustments or interventions can be made in a timely manner to
avoid any unpleasant consequences. This project aims to develop a new
statistical method to handle this problem effectively. If successful, research
results from this project will have a profound impact on the applications
mentioned above.

In the statistical literature, there are two research areas relevant to the
above sequential monitoring of longitudinal pattern (SMLP) problem: longitudinal
data analysis (LDA) and statistical process control (SPC). By an LDA method, we
can compare a new subject with a group of well-functioning subjects to judge
whether the new subject's longitudinal pattern is consistent with the regular
pattern in a given time interval. One limitation of the LDA methods is that they
cannot make a decision about a subject's longitudinal pattern sequentially and
quickly even when all available observations up to the current time point have
provided enough evidence to support the decision. For solving the SMLP problem
effectively, however, this dynamic decision-making feature is crucial. By a SPC
method, we can follow each subject sequentially, and make a decision about its
performance by comparing its observations at the current time point with all of
its history data. One major limitation of the SPC methods is that they cannot
compare different subjects when making decisions about a given subject.
Therefore, there are no existing statistical methods that can solve the SMLP
problem effectively yet. This project proposes a new method that makes decisions
about the longitudinal pattern of a subject by comparing it with other subjects
cross-sectionally and by using all its history data as well with a sequential
monitoring scheme. The new method combines the major strengths of the LDA and
SPC methods and should provide an effective solution to the SMLP problem.
