
* 1406872
* Nonparametric Statistics and Riemannian Geometry in Image Analysis: New Perspectives with Applications in Biology, Medicine, Neuroscience and Machine Vision
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,05/05/2016
* Rabindra Bhattacharya,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

This project aims at (1) precise geometric depictions of digital images arising
in biology, medicine, machine vision and other fields of science and engineering
and (2) providing their model-independent statistical analysis for purposes of
identification, discrimination and diagnostics. One specific application is to
discriminate between a normal organ and a diseased one in the human body. Among
examples, one may refer to the diagnosis of glaucoma and certain types of
schizophrenia based on shape changes. A subject that the project will especially
look at and analyze in depth, concerns changes in the geometric structure of the
white matter in the brain's cortex brought about by Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimers, schizophrenia, autism, etc., and their progression. Important
applications in the fields of graphics, robotics, etc., will be explored as
well.

Advancements in imaging technology enable scientists and medical professionals
today to view the inner functioning of organs at the cell level and beyond. For
example, in the white matter in the cortex, the coefficients of the 3x3
diffusion matrix of water molecules can be measured. In the absence of a disease
or trauma, these matrices show pronounced anisotropy along well organized neural
structures, while perturbations due to a disease lead to a decrease in
anisotropy in each such location. This is one aspect of the structural change
due to a disease that is visible in the diffusion tensor imaging scans. There
are others. So far there is no statistical methodology that can precisely
associate such a decrease in anisotropy with the particular disease that causes
it. The present project will represent the main neural structures in the white
matter in terms of elements of a Riemannian manifold and their geodesics. As one
specific task, the project will choose appropriate metric tensors on the space
of alignments of positive definite matrices along neural structures. The broad
goal is to provide a nonparametric statistical methodology based on Fre'chet
means for discrimination and diagnostics, extending much further and in novel
directions the research that was carried out under earlier NSF supports. In a
completely different direction, one theoretical objective of the project is to
provide broad conditions for uniqueness of the Fre'chet mean under a geodesic
distance. Such conditions are required for statistical applications but are
unavailable in adequate generality for Riemannian manifolds with positive
curvature. This matter of uniqueness also has surprising implications, for
graphics and robotics.
