
* 1406536
* Collaborative Research: Theory and Methods for Massive Nonstationary and Multivariate Spatial Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,07/29/2014
* William Kleiber,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 307,938.00

The field of spatial statistics is an expanding subset of statistical science
with numerous applications in a wide variety of specialties such as geophysical,
environmental, ecological and economic sciences. Modern datasets in these
sciences often involve multiple variables observed at thousands to millions of
irregularly spaced geographical locations. Associated scientific goals include
surface estimation, stochastic simulation and statistical modeling to gain
insight of underlying phenomena. Statistical analyses require flexible
nonstationary and multivariate constructions, which have heretofore been
hampered by a lack of models adequate for datasets of large magnitude. This
project addresses this gap in statistical science, developing a unifying
framework for nonstationary and multivariate spatial models capable of modeling
complex spatial dependencies. Additionally, the justification for the use of
nonstationary models is generally relegated to empirical results with data and
simulation experiments; this research will develop a companion theory for
exploring the relative benefit of these more complex spatial models. Using the
tools introduced in this project, the final major goal is to develop a gridded
data product for the historical climate of the United States based on large,
irregularly spaced observational networks with transparent statistical
methodology and formal quantification of the uncertainty in such an analysis.
Historical data products such as this are of crucial importance in the fields of
atmospheric and climate sciences.

Modern spatial statistics has increased focus on developing methods for massive
spatial datasets that involve multiple variables with complex dependency
structures. This research aims to foster a common framework via multiresolution
processes for modeling nonstationary and multivariate spatial structures that
does not break down in the face of large sample sizes. Multiresolution processes
lend themselves to fast estimation and computation, and also to the linked
theoretical questions of asymptotic behavior of spatial estimators. For example,
there is a lack of rigorous theoretical treatment of nonstationary approaches,
with current understanding limited to experimental results. The companion large
sample theory of this research is aimed at identifying situations in which
nonstationary models provide tangible benefits over simpler stationary cousins.
A linked goal is approximation theory for existing spatial constructions;
special multiresolution constructions can approximate existing covariances such
as the Matern, allowing for a theoretical treatment of spatial smoothing under
these common classes of covariances. Additionally, the project will generalize
the notion of a multiresolution process to the multivariate setting, allowing
for feasible and flexible inference-based modeling of massive multivariate
spatial datasets.
