
* 1406279
* Collaborative Research: Interface of Probability and Statistics for High-dimensional Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,08/28/2017
* Tiefeng Jiang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 279,998.00

With rapid advances in information and technology, big data are now routinely
collected in many frontiers of scientific research and technological
developments. Various advanced techniques are needed to address the challenges
such as computation, noise accumulation, and spurious correlations prominently
featured in big data. New theoretical challenges arise in order to address
probabilistic problems in high-dimensional statistics. This collaborative
research project intends to combine the strength and expertise on probability
and statistics of both investigators to address a number of emerging and
challenging issues in high-dimensional data analysis.

The project will focus on primarily two types of problems: (i) high-dimensional
statistics on spheres and (ii) behaviors of eigenvalues of random matrices and
zeroes of polynomials. The two topics are innately related since high-
dimensional data are often expressed in terms of matrices. The project would
create new theories and methods for high-dimensional statistics, interact and
apply them to several different disciplines including mathematics, statistical
physics, information theory, and computer science. The project also involves
training of top notch mathematical scientists and engineers and to disseminate
the research results and products broadly via the online media, conferences and
seminar presentations.
