
* 1407530
* Random Matrix Approach to High-Dimensional Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Debashis Paul,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 329,959.00

High-dimensional time series arise naturally in economics, atmospheric and
environmental science, genomics, experimental chemistry, wireless
communications, and a multitude of other disciplines. Recent developments in the
statistical analysis of data with large number of features have demonstrated the
importance for developing new paradigms for qualitative as well as quantitative
summaries. Exploration of the behavior of some widely used descriptive
statistics has resulted in the discovery of new phenomena, and these theoretical
investigations in turn have contributed to the development of sophisticated
statistical procedures geared towards analyzing high-dimensional data. This
pursuit benefited from the confluence of knowledge from various disciplines such
as probability theory, optimization, geometry, and computer science. Random
matrix theory has contributed significantly to the aforementioned theoretical
developments. The primary goal of this project is to introduce the random matrix
perspective to the study of multivariate time series, and utilize the resulting
theoretical developments to build statistical methodologies for analyzing large
and complex time series data. There are several ways in which this project is
expected to have an impact on the scientific community and beyond. This research
has potential direct applications to econometrics and finance. The research
findings are also expected to influence model building and data analysis
techniques in climate studies, environmental science and communications theory.
The findings will give wider access to practitioners in various fields to modern
statistical tools and concepts for dealing with large volumes of temporally
observed data. Students working in this project will be well-versed in a
multitude of disciplines through the merger of mathematical, computational and
data analytic skills. The training component of this project involves giving
exposure to undergraduate and graduate students to modern statistical and
mathematical techniques and research problems through short courses and directed
individual and group studies. This will facilitate their smooth transition into
advanced academic programs and industry jobs specializing in cutting-edge
technologies.

In this project, techniques of random matrix theory will be extended to analyze
the behavior of sample covariance and symmetrized auto-covariance matrices and
spectral density matrices for high-dimensional time series. These statistics are
the primary building blocks for modeling and prediction of time-dependent data.
A major motivation of this proposal is to the infer nature of dependence in
large dimensional time series from the spectral characteristics, such as the
empirical distribution of eigenvalues, of the sample covariance and auto-
covariance matrices. The theory developed in this proposal extends the frontier
of random matrix theory to the domain of dependent data with special structures.
Another aim of the project is to develop tools for statistical estimation and
prediction for high-dimensional time series and to analyze the performance of
these procedures by blending mathematical and computational techniques. This
research will also broaden the scope of interface among disciplines such as
statistics, applied mathematics, econometrics and engineering.
