
* 1407560
* Studies in Factorial and Composite Designs with Applications to Drug Combination Experiments
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,06/07/2016
* Hongquan Xu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

The advance in technology enables researchers to investigate a dozen or more
drugs simultaneously in a single experiment in order to identify novel drug
combinations with high efficacy and low toxicity. This raises substantial new
challenges to experimenters and statisticians, because the number of drug
combinations grows exponentially as the number of drugs increases. Researchers
rely more than ever on large efficient experimental designs in order to
successfully and efficiently identify a few important drugs and drug
interactions among millions or billions possible drug combinations. However, few
good designs and results are available in the literature. To address the growing
needs from such large-scale drug combination experiments, this project aims at
developing new methodology and constructing efficient factorial and composite
designs. This project will help shorten investigation time and reduce
experimental cost tremendously in a wide variety of scientific researches. The
applications to drug combination experiments will have an immediate impact on
discovering novel treatments for various common diseases and hence help advance
the national health.

Fractional factorial designs are cost-effective for screening important factors
from a large pool of potential variables; composite designs are indispensable
for sequential experimentation, as well as for building response surface models.
A systematic method is proposed for constructing multi-level nonregular
fractional factorial designs using linear and quadratic functions. A general
theory is developed for obtaining important design properties such as resolution
and aberration. New tools are introduced for studying design structure under
level permutations for quantitative factors. Two classes of composite designs
are introduced and studied thoroughly. The first class consists of a two-level
and a three-level factorial design; the second consists of a two-level factorial
and a three-level definitive screening design. These composite designs have many
desirable features and are more effective than existing composite designs for
factor screening and response surface modeling, especially for large-scale
experiments.
