
* 1407751
* Robust Estimation for Structured Covariance Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2014,05/20/2016
* David Tyler,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 119,999.00

The need to analyze multivariate data arises in many diverse disciplines, such
as computer science and engineering, signal processing, psychology, meteorology,
chemometrics, sociology, and biology. Due to the changing methods for collecting
data, the number of variables or attributes measured in a single observation or
for a single subject are becoming exceptionally large, and they can be
considerably larger than the number of observations or subjects themselves. Such
data sets are commonly referred to as large sparse data sets. For such data
sets, the possibility of recording bad data points or outliers is increasingly
likely. Outliers tend to have a disproportionate impact on the interpretation of
the data unless one uses robust methods, that is, methods that can accommodate
bad data. Developing methods to analyze large sparse data sets has become a
major research topic within the field of statistics. There has been, however,
relatively little attention given to the development of robust methods for large
sparse data sets, which is the primary goal of this research project. The
research project aims to produce fundamental results, theoretical approaches and
statistical methods applicable to the robust analysis of large sparse data sets,
upon which other researchers can build.

Most robust multivariate statistical methods are mainly applicable whenever the
sample size is considerably larger than the number of variables, and are not
particularly applicable to large sparse data sets. In particular, for sample
sizes that are modest relative to the number of variables, robust affine
equivariant estimates of multivariate location and scatter are similar in
performance to the classical sample mean vector and sample covariance matrix,
and consequently do not yield robust results for such data sets. Analyzing
relatively sparse multivariate data tends to require either presuming certain
covariance structures, such as those arising in graphical models, factor
analysis or other reduced rank models, or developing methods which give
preference to certain covariance structures via regularization methods. These
special covariance structures are usually not considered in most robust
multivariate methods. To address this shortcoming, the research project aims to
develop robust methods which take into account a presumed covariance structure,
and in particular to develop and study direct M-estimation methods and
S-estimation methods for structured covariance models, as well as to develop and
study penalized M-estimates of the covariance matrix. Addressing robustness
issues for structured covariance models and for penalization methods are
fundamental problems which is more mathematically and computationally
challenging than in the classical setting or in the unrestricted robust
estimation setting. Here, some recent work on geodesic convexity within the
signal processing community is expected to play an important role in addressing
these problems.
