
* 1407852
* Modeling Complex Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2014,06/20/2014
* Hans-Georg Mueller,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2018
* USD 337,658.00

There is increasing need for adequate statistical analysis methods for samples
of time-dynamic and longitudinal data that include high-dimensional and other
complex objects that are recorded over time. Such data arise in many areas of
critical concern where adequate methodology to quantify changes of complex
patterns over time is relevant to come to the right conclusions. This includes
studies of environmental and climate change and the evolution of social networks
over time. It also includes biological networks that are thought to operate
between "hubs" in the brain and that are changing as a person ages. Such data
are objects with a structure that defies established linear modeling approaches
that have been previously developed in the statistical field of functional data
analysis. The investigator and his research group are therefore developing new
methods aimed at the analysis of such complex time-dynamic and longitudinal
data. These techniques will lead to a better understanding of the underlying
dynamics and the changes in the inherent patterns and interactions of the
objects over time. Better understanding of time-dynamic phenomena will lead to
better informed societal and individual decision making. The research also
involves the training of students in upfront methodology and the creation of
suitable fast algorithms to implement these new methods.

The established field of Functional Data Analysis has been focused on linear
methods such as functional linear principal component analysis. However, the
applicability of these established models for "next generation" functional data
is quite limited. This is because such data are inherently nonlinear, i.e., they
do not live in a linear space, and therefore are far more complex than linear
data. Second generation functional data are generated across the sciences and
e-commerce and by online and physical tracking devices that continuously record
signals and trajectories, in on-line settings, monitoring and sensor systems.
Important types of time-varying "object data" are covariance matrices, densities
or networks, and new methods will be developed to properly quantify the dynamics
of such complex objects. Besides the non-Euclidean nature of these objects,
additional challenges arise from the sparsity of available data in many
longitudinal studies, due to missing data or irregular sampling schemes. This
research addresses these issues and challenges and will lead to techniques to
quantify the variability of complex dynamics by developing principled and
theoretically supported methodology for the analysis of these more complex data
types. This research will benefit the analysis and understanding of the time
dynamics of social and biological networks, and of other time-indexed objects,
as well as the analysis of high-dimensional functional data. The research
includes novel methods for the classification of functional data, which is an
increasingly important problem in itself. It also includes methodology for the
analysis of short snippets of time-dynamic observations, due to the need to come
to quick conclusions under limited observation time, which is a feature of many
current longitudinal studies in biomedical fields.
