
* 1407557
* Statistical learning via multivariate density estimation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,06/12/2017
* Wing Hung Wong,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 599,539.00

The overall goal of the project is to develop methodologies of density
estimation in multiple dimensions, and to develop new tools based on this
methodology for selected problems in data compression, image analysis and
graphical model inference. Density estimation is a fundamental problem in
statistics but traditional approaches such as kernel density estimation are not
well suited to handle the large multivariate data sets in current applications.
The research in this project is centered on the methodology and application of
multivariate density estimation. By creating effective methods for this problem,
this project will also benefit many other research problems in applied
statistics and machine learning where density estimation can be used as a
building block for the solution, for example, image segmentation, data
compression and network modeling. Specifically, the project will address the
question of how to infer a partition of the sample space that will reveal the
structure of the underlying data distribution. The partition will be learned
from the observed data based on a Bayesian nonparametric approach which imposes
minimal assumptions on the distribution to be estimated. Efficient and scalable
algorithms for such inferences will be designed for the analysis of large data
sets in multiple dimensions. The theoretical properties of the estimates, such
as asymptotic consistency and convergence rates, will also be investigated.
