
* 1407771
* Spectral and principal components analysis in sparse, high-dimensional data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2014,05/04/2016
* Jing Lei,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

With the rapid advances in data collection technology, relational data is
becoming increasingly important in modern sciences. Broadly speaking, relational
data records interactions and dependences among actors in a population of
interest. A typical example is network data, such as social networks, world-
wide-web, and terrorist networks, where each actor is represented by a node in
the network and an interaction between two actors is represented by the presence
of an edge between the corresponding nodes. Another common form of relational
data is covariance and correlation data, which summarizes pairwise dependence
among actors, such as gene-gene co-expression, functional correlation in brain
imaging, and spatial correlation in atmospheric and oceanographic measurements.
Such data sets often contain important structures that can provide key insights
to the population of interest. For example, the population of actors in a
network data may be divided into several communities with different connectivity
patterns; the population in a correlation data may contain a few important
actors that account for most of the observed variability. However, the high
dimensionality and complex dependence structure in these data sets make it a
challenging statistical problem to recover these hidden structures.

This research project aims at advancing the theory and methodology in
statistical inference for network and covariance data using spectral and
principal components analysis. These two topics are brought together and studied
using a novel set of tools recently developed in random matrix theory, spectral
analysis, and empirical process theory. This project will investigate three
topics. The first topic is a better understanding and refinement of community
recovery in sparse network models using spectral clustering, one of the most
popular methods in the literature and in practice. The second topic is network
community detection in a statistical minimax framework, including information-
theoretic lower bounds quantified by a comprehensive collection of model
parameters, and optimal estimation procedures that achieve the lower bounds. The
third topic is goodness-of-fit tests for general sparse principal components
analysis models, where adaptive procedures will be developed using a detection
boundary framework; and the high dimensionality challenge will be tackled by
considering regular alternatives such as Sobolev ellipsoids.
