
* 1407475
* Solution of Sparse High-Dimensional Linear Inverse problems with Application to Analysis of Dynamic Contrast Enhanced Imaging Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Marianna Pensky,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

The project is motivated by analysis of Dynamic Contrast Enhanced (DCE) imaging
data. DCE imaging provides a noninvasive measure of tumor angiogenesis and has
great potential for cancer detection and characterization. It offers an
extremely useful tool for the evaluation and optimization of new therapeutic
strategies as well as for long-term evaluation of therapeutic impacts of anti-
angiogenic treatments. The current project will be greatly beneficial for a)
reducing health care costs by replacing expensive and invasive tests by analysis
of medical images, and by shortening hospital stays for stroke patients due to
better monitoring of drug effectiveness; b) the medical practice, since
development of novel path-breaking methodologies for analysis of DCE imaging
data will potentially improve clinical outcomes by providing non-invasive tools
for cancer detection and characterization and for longitudinal evaluation of
therapeutic impact of anti-angiogenic treatments; c) medical research, since the
software for analysis of DCE imaging data will be freely available to everyone
who carries out examination of such data and, thus, will contribute to design of
new methodologies; d) other types of medical imaging techniques, since
methodologies resulted from the proposal will contribute to understanding of
reconstruction of sparse high-dimensional functions in the presence of noise;
and e) various fields of science such as geophysics and astronomy, which rely on
solution of noisy inverse problems. The current project presents an integral
effort of merging applications and theory. Mathematically, the problem reduces
to solution of a noisy version of a matrix-variate Laplace convolution equation
based on discrete measurements. We shall use very modern techniques designed for
recovery of sparse representations that led to many successful developments in
image and signal analysis and other applications. However, since majority of
those methods rely on very stringent assumptions, only few of them have been
adopted for solution of inverse ill-posed problems. In addition, recently,
acquisition of new types of data brought to light new types of the linear
inverse problems where the function of interest is itself vector or matrix-
valued. So far, the new challenge has been addressed by separate recovery of
each component of the solution. However, recent developments in the area of
sparse matrix estimation allow for much more coherent solution of the problem.
Furthermore, in many applications, the operator itself is unknown and is
estimated from data. Although often the uncertainty in the operator is ignored,
we are planning to account for operator uncertainty. The goal of the present
proposal is to extend techniques based on penalized optimization or exponential
weights to solution of sparse ill-posed high-dimensional linear inverse problems
where the operator may be not be known exactly and the function of interest is
matrix-variate. We are planning to put a solid theoretical foundation under the
proposed new methodologies, develop computational algorithms for their
implementation, and apply the newly constructed algorithms to solution of
Laplace convolution equation and, subsequently, to analysis of DCE imaging data
obtained in ongoing REMISCAN studies.
