
* 1407819
* Statistical Inference on Memory Structure of Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Zsolt Talata,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Finite-memory models of time series are used in statistics, information theory,
bioinformatics and various other disciplines. Specific areas of applications
include lossless data compression, universal prediction of individual sequences,
linguistics to compare dialects of languages and genetics for modeling of DNA
sequences. The Markov random field model can be regarded as a generalization of
the finite-memory property to spatial processes. Markov random fields are
special Gibbs fields, therefore they provide essential models in statistical
physics for modeling interactive particle systems. They are also used in several
other fields, including image processing and pattern recognition. Both models
involve information sufficient in many applications but general enough to model
large amount of data and to be computed in feasible time.

A discrete-time stochastic process is a Markov chain of order k if the memory
depth of the process is k. Estimating the order from a sample, a finite-length
observation of the process, is a statistical model selection problem. The
project considers the penalized maximum likelihood method and studies
statistical inference on the Markov order for stationary ergodic and other
processes. A stochastic process on a multidimensional integer lattice is a
Markov random field if the distribution at a site depends only on the values of
sites from a finite neighborhood, called basic neighborhood. The project
addresses the problem of statistical estimation of the basic neighborhood from a
sample, a single realization of the process observed in a finite region. Since
large sample sizes are typical in applications, asymptotic behavior - such as
consistency of the estimation procedures - is studied in addition to error
probabilities for finite sample sizes. Computational complexity is a fundamental
aspect in model selection problems so this property of the developed statistical
procedures is studied as well. The research includes collaborative work with
researchers in the area, and it also involves the potential of broadening the
applications of the results in collaboration with researchers from the areas of
applications, namely, from bioinformatics and engineering. The project provides
opportunity for graduate students to collaborate in research.
