
* 1407600
* New Horizons in Statistical Decision Theory
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2014,06/13/2019
* Michael Nussbaum,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 370,000.00

The classical metric theory of statistical models (experiments) has been
extended towards an asymptotic equivalence paradigm, allowing to classify and
relate problems which are essentially infinite dimensional and ill-posed.
Asymptotic equivalence theory is emerging as a recognizable research area in
statistics. The theoretical possibility to carry over optimal procedures from
one model to another allows a better conceptual understanding of asymptotic
inference. This area is still under vigorous development, and new problems arise
in the context of asymptotic inference based on high-dimensional data. Modern
statistical concepts like these are also being integrated into the emerging
field of quantum statistics, which is developing on the background of
technological breakthroughs in quantum engineering. The analysis of quantum
statistical models points towards an underlying non-commutative statistical
decision theory with connections to operator algebra, quantum information and
quantum probability. By focusing on this growing research area at the interface
of Statistics and Mathematical Physics, the project will have the side effect of
fostering interaction between the different scientific communities.

One of the unexplored topics in asymptotic equivalence theory is the impact of
additional observations in nonparametric models. Le Cam showed that in the
regular parametric case, additional observations are negligible in an asymptotic
information sense if their number is one order of magnitude below the original
sample size, but for larger parameter spaces this critical threshold seems to be
lower. Reasoning via additional observations has been applied in the past to
prove equivalence of spectral density to white noise models, and may prove
useful again for problems related to estimation of high-dimensional matrices. In
a related topic, it is of interest to further refine sharp nonparametric risk
bounds like the Pinsker bound, which have motivated the development of
equivalence theory. Here the research program aims at confirming a conjecture
about a bound of this type for sharp adaptive nonparametric testing, a possible
complement to results in adaptive estimation. In the problem of symmetric
quantum hypothesis testing, or discrimination between two quantum states, the
program focuses on applications of the quantum Chernoff bound pertaining to the
exponential rate of decay of the error probability. In that connection, several
new problems appear, such as attainability of the bound by realizable receivers
in quantum optics, and variants for discriminating states given by quantum
Markov chains. An area of particular interest is local asymptotic normality for
quantum statistical models. Some elements of such a theory have already been put
forward in the literature; these notions will be further developed in the spirit
of Le Cam's classical theory, focusing at first on the quantum analog of
Gaussian stationary sequences.
