
* 1412343
* Collaborative Research: Axially symmetric processes and intrinsic random functions on the sphere
* DMS,STATISTICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/31/2013,12/02/2013
* Haimeng Zhang,NC,University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 47,468.00

In spatial statistics, a wide variety of methods and models have been developed
in Euclidean spaces. Additional theory and methods are needed for analyzing
processes and phenomena on the sphere, many of which are of utmost importance in
the geophysical sciences. Data from global networks of in situ and satellite
sensors, for instance, are used to monitor a wide array of important
climatological variables such as temperature and precipitation. The goal of this
project is to study random processes on the sphere beyond the usual homogeneity
assumption using two approaches. The first approach is to consider axially
symmetry on the sphere, where the random process exhibits longitudinal symmetry
rather than being rotation invariant on the entire sphere. The second approach
of this research extends the intrinsic random functions and generalized
covariance functions to processes on the sphere. The notion of intrinsic random
functions has been developed in order to handle a process with an unknown and
possibly non-constant mean function while preserving a linkage to stationarity.
The investigators plan to achieve a fundamental understanding of the covariance
structures of the non-homogenous processes on the sphere and to develop
associated estimation procedures. In addition, these approaches are extended to
more sophisticated situations including multivariate random processes and
spatio-temporal processes on the sphere. All of these methods and models are
applied to global-scale temperature data from surface and satellite sensors.

The models and methods developed here provide new tools for improving our
understanding of global-scale phenomena in general and multi- decadal
temperature variations in particular. The motivation of this project comes from
a desire to understand the statistical characteristics of global-scale
temperature variations during the instrumental (1880s onward) and satellite
(1979 onward) periods. As a result, two important and widely used data sets are
analyzed here:(1) tropospheric temperature data from National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration satellite-based Microwave Sounding Unit and (2)
surface-based instrumental data from the Hadley Centre in the United Kingdom and
Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia. The geostatistical
analysis of these data sets on the sphere provides profound information on the
state of our changing planetary environment. The project also establishes and
encourages research and education collaborations between Indiana University and
Mississippi State University.
