
* 1431409
* Conference Proposal -- StatFest 2013
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2014,03/10/2014
* Javier Rojo,NV,Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2014
* USD 21,515.00

StaFest conference will be held on October 12, 2013 at Rice University. The
StaFest is an annual event partially supported by the American Statistical
Association through the Committee on Minorities in Statistics. This year, the
International Year of Statistics, this event will be especially significant. The
goal of the StatFest is to showcase the work by statisticians in all realms of
human endeavors, and by doing so, to encourage undergraduate students -- mostly
non-traditional and underrepresented -- to pursue graduate careers in the
statistical sciences. In addition, opportunities for graduate fellowships are
discussed in the context of opportunities for graduate work in specific
institutions. These goals are achieved by gathering a cadre of dynamic speakers
who are top researchers in their respective domains (government, industry,
academia, etc.) who are able to transmit their enthusiasm for the statistical
sciences. In addition, a panel of graduate students discusses more specifically
opportunities, challenges, and anecdotes that can be helpful for the soon-to-be
graduate students. The conference also offers plenty of one-on-one discussion
opportunities between undergraduate students and professional statisticians
through communitarian meals (breakfast, lunch, and two coffee breaks) and, for
the first time in the history of StatFests, an undergraduate research poster
session at the end of the day. Students that will be recruited from across
Texas. Traditionally the StatFest has recruited students from institutions in
the host city. But this year, due to the International Year of Statistics, it is
envisioned that the event will have more of a regional impact rather than a
local one. The conference will assemble a group of top professional
statisticians from academia, industry and government to showcase their
activities with the purpose of enticing undergraduate students to pursue
graduate careers in the statistical sciences. Students, mostly from
underrepresented groups in the statistical sciences, engage in conversations
about, and learn about cutting edge problems and solutions in, various realms of
scientific inquiry, and most importantly, students come to appreciate the
fundamental role that the statistical sciences play in supporting and guiding
the fundamental scientific research and in the process get interested in
pursuing graduate careers. The StatFest continues to have a major positive
impact on the decisions of undergraduate students regarding graduate work. As a
substantial percentage of those students attending the StatFest are from
underrepresented groups in the statistical sciences, the StatFest -- clearly and
compellingly-- provides a launching platform for many underrepresented students.
These efforts will have an impact in helping to alleviate the well-documented
national critical need to train more students from underrepresented groups in
postgraduate careers in the mathematical sciences.
