
* 1442192
* Adaptive Design Based upon Covariate Information: New Designs and Their Properties
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/25/2013,04/23/2014
* Feifang Hu,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 108,807.00

Covariate information is usually available and often plays a critical role in a
clinical study. The stratified permuted block design and the classical
covariate-adaptive designs have been widely employed to balance important
covariates in clinical trials. Both designs have some serious drawbacks. In
addition, there is no theoretical justification of the covariate-adaptive
designs in the literature. In this project, two new families of adaptive designs
are proposed and their properties are studied. The first family of designs
overcomes the drawbacks of the stratified permuted block design and the
classical covariate-adaptive design, and hence provides better balance. The
second family of designs is proposed to detect the interaction between treatment
and covariate more efficiently. Also the investigator introduces a new technique
(called "drift conditions") to study the asymptotic properties of covariate-
adaptive designs. This project will produce new sequential tools for solving
many practical problems. The proposed methods will be applied to some specific
applications.

The objective of this project is to develop new methods for clinical trials
based upon covariate information. With today's advanced technology, it becomes
easier and easier to collect useful covariate information in sequential
experiments. For example, scientists have identified many new biomarkers that
may link to certain diseases over the past several decades. Since one is now
able to collect information on important biomarkers (covariate information) of
each patient, it becomes more and more important to incorporate information on
covariates into the design of clinical trials. The investigator will propose two
new families of adaptive designs and study their properties. The first family of
designs overcomes the drawbacks of the classical covariate-adaptive designs. The
second family of designs is proposed to detect the interaction between treatment
and covariate more efficiently. Upon completion of this project, one will be
able to apply new designs in clinical trials for personalized medicine. The
research project will produce some advanced statistical tools, which may be
applied in many fields including drug development, medical studies, industrial
experiments, economics and finance.
