
* 1454377
* CAREER: An Integrated Inferential Framework for Big Data Research and Education
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2015,07/13/2017
* Han Liu,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 192,630.00

This project addresses several fundamental challenges in modern data analysis
and aims to create a new research area named Big Data Inference. Currently
available literature regarding Big Data research mainly focuses on developing
new estimators for complex data. However, most of these estimators are still in
lack of systematic inferential methods for uncertainty assessment. This project
hopes to bridge this gap by developing new inferential theory for modern
estimators unique to Big Data analysis. The deliverables of this project include
easy-to-use software packages, which directly help scientists to explore and
analyze complex datasets. The principal investigator is also actively
collaborating with many scientists to ensure the more direct impact of this
project to the targeted scientific communities.

This project aims to develop novel inferential methods for assessing uncertainty
(e.g., constructing confidence intervals or testing hypotheses) of modern
statistical procedures unique to Big Data analysis. In particular, it develops
innovative statistical inferential tools for a variety of machine learning
methods which have not yet been equipped with inferential power. It also
provides necessary inferential tools for the next generation of scientists to be
competitive in modern data analysis.
