
* 1463094
* A New Treatment to Dimension Reduction via Semiparametrics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2014,09/18/2014
* YANYUAN MA,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 282,588.00

The principal investigator (P.I.) will study six topics in dimension reduction
problems, develop new methodologies and analyze their properties and
performances. Topic One concerns central space estimation. The P.I. will
initiate a totally different approach from the current literature, using a
semiparametric treatment. The new view point results in a complete class of
estimators for the central space which contains all possible estimators. In
addition, it relaxes various conditions currently required in the existing
methods. Finally, it illustrates the relations between various existing
estimators and reveals the underlying reason which enables all these estimators
to function. Topic Two concerns central mean space estimation. The P.I. will
establish parallel results to Topic One, using the same general idea but via
different analytic derivation. Topic Three concerns two common conditions in
dimension reduction: the linearity condition and the constant variance
condition. The P.I. will reveal an astonishing discovery that these conditions
are not only redundant, but also detrimental. They are redundant in that
consistent estimation can still be carried out of these conditions are relaxed.
They are detrimental in two ways. 1. If these conditions are not met, but are
falsely assumed, the classical estimators are biased. 2. If these conditions are
met and are used, the classic estimators will have inflated variances compared
to the same estimator without using these conditions. This research will prompt
re-evaluation of these popular conditions and divert the current research trend
of further exploiting these conditions. Topic Four concerns statistical
inference and efficient estimation of the central space. The P.I. will devise a
convenient parameterization and proposeto convert the space estimation problem
to an equivalent parameter estimation problem which facilitates statistical
inference. The P.I. will also establish the semiparametric efficiency bound for
the central space estimation and will derive the optimal efficient estimator.
She will further provide theoretical proof of the root-$n$ convergence rate and
the efficiency. Topic Five concerns inference and efficient estimation for the
central mean space. The P.I. will establish parallel results to Topic Four,
illustrate the difference between the two problems and highlight their
drastically different analytic results. Topic Six concerns deciding the
dimension of the reduced space. The P.I. will propose three methods tailored to
different estimation procedures and examine their usefulness.

The series of projects in this proposal will shed new light on the dimension
reduction problems and resolve some of the most fundamental and outstanding
issues in this field. Accompanying the modern development of sciences and
technologies, richer and more complex data have become a common phenomenon. Data
sets from medical science, genetics, environmental science, social behavioral
science including internet behavior studies easily contain a large amount of
variables that dimension reduction is unavoidable. The new methodologies will
generate wide interest and have important application in these fields. They will
also provoke further studies and development in related semiparametric problems
and computing methods in statistical sciences itself.
