
* 1501767
* RTG: Geometry and Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 09/01/2015,08/21/2019
* Susan Holmes,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,912,390.00

Statistical tools for the analysis of heterogeneous data have become
increasingly important, leading both to the prominence of the new field of data
science and to a need for more researchers at all levels. This project will
train the next generation of leaders in the field. The Statistics and Geometry
Research Training Group (RTG) will provide gateways for students at the various
academic levels: The program will fund undergraduate research programs to get
students excited by research so that they see themselves pursuing a graduate
career in statistics. Graduate students will have the opportunity to develop
their own classes in the summer, providing them with a gateway to an academic
career as they see themselves becoming teachers and mentors. Three newly created
postdoctoral positions will train doctoral recipients with a strong quantitative
background in the emerging field of data science. The common theme linking all
the participants will be the use of geometric methods in statistics and their
applications to high dimensional complex data in modern biology. The program is
structured to maximize mentoring and interaction opportunities, providing each
participant with a broad perspective of the state of the art in statistics
through highly relevant courses and working groups in statistics and geometry
and their applications to biology. A salient feature of the program is that it
will develop both the intellectual breadth as well as the mentoring and
communication skills of the participants. The program will allow more U.S.
students to supplement their interests in mathematics, applied mathematics, or
computer science with involvement in data science, which is a crucial current
need in many areas of information technology. The progress made in the analysis
of heterogeneous data will enhance medical discovery through improved
visualization and geometrical representations as well as the possibility to
assess levels of uncertainty in making decisions based on images or network
data. Domains of application will include computational anatomy, neuroscience,
immunology, and genomics.

The methods developed will extend multivariate statistics where specific metrics
(such as Fisher's Information metric, Mahalanobis distance, or L1) have already
provided successful projections and geometric representations. Differential
geometry will provide a rigorous framework that enables the incorporation of
local information. The questions raised by using statistics on non-Euclidean
varieties will be addressed in collaboration with computational geometers,
statisticians, and mathematicians. Creating formal initiatives in geometry,
statistics, and information science will bring new energy and focus into the
curriculum, with mathematically grounded students encouraged to attack applied
data analytic challenges. A key component of this initiative is outreach to
women and minority students. Material and tools developed by the program will
include open source visualization and approximations packages written in the R
programming language.
