
* 1505256
* Collaborative Research: New Statistical Methods and Theory for High-Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2015,08/04/2017
* Lingzhou Xue,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 126,102.00

High-dimensional data have become ubiquitous in this big-data era. In recent
years, many statistical methods and theory have been developed for analyzing
high-dimensional data with successful applications in practice. There are still
many challenges and open problems to be addressed. Their solutions call for
innovative ideas. The proposed research projects are motivated by real
applications where the current state-of-the-art high-dimensional data analytic
methods fail to deliver good solutions. The research results will be directly
applicable in various fields such as genomics, medical imaging, public health,
social networks, E-commerce, and among others. For example, methods developed in
this proposal will enable us to better understand how a social network evolves
and how brain functions change with age. The research results will be
disseminated through journal publications, conference presentations and seminar
talks. This proposal has an education program that contributes to the education
and training of the next-generation statisticians.

In this project novel statistical methods and theory are proposed to study three
important topics of large-scale statistical inference: (a) dynamic graphical
models and latent graphical models, (b) high-dimensional regression with noisy
and corrupted data, and (c) profile matrix inference in structural pursuit. The
investigators will develop innovative techniques to handle the methodological,
computational and theoretical challenges. The research results will not only
provide new powerful data analytic tools for solving open problems in (a), (b)
and (c), but also shed light on general principles for statistical learning from
complex high-dimensional data. In order to make the research outcomes readily
available to other researchers and practitioners, the investigators will
implement the methodology developed in this proposal into software packages that
will be publicly distributed.
