
* 1505780
* Semiparametric Statistical Methods for Replicated Point Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,07/25/2015
* Daniel Gervini,WI,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,907.00

The main goal of this project is the development of statistical tools for the
analysis of points that occur at random in time or space, such as the locations
of street robberies in a given city or the timings of spikes of neural activity
for an individual performing a certain task. These data arise in many different
fields including neuroscience, ecology, finance, astronomy, seismology, and
criminology. The statistical methods to be developed under this project will
then provide new data-analysis and inference tools for researchers and
practitioners in diverse scientific fields. They will also be applicable to the
analysis of data arising in strategic areas such as defense, public health and
economy, thus contributing to the improvement of the well-being of individuals
in society, the economic competitiveness of the United Stated, and national
security. The educational activities related to this project, including the
supervision of Ph.D. and Master's theses and the development of graduate and
undergraduate Statistics courses, will also contribute to the improvement of
graduate and undergraduate STEM education.

In this project, semiparametric methods for estimation of the intensity
functions of replicated point processes will be developed. In recent years,
replicated point processes have become more common, and the possibility of
pooling data across replications allows for the development of more efficient
statistical methods. However, replicated point processes have received little
attention in the Statistics literature and the methods to be developed under
this project will help bridge that gap. The methods will be equally applicable
to temporal or spatial processes, and will be developed for independent and
identically distributed replications as well as for more complex dependency
structures, such as ANOVA models, point processes with covariates, and
multivariate processes. The research activities to be undertaken include the
development of statistical models and parameter estimation methods, the
development of algorithms and computer programs to implement these methods, the
study of theoretical large sample properties, the study of small sample
properties by simulation, and the analysis of real datasets.
