
* 1505367
* Max-Linear Competing Factor Models and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2015,07/09/2017
* Zhengjun Zhang,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Throughout applications in diverse fields, analysis of extreme risks plays an
important scientific and societal role. This importance is exemplified by the
2007-2008 financial crisis, during which the concurrent decline of almost every
asset category gave investors few options. These kinds of events can be
described by an index termed asymptotic dependence, a probability concept that
has been used to depict two risk variables concurrently going wrong. On the
other hand, although the extremes of high-frequency financial transaction data
have a huge economic impact, the basic structure of the data has been ignored up
to now. The primary goal of this research project is to find a statistical
method for characterizing such extreme risks. The nonlinear competing factor
model and nonlinear time series model under investigation in this project will
bridge the gap between theoretical research and practice. The dissemination of
new methodologies and statistical tools will lead to a better understanding of
concurrent decline and extreme co-movement.

In the multivariate context, it is well-known that nonlinear dependence,
asymmetric dependence, and asymptotic dependence co-exist in financial time
series, social network studies, climate studies, image processing, and many
other application areas. A major goal of this project is to make significant
methodological and theoretical contributions to modeling observations
simultaneously, while embracing the different variable dependence features. The
project consists of two main sub-projects. The first sub-project proposes a max-
linear competing factor model that can incorporate the different variable
dependence features but still possesses a simple form of factor structure. The
second sub-project builds a new family of multivariate time series models
(Copula Structured M4 Processes) suitable for multivariate maxima of high
frequency intra-day returns. Using these models, the probability of the
concurrent decline of assets in a typical stock market will be evaluated. The
integration of the two sub-projects provides a comprehensive framework for
understanding how variables depend on each other in high dimensional and
temporal observational data.
