
* 1507078
* Collaborative Research: Smoothing Spline Semiparametric Density Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,07/30/2015
* Anna Liu,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 129,265.00

A probability density function of multiple variables describes the likelihood of
different values the variables can jointly take, therefore, contains full
information regarding the distribution of individual variables and their
interactions. Given observed data of the random variables, density estimation is
at the heart of Statistics and machine learning, where the classical problems
such as regression, variable selection, clustering, and dimension reduction, can
all be cast into a density estimation problem. Advanced density estimation
methods are therefore essential for the extraction of as much information as
possible from the data. There has been lack of systematic research in flexible
density estimation with high dimensional data or complex data such as clustered
data. The overall goal of this project is to develop a smoothing spline based
systematic framework that allows for flexible density model building for complex
and high dimensional data. As such data arise from a wide range of applications,
the results of this proposed research are useful for researchers from a wide
range of fields. In particular, the proposed methods will be applied to analyze
data in health and medicine, speech, environmental change, food and computer
sciences, in collaboration with researchers in these areas. High-performance
computing tools will be developed as a result of this research and made publicly
available.

This project adopts a semi-parametric approach that combines advantages of
parametric and nonparametric methods. Flexible and general semi-parametric
density and conditional density models for independent and clustered data will
be developed and studied. Regularization methods for adaptive density
estimation, variable selection in high dimensional conditional density
estimation and interaction selection in semi-parametric graphical models will be
developed. Nonparametric components will be modeled using reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces which can deal with different density models on different domains
with different penalties in a unified fashion. The semiparametric density models
considered in this project contain most existing semiparametric density models
as special cases as well as many new interesting models. Many methods in this
project for adaptive estimation, model/variable selection, model diagnostics and
inference are new. These novel methodologies constitute advances in density
estimation.
