
* 1509739
* Asymptotics and concentration in spectral estimation for large matrices
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2015,06/19/2015
* Vladimir Koltchinskii,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 289,425.00

Estimation of large matrices and their spectral characteristics is crucial in a
variety of problems of science and engineering that deal with large high-
dimensional data sets. Spectral methods are of the utmost importance in kernel
machine learning, manifold learning, functional data analysis, community
detection in large networks, quantum statistics and quantum information, and
many other applications. The purpose of the project is to develop new
mathematical tools needed in analysis of high-dimensional and infinite-
dimensional matrix estimation problems that could potentially lead to more
powerful methods of statistical inference for complex, high-dimensional data.
The project also includes a number of activities with an impact on graduate
education and on research collaborations between statistics, computer science
and other areas.

The focus of the project is on concentration properties and asymptotics of
spectral characteristics (eigenvalues, eigenvectors, spectral projectors) of
several important classes of random matrices and operators playing crucial role
in high dimensional and infinite dimensional statistical inference and in
machine learning. They include sample covariance operators, kernel matrices in
machine learning, empirical heat kernels and Laplacians for manifold data,
matrices involved in spectral clustering problems on graphs, matrix estimators
in trace regression problems (such as matrix completion and quantum state
tomography). The main goal is to study the problems where there exists an
operator norm consistent estimator of the target matrix (operator), but it
converges at a slow rate and to develop a broad range of concentration bounds
and asymptotic results for specific functionals of the underlying random matrix
(operator) such as its eigenvalues, bilinear forms of its spectral projection
operators, norms of deviations of empirical spectral projection operators from
their true counterparts. The solution of these problems relies on further
development of the methods of high-dimensional probability, such as
concentration inequalities, generic chaining bounds for Gaussian, empirical and
related classes of stochastic processes, non-asymptotic bounds for random
matrices.
