
* 1509023
* Collaborative Research: Studies on Signals and Images via the Fourier Transform
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS, Cross-BIO Activities, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Activation
* 08/15/2015,05/30/2017
* Weining Shen,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 03/31/2019
* USD 199,001.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel statistical methods that address
some of the current challenges in analyzing spatio-temporal data frequently
encountered in neuroimaging. One major application of this project is to
identify features in brain signals that could differentiate healthy individuals
from patients with neurological or mental diseases. The second application is to
identify changes that take place in a brain signal during cognitive processing
(e.g., while a human learns a new motor skill or while a rat learns risks and
rewards in a controlled experiment). The third application is to identify
biomarkers in brain signals that could predict a stroke patient's ability to
recover loss of motor functionality. The approach used to solve these problems
requires a study of the oscillatory patterns in these brain signals. Motivated
by these practical problems, statistical methods based on the discrete Fourier
transform (DFT) are developed. The DFT gives an indication of the decomposition
of variance in the time series. Under stationarity, the covariance of the DFT is
sparse and thus a departure from sparsity is an indication of non-stationarity.
Moreover, the covariance of the DFT can be utilized as a discriminator between
classes of signals. Using the properties of the DFT, novel methods for (1)
change-point detection in time series based on sparsity of the DFT, and (2)
discrimination and classification of classes of time series based on the
properties of the covariance of the DFT will be developed. The DFT will also be
used to estimate the variance of functionals of the spectrum and test for serial
correlation and stationarity in nonlinear time series. Validation for stationary
spatial processes and non-stationary spatial processes using the two-dimensional
DFT will also be developed.
