
* 1510238
* Bayesian estimation and uncertainty quantification for high dimensional data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2015,06/12/2017
* Subhashis Ghoshal,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

Statistical data in modern context appear in increasing size, form and
complexity such as images, videos, functions, trees from diverse sources
including barcodes, internet searches, social networks, mobile devices,
satellites, genomics, medical scans etc. Such data are typically huge in size
and dimension. Nevertheless, some lower dimensional structures is commonly
hidden within such data. The Bayesian approach to decision making is
particularly useful in the context since structural property in the data can be
easily incorporated in its framework and can automatically quantify the
uncertainty in the decision making process. Computation however remains a
challenge in the big data regime since common computing methods do not scale
well, especially when a large number of models are involved in the analysis.
Some of the newest cutting-edge techniques for computing and evaluating methods
will be used in the proposed research. It will have significant impact on
studying relations between variables in human brain development, gene-pathway
analysis and other applications. Computational packages will be developed and
users will be given free access. Results will be disseminated through articles,
seminars and talks given at various places. The proposed research will connect
various concepts together and synthesize into a powerful approach for analyzing
high dimensional data appropriate for subject specific and interdisciplinary
research in STEM disciplines. The educational component of the proposal will
impact human resource development in the form of graduate student advising and
offering of special topics courses. The PI is committed to involving female
students and students from under-represented groups to promote diversity.

The proposed research will have all round involvement in theory, computation and
application concerning Bayesian analysis of high dimensional data of various
types. Both parametric and nonparametric models will be considered and important
issues of estimation, prediction, clustering and assessing model uncertainty
will be addressed for a variety of data types including graphs, networks,
pathways and trees. Techniques of prior construction, scalable computation and
uncertainty quantification will be developed and study of frequentist
convergence properties of the resulting procedures will be initiated. Some of
the most recent ideas on continuous shrinkage priors which have computational
advantage in the high dimensional setting will be employed in the proposed
research. Study of posterior convergence properties is extremely delicate in
nonparametric and high dimensional models. Using the theoretical tools developed
by the PI and other researchers will be employed to study convergence properties
of the posterior distributions, and thus will help identify the most efficient
methods. The methods developed from the proposed research will be applied in
studying brain images, cancer studies and various other contexts.
