
* 1512975
* Functional Data Analysis: From Univariate to High-Dimensional Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2015,07/09/2017
* Jane-Ling Wang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 179,999.00

This project deals with data that are in the form of functions, images, and
shapes. A common feature of such data is that they are infinite dimensional,
which distinguishes them from traditional data. Methodology and theory for these
data is termed "functional data analysis," an area that is rapidly evolving. The
infinite dimensional nature of functional data calls for sampling and dimension
reduction approaches, which are challenging due to the large sizes of the data
sets. This research tackles these challenges by developing novel dimension
reduction methodology to model univariate functional data (Projects 1 and 2), as
well as next generation functional data (Projects 3 and 4). The guiding
principle is to accomplish dimension reduction and flexible modeling
simultaneously. The proposed research, motivated by potential applications to
research on aging, biomedical research, and neuroimaging, includes theory,
methodology, data analysis, and applications. The project is also driven by the
pressing need to involve more statisticians in brain research and to train the
next generation of statisticians to tackle the challenges of big data. Software
development is a key component of this project, and the accompanying computer
code will be integrated into an existing open-source package, PACE, available
for public access.

Functional data analysis is a fascinating area in statistics that deals with a
sample of random functions. However, measurements of these random functions,
realistically, can only be taken at discrete time points or grids, and the
measurements often are contaminated by noise. Current approaches in functional
data analysis are typically tailored toward specific sampling plans for the
measurements. In Project 1, a unifying approach, both in theory and in
implementation, for functional regression is proposed. The focus is on dimension
reduction models for functional responses and functional/vector covariates,
where spline basis functions will be used to estimate the unknown nonparametric
components functions. Project 2 deals with a new class of functional survival
models that accommodate censored univariate response data with functional/vector
covariates. These models differ fundamentally from existing survival models, and
can handle censored response data in contrast to current functional
(generalized) linear models. Projects 3 and 4 deal with multivariate functional
data, with Project 3 focusing on measures of disparity or synchronization for
pairs of functional data, and Project 4 focusing on reconfiguration of high-
dimensional multivariate functional data. New functional measures of distance or
synchronization are proposed in Project 3 using a novel concept that aims at
concordance of the derivatives of functional data. These new measures facilitate
the reconfiguration of high-dimensional functional data in Project 4, so that
functions in nearby regions of the reconfigured space are smoothly connected,
thereby overcoming the curse of high dimensionality. The proposed
reconfiguration methods not only extend the multidimensional scaling method from
multivariate to functional data, but also turn the curse of high dimensionality
into a blessing under mild assumptions.
