
* 1512084
* Valid Inference when Analytical Models are Approximations
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2015,08/20/2018
* Linda Zhao,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 531,966.00

Statistical inferential methods are used to answer questions throughout modern
life. For example, what affects the crime rate in a town; which factors are
important influences on the housing market; which genes are associated to a
certain disease; what are the most important elements to control in order to
mitigate climate change? Statistical methods are used to address questions such
as these. However, often the statistical data structure and the mathematical
model developed for the analysis do not agree. This project arises from a
broadly based statistical concern about the mismatch between standard
inferential analyses and the statistics of the world they are trying to
describe. This research draws a distinction between the statistical models that
conventionally describe the correlational relations in experimental and
observational data and the inferential models that are used in their analysis.
To this end, the project investigates a paradigm in which sampling models are
meant to be faithful representations of the real-world structure of the data
they are describing. At the same time, the analytical models to be applied to
the data are viewed only as approximate descriptions of that reality. The
statistical-sampling representations need not match the analytical models,
though the two should harmonize in certain important respects. There is a
significant disparity between accurate characterization and what is claimed by
classical procedures that ignore this distinction. The distinction has been
noted by many previous statistical researchers, and various partially adequate
approaches have been suggested. Nevertheless, clarifying this distinction in the
directions under study and then pursuing the consequences leads to a theory of
inference somewhat different from that in common use for relational and
observational data. Acknowledging and properly accommodating this duality then
leads to new methodology for some important statistical problems. One such new
methodology is within the setting of randomized clinical trials in which one
wishes to estimate the effect of certain treatment(s) relative to others or to
placebo controls. Another is within the setting of semi-supervised learning that
occurs in various big-data contexts.

The core of the current research is designed for linear analytical models. These
involve observations on a vector of explanatory covariates (X-variables) and a
numerical dependent variable (Y). The analytical model constructs the best
linear approximant of Y as a linear function of the X variables. Virtually no
assumptions are made about the (X,Y) pairs in the sample, other than that they
form a statistical sample drawn from some unknown joint distribution of (X,Y)
pairs and possess desired low-order moments. The notion of "best" is defined in
a statistically natural fashion related to minimizing squared prediction error.
It follows that the ordinary least squares estimators of parameters still have
desirable asymptotic properties. Inference about their (asymptotic) performance
can be derived via the standard sandwich estimator. However, a newly derived
iterated pairs-bootstrap is shown to give substantially more accurate
inferential information for realistic sample sizes. If more information is
available about the distribution of X (such as knowledge of its mean and
variance) then the usual least-squares solutions can be improved. This
observation leads via an indirect path to suggestions that improve the standard
methodology for estimating average treatment effect in randomized clinical
trials and for producing linear predictions of numerical outcomes in settings of
semi-supervised learning. Various additional issues are exposed in the course of
the above developments. We also plan to investigate generalizations of the above
setting -- for example to models having categorical Y-variables (classification)
and to other generalized-linear analytical models. Our earlier research involved
post-selection inference in the classical setting in which models for the data
and its analysis coincide, and we now intend to pursue analogous issues in the
current context in which they do not.
