
* 1512930
* Network Detection and Analysis Through Semi-Parametric Odds Ratio Model
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,08/18/2017
* Hua Yun Chen,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop innovative statistical methods for
tackling the challenging problems in the analysis of massive data generated in
the studies of complex systems, such as biological systems, financial systems,
and social networks. This project addresses the lack of flexible statistical
models and methods for the analysis of high-dimensional network data with mixed
categorical and continuous measurements. The methodology and software under
development increase the accuracy of the network detection, estimation, and
interpretation, which have widespread applications. One such application is to
genomic research that holds great promise for better disease prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment. The project's approach to network analysis can reveal
more accurate structures of causal pathway and system functionalities, which in
turn can lead to better understand of the underlying biological mechanisms. The
project also provides training opportunities for the next generation
statisticians doing research on high-dimensional data.

Specifically, this project studies a flexible alternative to the traditional
Gaussian model in the analysis of multivariate data. Such data may be biasedly
sampled and may also include many discrete variables, which makes the data
inherently non-Gaussianly distributed. The semiparametric odds ratio model under
study in this project unifies and extends the Gaussian models for continuous
data and the log-linear model for categorical data. This approach not only
models complex associations with highly interpretable model parameters, it also
naturally address the problem of biased sampling designs frequently encountered
in biomedical data collection. The penalized likelihood approach can
consistently detect sparse associations among mixed continuous and discrete
variables (i.e., sparse association networks with mixed nodes). Novel theory for
consistent sparse network detection and algorithms for implementing the methods
will be developed. In comparison to the traditional Gaussian model for
association network detection, the methods under study have the advantages of
detecting sparse association between groups of variables without modeling the
association within the groups of variables in high-dimensional settings. The
research results can substantially improve the information extraction from high-
dimensional data and the interpretation of such information.
