
* 1512267
* Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Projection Tests and Related Topics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2015,08/10/2015
* Lan Wang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2018
* USD 76,625.00

Although high-dimensional data analysis has become the most active research area
in statistics, there are still many challenging unsolved problems which call for
the development of new methods and theory. This project aims to develop new
statistical tools and software to statistical modeling and inference on high-
dimensional data. The proposed research is expected to significantly enhance the
availability of statistical tools and software for analysis of high-dimensional
data, which have frequently been collected in many research areas including
genomics, biomedical imaging, functional magnetic resonance imaging, tomography,
tumor classifications and finance. Hence, the proposed work is expected to
benefit a broad range of scientists and researchers in various fields.

Considerable attention has been devoted to high-dimensional estimation and
sparsity recovery over the last 10 years, but much less is known about
hypothesis testing. In this project, the Pis first plan to develop new
projection Hotelling's test and chi-squares tests for high-dimensional one-
sample and two-sample mean problems. The tests are distinguished from the
existing ones in that they are based on optimal projection directions that are
derived to achieve optimal power performance. The PIs further propose an
effective data-driven method to estimate the optimal projection direction by a
sample-splitting strategy. The proposed procedure can be easily carried out.
They plan to investigate the estimation of the sparsity optimal projection
direction via regularization methods. Linear discriminant analysis has been
hugely successful in classification, but most of the existing procedures cannot
handle diverging number of classes. In this project, they also plan to study
ultrahigh dimensional linear discriminant analysis with a diverging number of
classes and develop new procedures enable researchers to apply low-dimensional
linear discriminant analysis techniques for ultrahigh-dimensional linear
discriminant analysis, and make ultrahigh-dimensional linear discriminant
analysis with a diverging number of classes computationally feasible in
practice. This model and associated new methodology have high potential for big
data analysis. The PIs plan to continue collaborating with engineers,
meteorologists, public health science researchers and prevention researchers and
introduce the proposed methodology to scientists beyond statistics and
biostatistics. The PIs plan to disseminate the research results through
publications, conference presentations and software distribution.
