
* 1513657
* Spatial-Temporal Modeling and Estimation of Epidemic Diseases and Invasive Plants Using Hawkes Point Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2015,07/18/2017
* Frederic Schoenberg,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

This research will provide new insights into the spread of epidemics and
invasive species. In particular, this project will introduce new, more precise
methods of estimating the spatial-temporal spread of epidemics. The results will
also be more robust and less dependent on potentially faulty modeling
assumptions compared with those based on currently used epidemiological methods.
As a result, the project will lead to improved, more accurate estimations and
forecasts, and a better understanding of the impact of policy decisions related
to the spread of epidemics and invasive species. Such implications are important
for preparedness as well as for urban planning, insurance, and public health
policy. The results will be disseminated scientifically, rigorously, and
responsibly, reflecting as accurately as possible the true threat presented by
infectious or invasive species. This project is especially timely given the
public health threat of recent disease epidemics such as Ebola.

This research project makes use of spatial-temporal Hawkes point process models
to characterize the dynamics of both human disease epidemics and invasive
species spread. Hawkes models are currently widely used in seismology to
describe earthquake catalogs. Though these models have outperformed their
competitors in earthquake forecasting experiments, and are often called
Epidemic-Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) models based on the notion that
earthquakes spread like epidemics, their use in application to the spread of
diseases or invasive species has been sparse. Instead, epidemiologists have
primarily used compartmental SIR models and their variants, which can have
serious limitations when used to describe the detailed local behavior of an
epidemic and can significantly overpredict counts of infections such as SARS.
Indeed, existing estimates of epidemic spread rates are fundamentally model-
dependent, and the addition of seemingly small changes to the models, or their
parameters, can result in dramatic differences in local hazard estimates. This
project will use and extend state of the art residual analysis techniques, such
as deviance residuals, super-thinned residuals, and Voronoi residuals, in order
to assess the goodness-of-fit of existing and proposed models and suggest ways
to refine and improve them. Recently, a modified Hawkes model was fit to
sightings of one invasive species of red banana trees spreading in a Costa Rican
rainforest, and the results proved useful for estimating immigration and
spatial-temporal spread rates, forecasting, and the detailed description of
properties of the invasive species. This type of point process analysis will be
extended to the study of human disease epidemics as well as other invasive
species. This project will use recently developed statistical methods for
estimating Hawkes point process models and their parameters, including non-
parametric techniques for estimating the triggering function without relying on
potentially flawed parametric models for the triggering rate, as well as modern
integral approximation techniques that substantially add stability and
computational efficiency to parameter estimates.
