
* 1513040
* High-Dimensional Bayesian Computations: The Moreau-Yosida Posterior Approximation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2015,08/04/2017
* Yves Atchade,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2018
* USD 358,449.00

Bayesian inference is a powerful statistical inference method that allows
statisticians and other scientists to combine existing knowledge with new data
samples for better inferences and decisions. The difficulty of sampling from
posterior distributions is one of the biggest impediments to a wider adoption of
Bayesian procedures in high-dimensional/big data analysis. There is a need for
fast and accurate posterior approximation methods to assist with the practical
implementation of Bayesian statistics in high-dimensional problems. This
research project will use ideas from the related field of optimization to
develop a Bayesian posterior approximation method that satisfies these
requirements. The methodology will find applications in a wide-range of areas
such as finance, marketing science, epidemiology, biology, medical sciences, and
others.

More specifically, there is a need in statistics for posterior approximation
methods in high-dimensional problems that: (a) produce approximations that are
easier to explore by Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and (b) are well-
understood from a theoretical viewpoint. This project will use the Moreau-Yosida
approximation and related tools from optimization and variational analysis to
develop a Bayesian posterior approximation method that satisfies the above two
conditions. The research from this project will help clarify similarities and
differences between optimization and simulation problems. This research will
also contributes to the theoretical analysis of Markov Chain Monte Carlo
algorithms, with the special focus on understanding the mixing time of MCMC
algorithms in high-dimensional settings. The project will also address open
problems in high-dimensional Bayesian variable selection and will develop some
novel modeling and computational solutions. There are many applied research
areas, including biomedical research, epidemiology, marketing science, and
social science research, where variable selection plays an important role.
Hence, results from this research will allow researchers in those areas to
better handle available data and gain new insights into relevant scientific
questions. On the educational side, the material from this research will form a
key component of the doctoral dissertation of the Ph.D. students supported by
this grant. The project will also enable the PI to use the related scientific
problems and datasets to enrich the learning experience of students in his
classes and possibly other classes taught by his colleagues. Furthermore, novel
methodologies from this research will be widely disseminated to the scientific
community through presentation of academic seminars as well as presentations at
high-visibility conferences in statistical computing.
