
* 1513566
* Nonlinear Dimension Reduction Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Yoonkyung Lee,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

In the era of Big Data, technological advances have brought significant changes
in the amount and the complexity of data generated in almost every discipline
from astronomy to genomics to medicine. It has become an essential component of
the intellectual endeavor to find meaningful patterns and extract relevant
information from large scale, high-dimensional data in a reliable and efficient
fashion. Understanding and capturing the regular structures underlying the data
is crucial for subsequent modeling and prediction. Low-dimensional projections
of data are often primary tools for uncovering the structure and coping with
high-dimensionality along with other techniques for sparsity or structural
simplicity. Methods for dimension reduction will help the process of gathering
information from data significantly. This project concerns nonlinear dimension
reduction methods which can be viewed as an extension of standard principal
component analysis (PCA) - a widely used tool for low-rank approximation of
data. The research aims to expand the scope of PCA to various types of data from
binary to ordinal responses to counts, and unravel the data embeddings given by
nonlinear extensions of PCA. Enhanced understanding of the existing tools and
the development of new tools in this research will improve statistical practice
in many ways.

This project is primarily focused on investigation of two nonlinear extensions
of PCA: kernel PCA and generalized PCA, for various data types including the
exponential family data. This research has two specific aims: (i) to understand
the geometry of the nonlinear data embeddings given by the kernel PCA through
the spectral analysis of the kernel operator, and the effect of a kernel and
centering kernels on those nonlinear principal components for clustering in
relation to the data distribution, and (ii) to develop statistically principled
extensions of the PCA methodology for analysis and modeling of data matrices
from the exponential family distributions using generalized linear model
framework. On the methodological aspect, the research parallels the coherent
extension of linear model to generalized linear model framework for the best
low-rank approximation of data. Computational tools will be developed for a wide
range of applications of the studied methods.
