
* 1513654
* Collaborative Research: Hierarchical Sparsity-Inducing Gaussian Process Models for Bayesian Inference on Large Spatiotemporal Datasets
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2015,09/11/2015
* Sudipto Banerjee,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 240,000.00

With the increasing capabilities of geographical referencing and remote-sensing
technologies such as Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Global
Positioning Systems (GPS) that can identify geographical coordinates with a
simple hand-held device, scientists and researchers in a variety of disciplines
today have unprecedented access to spatially-referenced data. From identifying
spatial disparities in health standards to more precise weather predictions, GIS
technology is used today in almost every sphere of human life with beneficial
effects that can be far-reaching. Statistical modeling and analysis for spatial
data constitute a key element in harnessing the scientific potential of GIS and
related technologies. As the scientific community moves into a data-rich era,
there is unprecedented opportunity to build an understanding about how
environmental ecosystems function and how they will respond to changing
environmental conditions. This research project will advance data modeling in
disciplines as diverse as forestry, ecology, public and environmental health,
meteorology, engineering, and the geosciences. It will help discover complex
scientific relationships, which, in turn, will lead to better analysis and
understanding of our environment and how our ecosystem is evolving.

Analysts and researchers using GIS technology are increasingly faced with
analyzing massive amounts of spatial data. With spatial and spatial-temporal
data becoming increasingly high-dimensional -- both in terms of number of
observed locations and the number of observations per location -- scientists are
seeking to hypothesize extremely complex relationships. Not surprisingly,
statistical models accounting for spatial associations have become an enormously
active area of research over the last decade and, in particular, hierarchical
models capturing variation at multiple scales have become extremely popular for
spatial modeling. These, in turn, lead to rather complex models that are
computationally expensive and unfeasible even for moderately sized data sets.
This project recognizes the increased computational demands in statistical
modeling of large high-dimensional spatial and spatial-temporal data and offers
a model-based setup to tackle a wide variety of data analytic problems. The
emphasis of this project is on rigorous and principled statistical methodology
that can be implemented on standard computing platforms, thereby ensuring
accessibility for a very wide group of researchers. The project outlines a suite
of spatial models that easily scale to massive databases and have a broad range
of applications. Theoretical and methodological innovations that enhance current
methods will be presented, and their practical implications will be illustrated
using freely distributed open-source statistical software products developed as
a part of this project.
