
* 1513465
* Some problems in geometric data analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2015,09/14/2015
* Ery Arias-Castro,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The analysis of datasets is increasingly geometrical. In some applications, such
as in the analysis of the cosmic web in astrophysics, this is arguably the most
natural approach. In others, modeling datasets via geometric structures allows
to bypass the use of functions, which are in general difficult to deal with in
high-dimensions because of the so-called "curse of dimensionality". The project
aims at making contributions in this general area of geometrical data analysis,
and in particular in fields like clustering, dimensionality reduction, and
surface estimation, via the development of new methodology and new theory.

Geometrical approaches to data analysis are well-established. Clustering,
dimensionality reduction, and manifold/surface estimation, are well-developed,
with ongoing work in the form of robust PCA, subspace clustering, manifold or
surface clustering, manifold learning, geometric statistics, computational
geometry, etc. The vast majority of this research is methodological or applied
to a particular problem in a specific field, and theory is by and large lagging
behind. This is, for example, the case in important areas such as subspace
clustering, manifold embedding and sensor localization. This project has the
ambition to contribute theoretical insights in those areas. While methodology
tends to be well ahead of theory, good and timely theoretical analyses can shed
some light on applied problems, and can sometimes inform the design of more
effective methodology. And such methodology is missing in some areas of
geometric statistics. Thus the project also includes the development of
practical methodology that provably matches the minimax performance bounds
available for the problem at hand, particularly in the areas of manifold
estimation and the estimation of geometric characteristics of a distribution.
