
* 1513076
* Bayesian Inference for Peaks Over Threshold Models for Multivariate and Spatial Extremes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2015,07/18/2017
* Bruno Sanso,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,336.00

Extreme value theory is a branch of probability and statistics that focuses on
the study of rare events. There are many areas of science and technology where
such methods find applications. Examples include the quantification of actuarial
risk, estimation of large fluctuations in financial markets, and the estimation
of maximum water flow. Of particular relevance for our society is the study of
extreme climate events. Historical records of climate related variables provide
evidence that there is an intensification of extreme weather. Climate
projections indicate that the frequency and intensity of events with
catastrophic potential will increase even further. This research focuses on the
development of statistical methods that will enable careful assessment of the
uncertainties related to extreme events. The proposed methods will focus on
models that look jointly at several variables and apply to observations
collected in large spatial domains. Probabilistic assessment of the
uncertainties in the occurrence of rare events will be made possible by a
Bayesian approach. This will provide a powerful tool for rational decision and
policy making.

In this project, novel methodology for the statistical analysis of the
distributions of extreme values is proposed. The methods are based on using the
amounts in excess of a fixed threshold for the variables of interest, or peaks
over thresholds (POT). POT methods to perform Bayesian inference for (a)
multivariate observations, (b) spatially indexed fields, and (c) fields of
multivariate observations in space will be developed and implemented. In extreme
value theory, the focus is on extrapolation as scarce extreme observations are
used to describe the behavior of the tails of the distribution. The theory and
the methods for inference on univariate extreme values are firmly established
and fully developed. For multivariate problems, it is key to model the joint
tail dependence of the different variables. In this sense, the theory is well
understood, but inferential methods are not as straightforward as in the
univariate case. This is especially true for POT methods. A further level of
complication is introduced when dealing with georeferenced data. In fact, in the
spatial setting, it is impossible to write the full likelihood of realistic POT
models for observations collected at an arbitrary number of locations. This
research focuses on the development of methods that (a) are conceptually clear
to specify using a simple factorization that is at the core of Bayesian
hierarchical models, (b) allow for fully integrated Bayesian inference that
accounts for all estimation uncertainty and quantifies it probabilistically, (c)
have theoretically sound asymptotic properties, (d) provide flexible
characterizations of a wide range of tail dependence, and (e) are
computationally feasible for large spatial domains.
