
* 1513644
* Next-generation random graph models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,08/04/2017
* Michael Schweinberger,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2019
* USD 200,001.00

Networks are ubiquitous in the modern world, with social networks and the World
Wide Web as well-known examples. Understanding the structure of networks is
critical to understanding real-world phenomena, making predictions, and helping
inform decisions on, for example, strategies to disrupt and dismantle terrorist
networks, curb the spread of infectious diseases, and reduce systematic risk in
financial markets. To help understand and predict such phenomena in the face of
uncertainty, professionals need statistical models which are both complex and
scalable (i.e., models which are capable of modeling a wide range of network
characteristics and which can be applied to large networks). Existing models are
either scalable but simplistic or complex but not scalable. This research
project will develop the first generation of models which are both complex and
scalable. The developed models and methods will have applications in a wide
range of areas, including national security (e.g., insurgencies, terrorism),
public health (e.g., the spread of infectious diseases), and finance (e.g.,
systematic risk in financial markets).

This research project will develop the next generation of random graph models
which are both complex and scalable by merging the two most important streams of
statistical network analysis, stochastic block models and exponential-family
random graph models, with a view to reducing the disadvantages of each while
retaining the advantages of both. Stochastic block models are scalable but
simplistic, whereas exponential-family random graph models are complex but not
scalable. The next-generation models studied here bridge the gap between
complexity and scalability and are both complex and scalable. In addition to
elaborating next-generation models, this research will address the unique
computational and theoretical challenges raised by next-generation models. The
computational challenge of estimating next-generation models will be addressed
by taking advantage of model structure, including local dependence and local
convexity properties, and by exploiting massive-scale minorization-maximization
methods which break down the high-dimensional optimization problem into low-
dimensional ones that can solved in parallel. The theoretical challenge of
studying the properties of estimators will be addressed by exploiting novel
concentration of measure inequalities. The concentration of measure inequalities
will take into account the dependence inherent in networks as well as the lack
of smoothness of estimators.
