
* 1513653
* Change-Point Analysis for Multivariate and Object Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2015,06/29/2015
* Hao Chen,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 341,765.00

Technological advances allow for the collection of massive data in the study of
complex phenomena over time and/or space in various fields. Many of these data
involve sequences of high dimensional or non-Euclidean measurements, where
change-point analysis is a crucial early step in understanding the data:
Segmentation or offline change-point analysis divides data into homogeneous
temporal or spatial segments, making subsequent analysis easier; its online
counterpart detects changes in sequentially observed data, allowing for real-
time anomaly detection. Traditional change-point analyses primarily focus on
univariate measurements. There is some literature on multivariate data, but very
little on object data. This project considers both offline and online change-
point analysis for multivariate and object data, for instance, for temporal
analysis of multiple sensor systems, images, and social networks. The proposed
methods and corresponding theory build on previous work of the PI, which adapts
nonparametric graph-based two-sample tests to the segmentation problem. The PI
has shown that the graph-based approach scales flexibly to high dimensional and
object data, and allows for a universal analytic permutation p-value
approximation that is decoupled from application-specific modeling. Despite this
recent development, many challenges remain. This project identifies these
challenges, formulates them into approachable frameworks, and develops
appropriate methods and theoretical treatments. In particular, this project will
(1) study more sensitive distance-based tests for testing equality of
distributions in high dimensional or in non-Euclidean spaces, which will be
adapted to the change-point testing and estimation problem, resulting in a more
sensitive and accurate detection of general changes; (2) address methodological
and theoretical issues in extending the nonparametric graph-based framework on
the offline case to the online scenario; and (3) extend graph-based segmentation
and online detection to a circular block permutation framework, enabling them to
work for multivariate and object data with weak local dependence.
