
* 1513378
* SEMIPARAMETRIC INFERENCE WITH HIGH-DIMENSIONAL DATA
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,08/16/2017
* Cun-Hui Zhang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Big Data is an area of intense current interest in statistical research and
practice due to the rapid development of information technologies and their
applications to modern scientific experiments. High-dimensional statistical
methods typically provide crucial elements and ideas in engineering solutions
for complex Big Data problems. Important fields with an abundance of such
problems include bioinformatics, signal processing, neural imaging,
communications and social networks, text mining and more. In many such
applications, the nominal complexity of the problem, typically measured by the
dimension of the data such as genetic components in bioinformatics, brain
regions or voxels in neural imaging, or computers and routers in the Internet,
is much greater than number of sample points or the information content of the
data. The research project will identify and characterize high-dimensional
statistical models and problems in which efficient statistical inference are
feasible, and will develop new methodologies and algorithms to carry out such
efficient statistical inference with high-dimensional data. The proposed
research is motivated by and will be directly applicable to real life problems
in the aforementioned areas where modern information technologies prosper.
Furthermore, the proposed research will have significant educational impact.

A longstanding challenge in high-dimensional data is to identify problems where
regular statistical inference is feasible without relying on model selection
consistency theory. Consistent model selection allows reduction of the nominal
complexity of the problem to a manageable level by identifying all relevant
features. However, model selection consistency typically requires uniformly
strong signal to separate relevant features from irrelevant ones. Unfortunately,
such uniform signal strength assumption is seldom supported by either the data
or the underlying science, especially in biological, medical and sociological
applications. The PI has proposed a semi-low-dimensional approach of statistical
inference and successfully applied it to construct regular p-values and
confidence intervals in high-dimensional regression and graphical models. This
approach corrects the bias of model selectors just as semiparametric approach
corrects the bias of nonparametric estimators. The proposed research will
further develop this approach in high-dimensional data analysis and tackle new
problems in ways not visible just a few years ago. It will focus on efficient
statistical inference with semisupervised data and problems involving many high-
dimensional or complex components, including confidence regions and significant
tests for composite and multivariate features with high-dimensional data. The
project will develop practical methods, efficient algorithms, statistical
software, and solid theory directly relevant to common applications involving
many high-dimensional or complex components.
