
* 1513621
* Statistical Learning for High-Dimensional Relational Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,06/29/2015
* Vincent Vu,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 279,965.00

Technological advances in data acquisition, digital observation, and storage
have produced an explosion in high-dimensional datasets that are often too large
and noisy for traditional data analysis tools. In many cases these high-
dimensional datasets are transformed into relational data that summarize
relations between pairs of entities in the original dataset. There are two major
classes of statistical methods for analyzing such relational data: techniques
from classical multivariate analysis and probabilistic graphical models. These
two classes are often viewed as disparate yet complementary approaches to
relational data analysis. However, both can fail from being overwhelmed by noise
and high-dimensionality. This research project proposes a new framework that
unifies these two classes of methods under the umbrella of regularized
statistical learning, and it will address three important issues: (1) it will
reveal important conceptual links between these disparate methods, thus
providing a common ground for developing new and hybrid methods; (2) it will
advance theoretical understanding of these methods especially in the case of
high-dimensional and noisy data; (3) it will advance computational techniques
that enable these methods to be applied to big data that is high-dimensional and
large-scale.

Statistical theory has shown that traditional multivariate methods can fail on
high-dimensional data and that some form of regularization is necessary for
estimation. Despite the recent surge in development of regularized methods,
there still exists a gap between the methodological developments and theoretical
understanding. This research project fills this gap by combining methodological
development with theoretical insight to produce a unified family of regularized
methods for relational data that are both computationally efficient and
theoretically sound. The theoretical insights will reveal the statistical
properties of the methods under very weak assumptions, and they will enable
computational strategies that exploit hidden structure in the optimization
problems underlying the methods.
