
* 1513461
* Topics in Nonparametric Statistics: Faster Minimax Rates, Large-p-Small-n Cross-Correlation Matrices, Survival Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2015,09/14/2015
* Sam Efromovich,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The project focuses on three main statistical activities motivated by medical,
engineering and insurance applications. The first one is the optimal denoising
and decomposition of signals and images. Analysis of functional magnet resonance
images (fMRI) in the human brain is a particular example of application. Loosely
speaking, fMRI is a noisy time series of images which reflects the level of
oxygen in blood during measurements. Because this is about dealing with oxygen
in blood, the time series contains respiratory, cardiac and neural response to
functional stimuli. The proposed statistical procedure will allow doctors and
bioengineers to separate and denoise these components, with potential
applications in developing new methods for diagnosis and treatment of
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Diseases. The second topic is the estimation of
large cross-covariance/correlation matrices for noisy signals, with the number
of elements in millions and sample sizes of just several hundreds. This is a
familiar problem in statistical analysis of Chip-on-chip microarrays used to
study bacteria. Another application is the study of neural plasticity, which is
the ability of the brain to recognize neural pathways based on new experience
and change in learning. This will allow physicians to create new methods for
early diagnosis and treatment of stroke which is the 4th leading cause of death
in the US. The third topic is adaptive and efficient estimation of hazard rate
and survival function from indirect observations, including new methodology of
sequentially controlled experiments and protocols. This research is motivated by
new methods of radiation and drug therapy for lung and breast cancers as well as
by innovative technologies of waste-water treatment and the actuarial problem of
developing adaptive life tables.

The project focuses on three objectives. (1) Advance knowledge and understanding
of nonparametric curve estimation to develop a general theory of shrinking local
minimax estimation that allows statisticians to get a new benchmark for the
quality of estimation and generate a family of more accurate estimators.
Preliminary results indicate that new efficient estimators can be proposed
either via mimicking oracles or via aggregation of different estimators in
frequency domain. Most challenging and rewarding results are expected for
multivariate curves where new rates can remedy the familiar curse of
multidimensionality. Applications in statistical analysis of microarrays, fMRI,
radiation and drug therapy of cancer cells, and innovative technologies of
waste-water treatment are expected.(2) Develop new methods of inference for
large cross-covariance/correlation matrices for noisy signals, based on wavelet
methods and exponential inequalities that can be applied to dependent and non-
Gaussian observations. The main application is the study of neural plasticity of
the human brain. This allows doctors and bioengineers to observe changes in
neural pathways based on new experience and change in learning with applications
to treatment of stroke and other brain diseases.(3) Improve nonparametric theory
and create efficient methods of hazard rate and survival function estimation for
indirect observations, including a new methodology of sequentially controlled
experiments and protocols.
