
* 1513595
* Regression Analysis of Networked Data: Estimating Function Theory and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Peter Song,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Network data are pervasive in practice such as genetic network data and social
network data. Regression analysis of network data is needed to understand the
relationship between a set of network-correlated outcomes and another set of
covariates. Accomplishing this task requires fast and efficient estimation and
inference methods for the model parameters. This motivates researchers to
develop a new regression modeling framework for data arising from either
networks with undirected edges or networks with directed edges. Through PI's
long-term collaborations in Epidemiology, Environmental Health Sciences, and
Nephrology, the studied methods can be used by local scientists who will provide
valuable feedback. This new research project can also lead to substantial
educational initiatives that will involve undergraduate and graduate students
and expose them to the state-of-the-art research in various interdisciplinary
topics related to the corresponding research. These include new courses, short
courses at major conferences, summer workshops, mentoring, and software
development. These and other dissemination activities will increase awareness of
modern powerful methods for data analysis among scientists from other fields.

Although the network analysis has been extensively studied in the literature for
dependent structures, little has been studied yet in the regression analysis of
response-covariate relationships. This project attempts to fill in such a gap
through a few steps. Specifically, the PI proposes to study three different but
related problems, including network dependence models, estimating functions
methodology via the generalized method of moments, and large-sample theory. This
research project includes several innovative and efficient statistical
procedures based on estimating functions for estimation and inference. It is
anticipated that the studied framework will allow researchers to handle a large
variety of network-correlated discrete and continuous data.
