
* 1515194
* RAPID: Fitting Ebola multi-type branching process models to data
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS, BIO Innovation Activities
* 01/01/2015,12/19/2014
* Andrew Park,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 58,021.00

The main goal of the project is to provide the scientific community with a set
of quantitative modeling tools that will assist in the real-time identification
of factors contributing most to the ongoing spread of Ebola in Africa, and that
will allow straightforward testing of plausible intervention strategies. This
will be done by developing branching process models of the spread of Ebola that
connect to available data sources, and that allow for changes in human behavior
as well as incorporate realistic scenarios aimed at mitigating transmission.
Estimates of the key transmission rates and associated measures of uncertainty
will allow for improved precision in forecasting under a range of scenarios.

While multi-type branching process models are an ideal way to capture key
heterogeneities in transmission, and can readily include the dynamic landscape
associated with serious disease threats unfolding in real time, their potential
is maximized only when we develop techniques to interface them with data. This
is a two-way communication in which existing data allows estimation of critical
process rates and probabilities, and in addition, the accurately parameterized
models allow forecasting. For the ongoing Ebola outbreak in West Africa, the
utility of both wings of this workflow have important implications. More
broadly, multi-type branching process models have wide applicability to emerging
infectious disease threats. Improving fitting techniques for such models fills a
knowledge gap regarding the connection between a flexible modeling framework and
available data sources. By identifying simple, key heterogeneities in
transmission, the modeling approach transcends purpose-built models that are not
easily extended to other systems. Models and associated fitting procedures for
the analysis of data related to the Ebola disease will be relevant also for
future emerging disease threats.
