
* 1534545
* Empirical Process and Modern Statistical Decision Theory
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2015,04/28/2015
* Huibin Zhou,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2016
* USD 21,000.00

The workshop titled "Empirical Process and Modern Statistical Decision Theory"
will be held at Yale University on May 7-9, 2015. The era of big data is
fundamentally changing every aspect of our life through discoveries in science,
medicine, and engineering. Many innovative and intuitively appealing
methodologies have been proposed to make novel and significant discoveries by
analysis of complex and big data. It is timely and critically important for
statisticians to develop deep, broad, and formal statistical theory to
understand and justify why and when certain methodologies would work or not
work, to guide statistical practice to make valid and influential contributions
to our society. This workshop will bring together some of authorities in
statistical decision theory and empirical Process to review the most important
and influential advances in the past, to report their most recent exciting
research, and to discuss their view of future developments. The workshop will
provide a venue for promising young researchers to interact with these leaders
of the field and each other, leading to future collaborations and discoveries. A
potential outcome of this workshop will provide a guidance to researchers and
professors on how and what to teach in empirical process to train our students
in understanding and developing modern statistical decision theory.

Empirical process has been playing a key role in developing modern statistical
decision theory for a wide range of important models and significant
methodologies, such as providing a unified framework for many high dimensional
linear models by Gaussian width, establishing asymptotic equivalence theory of
Le Cam for various statistical models by the KMT construction, and justifying
the effectiveness of important algorithms in machine learning including SVM by
VC dimension. In the last ten to fifteen years, the statistics research has
witnessed a tremendous successes of empirical process theory in Bayesian
nonparametrics, shape constrained estimation, robust estimation, minimax regret,
lasso, and sparse principal component analysis. This workshop will bring
together some of authorities in statistical decision theory including Lawrence
Brown and Iain Johnstone, and in empirical processes including Richard Dudley
and Evarist Gine, as well as some of the the most prominent researchers in high
dimensional estimation, Bayesian nonparametrics, robust estimation, machine
learning, and shape constrained estimation, to celebrate the most significant
advances in the past and to discuss exciting future developments.
