
* 1540663
* Participant Support for Attendants to the 11th International Conference on Objective Bayes Methodology
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2015,06/15/2015
* Edward George,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The International Workshop on Objective Bayes Methodology, O-Bayes15, will be
held in Valencia, Spain, June 1-4, 2015. This will be the 11th meeting of one of
the longest running and preeminent meetings in Bayesian statistics, following
earlier meetings held in West Lafayette, IN, USA, 1996; Valencia, Spain, 1998;
Ixtapa, Mexico, 2000; Granada, Spain, 2002; Aussois, France, 2003; Branson, MO,
USA, 2005; Roma, Italy, 2007; Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2009; Shanghai, China,
2011; and Durham, NC, USA 2013. The principal objectives of O-Bayes15 will be to
facilitate the exchange of recent research developments in objective Bayes
theory and methodology, and related topics, to provide opportunities for new
researchers, and to establish new collaborations that will channel efforts into
pending problems and open new directions for investigation. O-Bayes15 will
feature 21 invited talks and discussions, 3 tutorials and a poster session, all
centering on major recent developments in objective Bayesian theory, methodology
and application. The organization of the meeting is designed to facilitate
interactions, with at most 7 talks per day and extensive discussion built in.
The tutorials and evening poster sessions enhance the conference experience for
graduate students and new researchers. Funding primarily supports graduate
students and new researchers.

O-Bayes15 will bring together leading researchers in Bayesian analysis from
around the world. The last decade has seen an explosion of interest in Bayesian
statistical methodology across engineering, medicine and science, and this
meeting provides a timely forum for the exchange of recent research
developments, provides opportunities for new researchers and underrepresented
groups, and establishes new collaborations that will channel efforts into
pending problems and open new directions for investigation. In particular, the
past two years have seen remarkable advances in the subjects of the conference;
an event to disseminate these advances and spark new developments and
collaborations is thus very timely. The scientific topics that will be
considered include foundations of objective Bayesian analysis; objective priors
in high dimensions; model uncertainty with huge model spaces; nonparametric
analysis; massive multiple testing and subgroup analysis; and objective Bayesian
methods for the interface of statistics and computational modeling of processes.
