
* 1541233
* An Undergraduate Workshop on "Big Data, Human Health and Statistics"
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2015,06/06/2015
* Bhramar Mukherjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This workshop is a concluding event to an Undergraduate Summer Institute on "Big
Data, Human Health and Statistics" held at the Department of Biostatistics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor from June 1-26 and is intended to be an event
focusing on the undergraduates. The training of the next generation of
quantitative scientists needs to change to meet the demands of the data. We
define "Big Data" as datasets of enormous size and complexity (either in number
of observations, and/or in the number/nature of predictors/outcomes). Classical
theory, computation and intuition often fail for such irregular, sparse data
sets of vast size. More training in data management, data storage,
visualization, high dimensional statistics, optimization, causal methods,
modeling sparse data, machine learning are needed to equip students to tackle
these big data challenges. It is expected that the knowledge obtained from these
massive heterogeneous data sources will inform prevention, screening, prognosis,
and treatment of human diseases and play a major role in biology, medicine, and
public health in the coming decade. This workshop lies in the intersection of
Big Data, Human Health and Statistics.

In this two-day symposium, the first day will feature talks by distinguished
researchers in areas of relevance to Big Data, including mobile health,
precision medicine, genomics, data visualization. There will be a poster session
by undergraduate attendees and an oral presentation session by the undergraduate
participants of the summer institute. The second day will be a professional
development workshop for undergraduate attendees. Registration will be open to
anyone interested (with a maximum limit of 120 participants). The grant will
support participation cost of selected undergraduate attendees, faculty mentors
and outside speakers.
