
* 1542332
* Statistical Inference for Functional Data in Time Series and Survey Sampling: Theory and Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2014,04/16/2015
* Lily Wang,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,999.00

Sophisticated data collection facilities often produce data which are a set of
functions, represented in the form of curves, images or shapes. The development
of functional data analysis in theory and methodology has provided us important
analytical tools to address challenging problems encountered in many important
fields. In the proposed research, the investigator continues to build and enrich
the theory and methodology of functional data. This proposal targets the
development of powerful statistical tools for analyzing functional data in time
series and survey sampling frameworks. Four related research topics are proposed
for investigation. For each project, statistical properties of the estimators,
statistical inferences governed by the underlying models, and theoretical
properties of the inferences will be studied. The proposed methods can be used
to estimate global quantities for dependent functional data, quantify and
visualize the variability of the estimators, and make global inferences on the
shape of the population quantities.

With "big data" of complex (such as longitudinal, functional, heterogeneous, or
correlated) features becoming increasingly available for public use in many
research areas, this proposal is one vehicle to address the challenges of
analyzing such types of data. The success of the proposed projects provides
effective and practical tools for dealing with large and complex structural data
over time and space, representing advances in the theory and methodology of
statistical analysis. The benefits to society at large of the proposed research
include new methodology and inference tools for big data with complex features.
These topics are of interest to statisticians, survey researchers, and indeed,
more broadly for researchers in climatology, health, economics, engineering,
environmental studies, meteorology, behavioral and social sciences.
