
* 1553884
* CAREER: Modernizing Classical Nonparametric and Multivariate Theory for Large-scale, High-dimensional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 08/01/2016,05/26/2020
* Jing Lei,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The constantly increasing dimensionality and complexity of modern data has
motivated many new data analysis tools in various fields, and urgently call for
rigorous theoretical investigation, such as robustness against different sources
of model misspecification,uncertainty quantification in classification and
prediction, and statistical performance guarantee of conventional methods under
non-standard settings. Although most classical theory are not directly
applicable to methods developed for complex data, partially due to highly
specialized model assumptions and diversified algorithms, the profound
statistical thinking carried in these long-established results can still provide
deep theoretical insights. When combined with cutting-edge results in modern
context such as random matrix theory, matrix concentration, and convex geometry,
these classical theory will lead to novel principled methods for a general class
of problems ranging from high dimensional regression and classification to
network data analysis and subspace learning. All methods developed in the
proposed research will be implemented as standard R packages freely available
and will have high pedagogical value and will be used to develop new courses.
The proposed research has applications in astronomy and medical screening data.
The proposal also provides new inference tools for applied areas in genetics,
psychiatry, brain sciences. Integrated educational activities include designing
courses on new perspectives in nonparametric statistics and modern multivariate
analysis.

The proposed work will further integrate classical nonparametric and
multivariate analysis theory with modern elements in four major areas of
statistical research, including assumption-free prediction bands in high
dimensional regression; a generalized Neyman-Pearson framework for set-valued
multi-class classification; statistical performance guarantee of some greedy
algorithms in network community detection as well as goodness-of-fit tests for
network model selection; and a unified singular value decomposition framework
for structured subspace estimation formulated as a convex optimization problem.
These research activities will lead to modernized nonparametric and multivariate
analysis courses, featuring new theoretical frameworks such as computationally
constrained minimax analysis, additional topics such as functional data
analysis, and cutting-edge examples in genetics, brain imaging, traffic, and
astronomy.
