
* 1555244
* CAREER: Semiparametric and Machine Learning Approaches to Big Data Challenges in Precision Medicine
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2016,04/22/2022
* Rui Song,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

In the era of Big Data, the goal of better patient outcomes, coupled with lower
cost and burden has generated tremendous interest in precision (or personalized,
individualized) medicine, which is defined as treatments targeted to the needs
of individual patients on the basis of genetic, biomarker, phenotypic, or
psychosocial characteristics that distinguish a given patient from other
patients with similar clinical presentations (Jameson and Longo, 2015).Precision
medicine can be operationalized using individual's health-related metrics and
environmental factors to discover individualized treatment regimes (ITRs);
methodology for such discovery is an emerging field of statistics. The proposed
methods are expected to bring a great impact to accelerate the discovery of new
personalized treatment strategies. Therefore the proposed work is directly
related with the White House Precision Medicine
Initiative(https://www.whitehouse.gov/precision-medicine) as a research effort
to revolutionize how to improve health and treat disease. The proposed methods
are also general enough to be applied to a variety of data sources including
clinical, biomarker, economic and financial data. If successful, the projects
will greatly enhance the acquisition and analysis of large-scale data for the
scientific and engineering communities.

The main objective of this proposal is to develop cutting-edge semiparametric
methods and machine learning tools to realize the promise of precision medicine.
Specifically, the PI aims to: develop flexible and efficient methods for
discovering optimal ITRs (Aim 1); develop a general class of optimal ITRs (Aim
2); develop optimal ITRs with high-dimensional data (Aim 3); and develop optimal
ITRs under population heterogeneity (Aim 4). The proposed work contributes to
both semiparametric inference and machine learning fields. Machine learning
methods have rarely been studied for doubly robust estimation and optimal ITRs
with high-dimensional data. The theoretical developments including driving
nonasymptotic distribution, risk bounds, new empirical process technical tools
are challenging. The methodologies to be developed in this project will be
fundamentally important and generally applicable for studying semiparametric
models in high-dimensional setting. Using semiparametric and machine learning
methods for precision medicine is an emerging novel area. The integration of
research and education is a key aspect of this project. New courses on
statistical learning and semiparametric inference will be developed. These
courses will broaden the areas of specialized training in a department that has
a strong history of attracting under represented groups. The PI is expecting to
stimulate interests from a diverse group of researchers in numerous fields. The
PI will also reach out to the K-12 education levels by training high school
teachers.
