
* 1561141
* CAREER: Bridging High-Frequency Data Analysis and Continuous-time Features of Levy Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS
* 07/01/2015,05/06/2022
* Jose Figueroa-Lopez,MO,Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 09/30/2022
* USD 217,289.00

Motivated by recent theoretical findings in the field, the investigator
identifies some key open problems of the asymptotic behavior of Levy processes
in short time and connects them to two important statistical problems commonly
appearing in applications: parametric estimation and change-point detection for
Levy models. For finite random samples, methods such as maximum likelihood
estimation and cumulative sum (CUSUM) sequential rules are known to be optimal
for dealing with the two previously mentioned problems. Although one expects
that optimality would be preserved when the time span between consecutive
observations of a Levy process shrinks to zero, there exist important examples
showing this not always to be the case. The mystery behind these
counterintuitive results is closely connected to the "fine" distributional
properties of Levy processes in short time. Rather than directly attacking the
two proposed problems in continuous time, the investigator builds on the well-
studied analogous problems in discrete time and fill in the infinite time
continuum by analyzing their evolution when the time span between consecutive
observations is made increasingly small. This bottom-up approach is not only
appealing but also useful since in practice one would like to determine the
performance of statistical methods for high-frequency observations rather than
for continuous-time observations, which are arguably never available. The focus
on Levy processes is motivated by the fact that the latter are the simplest
stochastic models displaying abrupt changes while still preserving the
parsimonious statistical properties of their increments. Extensions to other
multi-factor stochastic models driven by Levy processes are also contemplated.

Automatic high-frequency monitoring systems of natural and social phenomena are
increasingly used in engineering applications, financial markets, and
environmental studies. Therefore, there is an increasing need for efficient and
accurate statistical and computational methods for the high-frequency data
generated by these systems. Two important issues arise with this need:
understanding the meaning of statistical efficiency in a high-frequency sampling
setting and analyzing the optimality of some of the commonly used statistical
methods when applied to high-frequency data. The undertaken research responds to
these two pressing problems. The project's outcomes have important applications
in pricing of financial derivatives, calibration of financial models, monitoring
of navigation system, intrusion detection in computer networks, and more.
Educational impacts include providing summer research experiences for
undergraduates and developing teaching/computational resources for
interdisciplinary topics in statistics, probability, and mathematical finance.
These activities involve graduate students and target the participation of
underrepresented groups in sciences.
