
* 1607840
* New algorithms for consistent model selection beyond linear models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2016,06/03/2018
* Xuming He,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Statistical model building is an important part of scientific discovery. In the
big data era, high dimensional data arise frequently. Model selection in the
presence of high dimensional features in the framework of linear models,
generalized linear models, and models with censored data has been a very active
area of research in recent years. The PI aims to develop new algorithms for
model selection, within a Bayesian computational framework, that are scalable
for high dimensional problems. The PI motivates the proposed research through
collaborations with scientists in atmospheric sciences, genetics, and
kinesiology, and aims to develop methodologies that are broadly applicable in
statistical modeling and data analysis. Much of the recent work has focused on
shrinkage through penalization or regularization. Bayesian computational
methods, when interpreted broadly, play a valuable role in statistics, including
model selection and estimation, but face important hurdles in high dimensional
statistics, both in theoretical intricacy and in computational scalability. The
PI aims to develop a theoretical framework to demonstrate model selection
consistency from the frequentist perspective, which offers interesting insights
into why Bayesian model selection methods can provide an asymptotic
approximation to the L0 penalty. An important part of the proposed work is the
development of a modified Gibbs sampler in the selection of sparse models that
is much more scalable than standard MCMC algorithms in the presence of high
dimensional variables. The Bayesian methods are especially useful in problems
with non-convex objective functions, where Bayesian computation methods can be
more robust in performance than direct optimization. A primary application of
such a problem considered in the project is quantile regression for censored
data. In addition to model selection, the PI proposes a new estimation method
for censored quantile regression that promises to be computationally and
statistically efficient. Equally importantly, the new method adapts easily to
general forms of censoring that other estimation methods have found difficult to
handle. The PI will continue integrating research with education by working with
PhD students and by providing research experiences for undergraduate students.
The research output will be properly disseminated through conferences and
workshops and through publication in widely read journals in statistical
science.
