
* 1608540
* Several Problems in Dimension Reduction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2016,05/22/2018
* YANYUAN MA,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Dimension reduction is almost an unavoidable practice in the modern era with big
and complex data, and is the main topic in this proposal. Benefit from our
success in this area, our research projects will further broaden the scope of
the dimension reduction research domain and resolve several difficult, subtle
and under-studied issues in this field. The results will generate wide interest
and prompt applications in different fields where measurements may contain
errors and/or where the data may not be completely random such as in medical
studies.

The principal investigator (P.I.) will study five topics in dimension reduction
problems, develop new methodologies and analyze their properties and
performances. The first topic concerns two common conditions in dimension
reduction: the linearity condition and the constant variance condition. The P.I.
will reveal the true effect of these conditions, understand why the current
implementation of these conditions are detrimental, prescribe a procedure to
optimally utilize these conditions and show the resulting efficiency gain. This
research will change the current practice of implementing these conditions. The
second topic concerns central variance space estimation. The P.I. will treat the
central variance space simultaneously with the central mean space and
demonstrate why it is necessary to do so. She will consider both when the two
spaces differ and when they coincide, and establish methods for estimation and
inference in both cases. The third topic concerns multivariate responses. The
P.I. will extend the central space concept to the general framework using a new
way of modeling that serves as a middle ground between two current approaches.
She will demonstrate the advantages of the new model and propose estimation and
inference methods. The P.I. will also establish the semiparametric efficiency
bound for the multivariate response central space estimation,and illustrate why
and how to conduct estimation to achieve local efficiency. The fourth topic
concerns dimension reduction when covariates contain measurement errors. The
P.I. will study a general semiparametric dimension reduction model when the
covariate of interest is measured with error and modeled parametrically. A bias-
correction procedure will be devised which does not require modeling the
unobservable variable distribution. The estimators will be shown to be
consistent, asymptotically normal. The fifth topic concerns dimension reduction
arising when analyzing case-control data in secondary analysis. The P.I. will
illustrate that when multiple covariates are available, despite of a completely
parametric modeling of the regression mean function, the case-control nature of
the data requires various nonparametric estimation with multivariate covariates,
hence leading to the need of reducing dimension. The inherent relation imposed
by the original model further leads to dimension reduction with special
structure, for which the P.I. will devise consistent estimators and establish
their local efficiency and robustness against the misspecification of the
regression error distribution.
