
* 1611791
* Collaborative Research: New statistically-motivated solutions to classical inverse problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2016,05/24/2016
* Ryan Martin,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 03/31/2017
* USD 124,354.00

Numerous scientific questions assume the form of inverse problems, in which an
unknown input to a system under study gives rise to an observed noisy output,
and the goal is to estimate the input from the output. An example of such a
problem is calculating the density of the Earth from measurements of the local
gravitational field. Only rarely can such inverse problems be solved
analytically, and in general numerical approximations are required to find
solutions. In this research project, the investigators aim to introduce a novel
iterative algorithm for solving inverse problems, develop its theoretical and
computational properties, and establish its performance in applications. It is
anticipated that the new algorithm will be adaptable to a range of problems
currently under investigation in applied and numerical mathematics, for example
in solving a sparse system of linear equations, currently of great interest in
areas including tomography, archaeology, astrophysics, and other sciences.

This research project explores a novel iterative algorithm for the solution of a
class inverse problems that includes Fredholm integral equations of the first
kind, Laplace transform inversion, mixing distribution estimation in statistics,
and solving sparse systems of linear equations. The investigators plan to (i)
introduce a novel iterative algorithm for solving inverse problems of these
types, and perhaps others, (ii) develop its theoretical and computational
properties, and (iii) establish its performance in applications. A motivation
for the research is the statistical problem of estimating a mixing density in a
nonparametric mixture model. To date, there are no general algorithms that
produce globally consistent estimators of the mixing density, in the sense of
almost sure convergence with respect to a strong metric; only weak convergence
results are available. An important feature of the algorithm under development
is that, if it is initialized at a smooth density function, then the estimator
is necessarily also a smooth density function. Other algorithms designed by
numerical analysts for solving these inverse problems do not have this closure
property. The form of the novel iterative algorithm, along with the fact that it
yields smooth density estimators, suggests that this open problem can be solved;
the investigators aim to establish a general global consistency result and
demonstrate rates of convergence.
