
* 1612965
* Dynamic Prediction of Time to Next Failure Event
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2016,08/14/2018
* Xuelin Huang,TX,University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 179,992.00

In manufacturing and industrial applications, it is critical to regularly
inspect all the components of a working system, record data during the
inspection, use these data to predict the next potential failure event, and take
preventive actions. In medical practice and research, the health status of
patients is measured repeatedly over time during post-treatment follow-up
visits. During each visit, new information is obtained and physicians use that
information to predict a patient's prognosis and design an appropriate treatment
plan. These applications involve the use of current information to predict the
time until the next failure event (such as disease progression). These
continuously updated predictions, called dynamic predictions, are critical for
patients with non-curable diseases such as cancer or AIDS. This project will
develop and apply modern statistical techniques to extract useful features from
massive data sets collected over time, and then use these features to conduct
predictions as accurately as possible. When these statistical methods are built
into a computer software program, they can be used online to conduct
predictions. Patients and physicians can use such programs to evaluate disease
progression and to make early decisions about treatment and prevention.
Industrial engineers can use such programs to forecast a potential system
failure and initiate maintenance. Commercial web sites can collect customers'
reaction data online and then apply such methods to better predict customers'
needs and improve sales and customer satisfaction.

Many statistical methods assume that longitudinal data trajectories follow
parametric models, linear or nonlinear. However, the pattern of longitudinal
data trajectories differs in each specific setting, making it difficult to
identify a satisfactory parametric family that is suitable for all situations.
Based on this consideration, a functional principal component analysis (FPCA)
approach is used to capture the longitudinal data structures and functional
patterns. The first goal of this project is to decompose biomarker trajectories
into some feature functions, and then incorporate these features as covariates
in the Cox proportional hazards model to make dynamic predictions. Given that
the proportional hazards assumption may be too restrictive in some cases, the
second goal of this project is to conduct dynamic prediction for the quantile
functions of the residual event time under a flexible framework. The residual
lifetime quantile regression model facilitates a meaningful interpretation and
offers more direct answers than the Cox model. The third goal of this project is
to develop analytic and visualization tools for identifying longitudinal data
trajectory patterns prior to a failure event by looking at them backwards in
time and aligning them with the failure events. Discerning these patterns can
greatly facilitate dynamic prediction of the imminent failure event. The
proposed methods are specially designed to handle the complications of censored
data, irregular follow-up times and dynamically collected data to facilitate
prediction over a range of time points.
