
* 1612970
* New Covariate-Adjusted Response-Adaptive Designs and Associated Methods for Statistical Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2016,05/22/2018
* Feifang Hu,DC,George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Precision medicine is an approach that allows physicians to tailor a treatment
regimen based on an individual patient's characteristics (which could be
biomarkers or other covariates). With today's modern technology, it is much
easier to identify important biomarkers (usually called predictive biomarkers)
that may associate with certain diseases and their treatments. To design an
efficient clinical study of precision medicine, one should incorporate these
useful predictive biomarkers. In this project, the investigator undertakes a
systematic and comprehensive study of feasible designs and statistical inference
related to clinical trials of precision medicine. The project will introduce and
study innovative designs and statistical methods and will investigate how to
implement the proposed designs and statistical methods in some real clinical
trials.

The objective of this project is to introduce new designs and to provide novel
statistical methods for adaptive randomized clinical trials of precision
medicine. Recently, advances in genetics have permitted identification of genes
(biomarkers) that are linked to certain diseases. These biomarkers (called
predictive biomarkers) could be used to predict the response of a specific
treatment and the confirmation of their predictive power relies on carefully
designed clinical studies. To develop precision medicine, groundbreaking designs
are needed for clinical trials so that predictive biomarkers can be incorporated
to facilitate treatment selection. Advance and innovative statistical methods
are required to match special features of clinical trials of precision medicine.
This project focuses on the designs of clinical trials and the corresponding
statistical inference for precision medicine. The investigator introduces
innovative classes of covariate-adjusted response-adaptive designs, studies the
statistical properties of these adaptive designs, develops new methods for
statistical inference and obtains their properties, and applies these methods to
practical problems.
