
* 1612914
* Conference on Modeling Neural Activity: Statistics, Dynamical Systems, and Networks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2016,05/10/2016
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference on Modeling Neural Activity:
Statistics, Dynamical Systems, and Networks (MONA2) held June 22-24, 2016 in
Lihue, Hawaii. Many disorders, such as ADHD, autism, and schizophrenia, as well
as stroke and various neurodegenerative diseases, are thought to involve
dysfunction of neural networks. Because computational neuroscience aims to
supply principles for understanding the activity of individual and collective
neural firing patterns, its successes can help in formulating mechanistic
descriptions of pathophysiology. This conference will bring together
statisticians and computational neuroscientists from the US and Japan in order
to enhance collaborations between scientists in the two countries. NSF funding
will help support the involvement of the US researchers.

Computational neuroscience has grown, in distinct directions, from the success
of biophysical models of neural activity, the attractiveness of the brain-as-
computer metaphor, and the increasing prominence of statistical and machine
learning methods throughout science. This has helped create a rich set of ideas
and tools associated with "computation" to study the nervous system, but it has
also led to a kind of balkanization of expertise. There is, especially, very
little overlap between mathematical and statistical research in this area.
Important breakthroughs in computational neuroscience could come from research
strategies that are able to combine what are currently largely distinct
approaches. This award seeks to encourage the creation and enhancement of
collaborations between scientists from the US and Japan. More information can be
found on the conference web site http://www.stat.cmu.edu/mona2.
