
* 1612873
* Semiparametric Estimation and Variable Selection in the Presence of Nonignorable Nonresponse
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats, 
* 09/01/2016,08/24/2016
* Jun Shao,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 290,431.00

Nonresponse exists in many statistical applications. In most survey problems,
many sampled units fail to provide answers to some or all survey questions. In
medical or health studies, the percentages of incomplete data are often
appreciable. Handling nonresponse is very challenging when nonresponse is
related to the missing data. Since this research is motivated by problems in
survey agencies such as the U.S. Census Bureau and Statistics Canada, or by data
sets in medical and health studies, results obtained from this research will
have significant impacts on the methodology of handling nonresponse for
estimation and inference in practice. The results from this research will also
shed light on further research in this area. When the nonresponse mechanism or
propensity depends on observed data only, the nonresponse is called ignorable;
otherwise, it is nonignorable. There is a rich literature on methodology of
handling ignorable nonresponse. Handling nonignorable nonresponse is much more
challenging, since assumptions have to be imposed to ensure the identifiability
and estimability of unknown population characteristics and these assumptions are
hard to check using data with nonignorable nonresponse. Applying methods
developed for ignorable nonresponse to data with nonignorable nonresponse may
create serious biases in statistical estimation and inference. This research
focuses on estimation based on data with nonignorable nonresponse in the
following two general topics. (1) Semiparametric estimation. If a fully
parametric model is assumed on the nonresponse propensity and the population
distribution of interest, then valid estimators of parameters of interest may be
derived using the parametric likelihood under some identifiability assumption.
However, this parametric approach is sensitive to model misspecification,
especially when nonresponse is nonignorable. On the other hand, unlike the
situation with no nonresponse, a purely nonparametric approach cannot identify
the population. This research studies semiparametric methods, assuming one
component of the propensity or population distribution is parametric and the
others are nonparametric. Efforts will be made to study robustness and
efficiency of various methods under different assumptions, longitudinal or
multivariate outcomes with nonignorable nonresponse, problems with both missing
outcomes and covariates, and unmeasured confounders or systematic missing
covariate data in meta analyses. (2) Model and variable selection. When
nonresponse is nonignorable, a covariate called nonresponse instrument needs to
be used, which is always observed and helps to identify population parameters.
In addition, a parametric component of either the propensity or the population
distribution has to be assumed. Thus, it is desired to perform model and/or
variable selection to ensure that the assumed parametric component and the
selected nonresponse instrument are appropriate. Because of nonignorable
nonresponse, the existing model and variable selection techniques are not
applicable. This research will develop new techniques for model selection and
the selection of nonresponse instruments. Furthermore, in the big data era there
exists an extremely large set of auxiliary variables that can be used as
covariates and this research will study dimension reduction and variable
selection for accurate estimation in the presence of nonignorable nonresponse.
