
* 1612885
* Estimation, Prediction, and Extremes of Multivariate Random Fields
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2016,05/23/2016
* Yimin Xiao,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 120,000.00

Data sets with multivariate measurements obtained at spatial locations are
nowadays ubiquitous in many scientific areas, ranging from astronomy,
environmental, and ecological sciences to image processing. The need to
construct and understand multivariate random fields as models for multivariate
spatial or spatio-temporal data has increased dramatically in recent years.
However, the development of statistical theory and methodology for multivariate
random fields is still in an evolutionary stage and poses substantial
challenges. This research project is focused on establishing novel results and
opening new research directions in parameter estimation, prediction, and extreme
value theory of multivariate random fields. It is anticipated that the results
of the work will further promote the applicability of multivariate random field
models in statistics and other scientific areas. Moreover, involvement in the
research will train graduate students and develop their careers in the
mathematical sciences.

The research addresses significant questions in statistical inference and
extreme value theory of multivariate random fields. Special emphasis is placed
on investigating the effects of smoothness/fractal indices and cross-dependence
structures of multivariate Gaussian and related random fields on their parameter
estimation and prediction under the framework of fixed-domain asymptotics, and
on multivariate extreme value theory. Many of the problems under investigation
are intrinsically connected with geometric and topological properties of the
multivariate random fields. The principal theoretical findings envisaged by this
project include simultaneous estimation of multiple parameters and description
of their joint performance, prediction under fixed-domain asymptotics, and
precise asymptotics for the excursion probabilities, for multivariate Gaussian
and related random fields indexed by the Euclidean space or spheres. In previous
work, the investigator developed probabilistic and statistical methods for
studying multivariate random fields and resolved several outstanding open
problems on excursion probabilities, random fractals, Gaussian random fields,
Lévy processes, and fractional Lévy random fields. This project aims to yield
novel insights into the understanding of multivariate random fields and quantify
the influence of their cross dependence structures on the performance of
estimators, kriging and co-kriging, and extreme value theory.
