
* 1613018
* Collaborative Research: New Directions in Multidimensional and Multivariate Functional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2016,05/19/2016
* Xiaoke Zhang,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 137,981.00

Functional data analysis, which deals with a sample of functions or curves,
plays an important role in modern data analysis. Nowadays in the era of "Big
Data", multidimensional and multivariate functional data are becoming
increasingly common, especially in biological, medical, and engineering
applications. There are significant challenges posed by the very large dimension
and complex structure of these data. The proposed research will substantially
narrow the gap between the increasing demand for handling such data in practice,
and the insufficient development of statistical methods and computational tools.
This research has applications to neuroscience, climate science, and
engineering. It will provide scientists, engineers, and doctors with tools to
help understand problems in their area, and enhance interdisciplinary
collaborations.

This project offers a comprehensive research plan to advance the understanding
and applicability of multidimensional and multivariate functional data. The
research will focus on the following three sub-projects: (1) Develop data-
adaptive and interpretable representation of the covariance function for
multidimensional functional data, (2) Develop a novel model-free procedure to
detect dependency between components of multivariate functional data, and (3)
Address the modeling and prediction of multivariate functional time series. The
resulting methods will be applied to neuroimaging and climate data. The
integration of these three sub-projects will foster creative directions and
strategies for multidimensional and multivariate functional data.
