
* 1613072
* Iterative testing procedures and high-dimensional scaling limits of extremal random structures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2016,08/13/2018
* Andrew Nobel,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 374,999.00

Over the past ten years, networks and network models have seen increasing use
and importance in a variety of fields, including economics, neuroscience,
genomics, and biomedicine. Work in these fields has driven an increase in
statistical research concerning modeling of, and inference about, complex
networks. The PIs will pursue several new directions in statistical network
research, a key theme being the application and extension of recent work in
probability on the theory of complex, random and geometric networks. In
particular, the PIs will develop iterative testing methods to identify
relational changes in large data sets, and to enhance the power of genomic
studies that link genetic variation to global changes in gene expression. They
will extend existing probabilistic techniques to provide theoretical support for
the iterative testing procedure, and to address broader statistical questions
concerning inference about complex associations between the features of large,
high dimensional data sets. Methodological development and application will be
carried out in cooperation with researchers in genomics, biomedicine, and
sociology at UNC, with whom the PI and co-PI have long standing collaborations.

Motivated in large part by the increasing use and importance of networks in a
variety of fields, there has been a great deal of work in the statistics
community devoted to the problem of testing and estimating associations between
variables in high dimensional data sets. Concurrent with this statistical
activity, recent developments in the fields of probabilistic combinatorics have
significantly advanced our understanding of discrete random structures that
capture the association of high-dimensional objects. The PIs will bring a number
of these probabilistic tools to bear on association based inference problems. In
particular, the PIs will develop and implement an iterative testing procedure
that identifies self-associated sets of vertices in a graph, and self-associated
sets of variables in a high dimensional data set. Within the framework of the
iterative testing procedure they will develop computationally efficient methods
for several applied problems: mining of block correlation differences in two
sample studies, and identifying groups of mutually correlated variables in
studies where each sample is assessed with two or more measurement platforms. As
a special case of the latter problem, they will develop tools to enhance the
power of genomic studies that link local genetic variation to global changes in
gene expression. A second component of the proposed research is to adapt and
extend existing techniques in probabilistic combinatorics to provide supporting
theory for the iterative testing procedure, and to address broader statistical
questions concerning the testing and estimation of correlations. Development and
application of the methods will be carried out in cooperation with researchers
in genomics, biomedicine, and sociology at UNC, with whom the PI and co-PI have
long standing collaborations.
