
* 1613016
* A New Approach Toward Optimal and Adaptive Nonparametric Methods for High-Frequency Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2016,08/30/2016
* Jose Figueroa-Lopez,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,949.00

High frequency monitoring of complex systems, which operate in continuous time,
is increasingly important in many fields such as neural science, turbulence, and
environmental sciences. This tendency, however, has been particularly
predominant in financial markets with the advent of transaction and Limit Order
Book data sets, which constitute two prototypical examples of "big data" in
statistics. In light of the just mentioned technological advances, statistical
inference methods for continuous time processes based on high-frequency
observations have seen a rapid evolution in the last few years. One of the
crucial issues with the current state of art of the subject lies in the fact
that most of the proposed methods critically depend on tuning parameters that
need to be calibrated. This, of course, is the case with most of the
nonparametric methods used in other classical statistical problems. However, the
extensive literature for resolving these problems in other frameworks has not
yet been fully translated into the context of high-frequency-based inference for
stochastic processes. Another important issue comes from the common practice of
adopting artificial models specified by stochastic dynamical systems, which are
known to lack sufficient accuracy for describing the stylized features of asset
prices at ultra high frequency. This, in turn, has motivated the introduction of
the concept of microstructure noise, but sometimes, again, assuming unnatural
assumptions. Hence, there is a real need for bottom-up derivations of models
that allow a better understanding of the underlying asset price formation.

The principal investigator will tap on the previously mentioned needs and is
expected to significantly advance the area in the following three primary
directions of theoretical and practical relevance: (1) Devise new methodologies
towards the implementation of "optimal" inference methods in regard to the
intrinsic tuning parameters of the methods; (2) Develop a new approach, together
with the necessary theoretical foundations, for adaptive estimation methods
based on data-driven fixed point procedures; (3) Better incorporation of Limit
Order Book data in the modeling of both the underlying approximating jump-
diffusion process and the microstructure noise with a view of enhancing the
estimation of latent process parameters based on limit order book information.
