
* 1613054
* A Geometric Approach to Bayesian Modeling and Inference with the Nonparametric Fisher-Rao Metric
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2016,09/06/2016
* Sebastian Kurtek,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

Bayesian modeling and inference are commonly used statistical approaches to the
analyses of complex high-dimensional data from many scientific fields including
computer vision, biology, biometrics, bioinformatics and medicine. This research
project is concerned with developing geometry-based, computationally efficient
and scalable tools for Bayesian modeling of such datasets that have high
potential for revealing novel insights. An example is a Bayesian model for
statistical analysis of tumor heterogeneity in cancer with the possibility for
improved disease characterization and new treatment approaches. The novelty and
potential for high impact of this project come from the utility of an area of
mathematics called differential geometry in the study of Bayesian statistical
models and inferences.

While much progress has been made in the area of Bayesian modeling and inference
both in terms of theory and computation, little attention has been given to
studying the underlying geometry of such models. In this project, the PIs focus
on developing a practical, unified Riemannian-geometric framework for three main
problems: (1) Bayesian sensitivity analysis, (2) geometric variational
inference, and (3) geometric nonparametric prior construction; these problems
culminate in a fourth one of Bayesian density estimation, wherein the tools
described in the first three can be used with obvious advantages. For a Bayesian
model with prior, sampling and posterior densities, the geometric properties of
the model are investigated and exploited through a square-root transformation,
under which the nonlinear manifold of probability densities endowed with the
nonparametric Fisher-Rao metric simplifies to the positive orthant of the unit
sphere endowed with the Euclidean metric. Because the geometry of the sphere is
well-known, important tools for analysis (e.g., exponential and inverse
exponential maps, parallel transport, geodesics) are available in closed-form.
As a result, this framework is versatile computationally and applicable to
parametric, semiparametric and nonparametric Bayesian models. More importantly,
it provides a formal mathematical background for defining distances between
densities and developing geometrically calibrated measures. Thus, the two main
contributions of this project are the development of (1) metric-based
inferential methods for Bayesian models that may permit a more intuitive
explanation of prior and posterior beliefs, and (2) a geometric quantification
of various aspects of posterior inference through intrinsic analysis on the
space of all probability densities.
