
* 1613173
* Understanding Regression Heterogeneity Through Joint Estimation of Conditional Quantiles
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2016,08/01/2016
* Surya Tokdar,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 149,979.00

In many data-driven scientific investigations, the primary goal is to understand
the relationship between a response variable and a set of predictors. Standard
statistical techniques attempt to detect and quantify the nature of such
relationships through changes in the average response. However, in the real
world, predictor-response relationships are often more complex and nuanced. In
disciplines like climate science, ecology, economics, public health and
sociology, investigators are often interested in understanding changes to the
extreme response percentiles. Additional insights are gained by quantifying how
the rate of change varies as one moves from the average to the extremes. This
project aims to develop sophisticated and theoretically sound statistical tools
that can answer these questions from large and complex data sets.

Statistical tools are sought within the recently popularized modeling framework
of linear quantile regression. The proposed framework expands the scope of
linear quantile regression to scenarios where the response variables exhibit
additional dependency. Such dependency manifests in many common situations,
e.g., when one simultaneously measures multiple response variables per
observation unit, when a response is measured repeatedly over time, or, when
data is drawn from a network of individuals. Standing between the promise of
quantile regression and its wider applicability is the lack of a proper model-
based estimation framework. The PI has recently introduced a modeling framework
that leads to Bayesian or penalized likelihood based joint estimation of linear
quantile planes over arbitrary predictor spaces. Proposed model extensions
augment this framework with autoregressive and copula formulations to address
various kinds of structural dependency between the observation units. The
project will develop efficient inference algorithms using advanced Bayesian
techniques based on stochastic computation, and public, open source software in
the form of R packages. Software development will incorporate possible
leveraging of distributed computing architectures to render scalability to big
data. For all model extensions, the PI will also carry out sharp analyses of
theoretical guarantees on model performance by working out the large sample
distribution theory of Bayesian parameter estimates.
