
* 1613061
* Summer Research Conference in Statistics and Biostatistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2016,03/10/2016
* Arnold Stromberg,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2017
* USD 21,315.00

This award supports graduate-student participation in the Summer Research
Conference in Statistics and Biostatistics, held June 5-8, 2016 in Bentonville,
Arkansas. The meeting, part of an annual research conference series sponsored by
the Southern Regional Council on Statistics, is designed to encourage the
interchange and mutual understanding of research ideas in statistics and
biostatistics, and to give motivation and direction to further research
progress, particularly for young researchers, in a manner not ordinarily
possible at other meetings. The meeting is particularly valuable for graduate
students and faculty from smaller regional schools in the South. Each year, the
location of the conference is chosen to be within driving distance for
researchers in the southern region, thus affording them the opportunity to
participate and interact closely with internationally-known leaders in the field
without the cost of travel to distant venues. Speakers present formal research
talks with adequate time allowed for clarification, amplification, and further
informal discussions in small groups. Senior participants make themselves
accessible for informal discussions of their research as well.

This year's Summer Research Conference centers on five topical areas:
Measurement Error Models, Visual Analytics, Alzheimer's Disease Modeling,
Survival Analysis, and Big Data Prediction Modeling. In addition to two plenary
speakers for the conference, each topical area features talks by one senior
speaker and two junior speakers. A poster session for graduate students will be
held on the second day. This award provides travel funding for graduate students
who are making poster presentations and in need of support. For more
information, see the conference web page: www.stat.missouri.edu/~srcos/
