
* 1613156
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Bayesian Methods for Complex Data with Optimality Guarantees
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2016,05/24/2016
* Debdeep Pati,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2018
* USD 127,059.00

Spectacular advances in data acquisition, processing, and storage present the
opportunity to analyze datasets of ever-increasing size and complexity in
various applications, such as social and biological networks, epidemiology,
genomics, and Internet recommender systems. Underlying the massive size and
dimension of these data, there is often a parsimonious structure. The Bayesian
approach to statistical inference is attractive in this context in terms of
incorporating structural assumptions through prior distributions, enabling
probabilistic modeling of complex phenomenon, and providing an automatic
characterization of uncertainty. This research project aims to advance eliciting
and translating prior knowledge regarding the low-dimensional skeleton of big
data to provide realistic uncertainty characterizations while maintaining
computational efficiency. Bayesian computation poses substantial challenge in
high-dimensional and big data problems. The research aims to develop cutting-
edge computational strategies and software packages for implementation to be
made available publicly. The project involves graduate students in the research.

The research project focuses on theoretical foundations and computational
strategies for Bayesian methods in high-dimensional and big data problems
motivated by applications in social networks and epidemiology. Techniques for
systematically developing and evaluating prior distributions in high-dimensional
problems will be investigated with a special emphasis on the trade-off between
statistical efficiency and computational scalability. Specific directions
include efficient algorithms for posterior sampling with shrinkage priors, a
theoretical framework for divide and conquer strategies in big data problems,
fast algorithms for clustering nodes in large networks with unknown number of
communities, and methods for discovering structure in sparse contingency tables.
The algorithms will be motivated by rigorous theoretical understanding of the
behavior of the posterior distribution with a particular emphasis on proper
quantification of uncertainty in a distributed computing framework. Software
will be developed for each application.
