
* 1613060
* Prediction Models Based on Large Scale Image Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2016,07/25/2016
* Xiao Wang,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Research in statistics involves the development and understanding of models
based on data. Generally, these data are in the form of numbers, but more
recently, statisticians have begun to develop models for data in the form of
images. These functional image models have broad applications in neuroscience,
engineering, and biomedical practice. This research will further the development
of these image models. This project will also include the development of new
courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels to train students in the use
and understanding of these models.

This project is to develop an integrated research program that studies a broad
class of large scale functional image models. The PI aims to develop the
adaptive and/or local region regression, the finite mixture regression, and the
transformation survival regression with ultra-high dimensional image data. The
key advantages of these models are to preserve sharp edges for better
interpretation, to incorporate the heterogeneity in the population for better
representation, and to handle sophisticated censored data. The theoretical
contributions of the proposed research are made towards addressing fundamental
issues across several disciplines, including nonparametric statistics and
machine learning. These functional image models have broad applications in
neuroscience, engineering, and biomedical practice. Courses will be developed to
train students in the use and understanding of these models.
