
* 1613154
* Collaborative Research: Tensor Envelope Model - A New Approach for Regressions with Tensor Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Modulation
* 09/01/2016,08/30/2016
* Xin Zhang,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 102,911.00

One of the most intriguing questions in modern science is to understand the
human brain. In particular, scientists want to understand the differences
between the brains of people with neurological disorders and those without. In
brain imaging analysis, scientists collect data in the form of images that are
used to compare the normal aging process to the development of neurological
disorders. Through this project, the PIs seek to develop a toolkit comprised of
a set of novel statistical methods, theories, and algorithms for the analysis of
brain imaging data, as well as similar data that arise in a variety of
scientific and business fields. The proposed research program is expected to
make significant contributions on two fronts: timely responding to the growing
needs and challenges of array data analysis, and providing a class of associated
methodology that advances the statistical discipline. Research proposed in this
project is to be disseminated through the investigators' close collaborations
with the neuroscientists, as well as substantial educational and outreach
activities.

Multidimensional array, or tensor, data are now frequently arising in a wide
range of scientific and business fields. Aiming to address some of the most
pressing questions in tensor data analysis, this research will integrate
advanced statistical modeling devices with modern computational techniques to
develop a set of novel tensor regression methods. Whereas there has been an
enormous body of literature on high-dimensional regression analysis, nearly all
work is with a vector response or predictor. Naively turning a tensor into a
vector would result in ultrahigh dimensionality, destroy inherent structural
information embedded in the tensor, and often render classical methods
inadequate. This research will develop methods and tools for regression modeling
of tensor responses or predictors, which both effectively tackles the high
dimensionality and simultaneously preserves the tensor structure. Three sets of
problems are to be investigated: (1) tensor response regression with envelope,
aiming to address questions such as identifying brain regions exhibiting
different activity patterns between the disease group and the general population
after controlling for a set of potential confounding variables; (2) tensor
predictor regression with envelope, aiming at questions of using brain images to
diagnose neurodegenerative disorders and to predict onset of neuropsychiatric
diseases; and (3) covariance matrix response regression with envelope, aiming to
understand brain network alternations and building their associations with
pathological phenotypes. The core idea underlying all of these aims is the
adoption of a generalized sparsity principle and the development of a class of
tensor envelope methods. The classical sparsity principle assumes a subset of
individual variables are irrelevant, and various penalty functions are employed
to induce such sparsity. By contrast, this generalized sparsity principle
assumes linear combinations of variables are irrelevant, and the proposed
envelope methods simultaneously identify and exclude such irrelevant information
to achieve much improved estimation accuracy and efficiency.
