
* 1622483
* On Conditional Statistical Procedures for Simultaneous Model Selection, Inference, and Prediction in Complex Climate Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 09/01/2016,09/10/2018
* Singdhansu Chatterjee,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 174,997.00

This research project aims to develop new methodology for studying climate data
as functions of time and space. Many such data series are oscillatory in nature
but not strictly periodic, and the phenomena described vary in intensity at
different points in time and in different parts of the globe. A thorough study
of these irregular oscillatory patterns is of primary importance for planning of
infrastructural needs, planning of sustainable development, and management of
the planet's food, water, and energy resources. Understanding of climate data is
also essential for decision-making to address human, ecological, and
environmental concerns, for better understanding of the physical process of
climate systems, and for more accurate predictive systems. This project studies
the mutual dependence of these oscillatory patterns and other climate variables.
The results are expected to advance knowledge in evaluation of climate models,
uncertainty quantification, and tropical cyclone behavior. Software development,
a core component of this project, will benefit researchers working on related
data analytic problems. Students will be trained through involvement in the
interdisciplinary research project.

The primary statistical challenges in modeling these irregular, multi-scale and
multi-dimensional spatio-temporal processes will be addressed using a functional
data approach. Computational techniques and theoretical machinery will be
developed for simultaneous model selection and inference in functional data and
in non-parametric and semi-parametric models involving such data. Computation-
based procedures will be developed for testing goodness of fit of models for
functional spatio-temporal data and for verifying technical assumptions about
the nature of spatial or temporal dependency patterns. Bayesian and resampling-
based inferential procedures will be developed and used in multiple datasets.
