
* 1628941
* Statistics and Biostatistics Department Chairs Workshop
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2016,05/19/2016
* Steve Pierson,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 10/31/2017
* USD 39,962.00

This award supports travel for participants in the U.S. Statistics and
Biostatistics Department Chairs Workshop held July 12-13, 2016 at the American
Statistical Association in Alexandria, Virginia. Enrollments in statistics
courses as well as statistics degrees awarded are surging across U.S.
universities. The numbers of universities granting both graduate and
undergraduate degrees in statistics and biostatistics are at all-time highs. At
the same time, data science is emerging as an important research program and the
demand for data science skills is rapidly increasing in the public and private
sectors. Since statistics represents a foundational discipline in data science,
statistics and biostatistics department chairs need to ensure statisticians are
effective partners in intramural and extramural university data science
programs. This workshop brings together statistics and biostatistics department
chairs to address current challenges and learn directly from funding agency and
private sector representatives about data science and research funding trends,
in order to help statistics and biostatistics departments ensure a comprehensive
approach both to data science research and to training graduates with skills
that meet workforce demands.

Statisticians and statistics play a very important role in advancing science.
This workshop provides an opportunity for statistics, biostatistics, and related
department chairs to discuss current trends, challenges, and opportunities
relating to surging enrollments, workforce needs, research trends, data science,
and other issues. To inform discussions, participants will hear from private
sector representatives concerning workforce needs, funding agency
representatives on funding programs and trends, academic leaders on statistics
and data science education, and university administrators on cross-campus
research and educational efforts. Because a goal of this workshop is to equip
department chairs to further engage their faculty in cross-campus
interdisciplinary research and data science efforts, the workshop has strong
potential to improve scientific research. Proceedings of the workshop will be
recorded, summarized, and disseminated in a format constructive to the
participants and the broader community. More information can be found at the
workshop web page: https://www.amstat.org/meetings/dcworkshop/
