
* 1636648
* 2016 International Indian Statistical Association conference `Statistical and Data Sciences: A Key to Healthy People, Planet and Prosperity'
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2016,07/05/2016
* Debashis Mondal,OR,Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The 2016 meeting of the International Indian Statistical Association (IISA) will
take place at Oregon State University, from August 18-21, 2016. (See
http://blogs.oregonstate.edu/iisa/.) The main objective of the conference is to
bring together both well established and emerging young researchers from around
the world who are actively pursuing theoretical and methodological research in
statistics and data science and their applications in various allied fields. The
conference aims to provide a forum for leading experts and young researchers to
discuss recent progress in statistical theory and applications and in data
science, thereby providing new directions for statistical inference in various
fields. It aims to promote education, research and application of statistics,
probability and data science throughout the world with a special emphasis on the
Indian subcontinent, foster the exchange of information and scholarly activities
between various countries as well as among other national/international
organizations for the development of statistical and data science, serve the
needs of young statisticians and data scientists and encourage cooperative
efforts among members in education, research, industry and business.

Oregon State University will host the 2016 meeting of the International Indian
Statistical Association (IISA) from August 18-21, 2016. Plenary speakers will be
Kanti Mardia (University of Leeds) and Xiao-Li Meng (Harvard University).
Keynote speakers include Kathy Ensor (Rice University), Debashis Ghosh
(University of Colorado, Denver), Kannan Natarajan (Novartis), and Ajit Tamhane
(Northwestern University). Activities for junior researchers include a session
on early career development and a student paper competition. This funding will
assure the participation of junior researchers and graduate students.
