
* 1637436
* Workshop on the Algorithmic, Mathematical, and Statistical Foundations of Data Science
* DMS,STATISTICS, Special Projects - CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/23/2016
* Xiaoming Huo,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 99,998.00

A workshop on the Algorithmic, Mathematical, and Statistical Foundations of Data
Science will be held April 28-30, 2016 in Arlington, VA. The event will bring
together leading researchers in computer science, mathematics, and statistics to
address foundational issues related to data science. The objectives of the
workshop are three-fold: (i) identify fundamental areas in the emerging
discipline of Data Science where collaboration between computer scientists,
mathematicians, and statisticians is necessary to achieve significant progress;
(ii) Assess how collaboration between computer scientists, mathematicians, and
statisticians could potentially contribute to workforce development by advancing
and transforming the Data Science research training of Ph.D. students and post-
docs; and (iii) Suggest different infrastructure modalities that could
significantly promote and advance such collaborations. The main deliverable of
the workshop is a white paper that will serve as a guideline for professional
societies and funding agencies.

The rapid emergence of the Big Data phenomenon presents both opportunities and
challenges. While massive data may allow the generation of models and the design
of algorithms that have improved inferential power, such models and algorithms
may be less successful on modest-sized data sets. The challenge for researchers
is to develop theoretical principles that will allow the scaling of inference
and learning to massive-scale datasets, and algorithms that control errors even
in the presence of heterogeneity in the data generation and data sampling
processes. These challenges will require collaborations between researchers
representing theoretical computer science, mathematics, statistics, machine
learning and data mining, and high performance computing. This award supports a
workshop that brings together leaders from these communities of researchers to
discuss the challenges and opportunities for collaborative work in this
developing field.
