
* 1703077
* Statistical Inference for Biomedical Big Data: Theory, Methods, and Tools
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/15/2017,04/11/2017
* Faming Liang,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports participation in the workshop "Statistical Inference for
Biomedical Big Data: Theory, Methods, and Tools" to be held on the Gainesville
campus of the University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida on April 7-8, 2017.
Dramatic improvements in data collection and acquisition technologies in the
past two decades have enabled scientists to collect vast amounts of health-
related data in biomedical studies. If analyzed properly, these data can expand
our knowledge and improve contemporary healthcare services from diagnosis to
prevention to personalized treatment, and can also provide insights into
reducing healthcare costs. However, biomedical data can be rather big and
complex, and are often characterized by some mixture of high dimensionality,
heterogeneity, high volume, high velocity, and high variety. Advances in
biomedical big data analysis can greatly impact the development of biomedical
sciences.

This workshop will bring together some of the most prominent statisticians in
biomedical big data and a selected group of local biomedical researchers in a
collaborative setting to discuss and foster cutting-edge developments of
statistical theory, methods, and tools for biomedical big data analysis. The
format of this workshop is designed to foster interactions between statisticians
and biomedical researchers. To facilitate communications between graduate
students, junior researchers, and senior researchers, a poster session is
included in the program. To disseminate the results of the meeting, the program
and abstracts will be widely circulated, and modest travel funds for a large
geographically diverse group of graduate students, postdocs, and junior faculty
are planned. More information about the workshop can be found at
http://biostat.ufl.edu/seminars/biostatistics-workshop/.
