
* 1712977
* Non-Parametric Methods for Analysis of Time-Varying Network Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Modulation
* 08/01/2017,06/26/2017
* Marianna Pensky,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 280,000.00

Stochastic networks are observed in many domains including biology, sociology,
genetics, ecology, information technology, and national security. While many
applications involve temporal network data, the research related to dynamic
networks has been relatively limited in scope. The goal of the project is to
fill this gap through the development of statistically sound and computationally
viable approaches for studying time-dependent networks. Although the research is
largely methodological, the resulting techniques can be used in a variety of
fields including medicine, molecular biology, statistical genetics, national
security, and the social sciences. In particular, the proposed theories and
algorithms will be applied to the analysis of brain networks associated with
epilepsy disease, in collaboration with the Functional Brain Mapping and Brain
Computer Interface Lab at the Florida Hospital for Children. Since the project
presents an integrated approach merging applications and theory, the results
will be greatly beneficial for a variety of fields that rely on analysis of
dynamic stochastic network data. Applications include (a) methods for
understanding connections between brain regions associated with speech,
resulting in safer and more efficient epileptic treatment options; (b) tools for
analysis of time-dependent connections between brain regions associated with
particular diseases; (c) techniques for analysis of the enzymatic influences
between proteins and temporal gene networks; and (d) detection of terrorist or
hacker groups on the basis of dynamic social media data. Educational and
training activities include development of Special Topics graduate courses,
training of graduate students, and organization of interdisciplinary seminars.
The PI plans to promote diversity through participation in the Women in Science
and Engineering (WISE) program.

The objective of the project is the development of nonparametric techniques for
the analysis of temporal networks that require a few simple assumptions on the
network, and preserve continuity of the network's structure in time. Although
approaches developed for a time independent network can be applied to a temporal
network frame-by-frame, they totally ignore continuity of the network structure
and parameters in time. In addition, the majority of research investigating
temporal network models assumes specific mechanisms for changing nodes'
memberships as well as parametric forms for the connection probabilities. Modern
algebraic techniques will be used to simplify the model, and precision
guarantees via oracle inequalities and minimax studies obtained. The research
will substantially advance the fields of non-parametric statistics in general,
and the emerging field of network data analysis in particular. The project will
significantly broaden the range of methods applicable to the analysis of time-
varying network data by developing techniques for non-parametric estimation and
clustering that require few simple nonparametric assumptions, are
computationally viable, and have guarantees of high precision.
