
* 1712418
* Statistical Inference for Large-Scale Structured Data with Dependence and Non-Stationarity
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2017,05/06/2019
* Chunming Zhang,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2020
* USD 125,000.00

This project aims to address some challenging research problems, with a common
theme of exploiting spatial-temporal dependence and non-stationarity in large-
scale structured data, emerging from scientific studies in biology, genetics,
astronomy, economics, neuroscience, geophysics, and meteorology among others.
New tools will be developed for stochastic modeling, computational algorithms,
and statistical inference applied to medical imaging data such as functional
magnetic resonance imaging, neuron spike trains, genome-wide association
studies, and building faster file access systems. It is anticipated that these
new developments will allow scientists to efficiently analyze data with
significantly increased flexibility and accuracy, and thus will have direct
impacts on these applications to science, public health, and information
technology. The research will also be integrated with educational practice
through development of a seminar course on new statistical methods for analyzing
spatially and temporally correlated imaging data.

The project focuses on adequate accommodation of three fundamentally different
types of spatial-temporal dependence structures. The research results aim to
bridge the gap between the limited theory and methodology currently available
and the broad and challenging scientific problems encountered in many applied
fields. Motivated by fMRI data analysis, Project 1 explores a new semi-
parametric inference procedure applicable to a broad class of "non-stationary
non-Gaussian temporally dependent" error processes for time-course data
collected at a given spatial point. A new test statistic will be developed, and
its asymptotic properties will be established. Large-scale multiple testing
tasks often exhibit dependence, and accounting for the dependence among
individual non-Gaussian test statistics is an important, challenging, but
unsolved problem in statistics. Motivated by challenges in detection of
activated brain regions from fMRI studies and assessing association between
single-nucleotide polymorphisms and a disease from GWAS studies, Project 2
proposes a new multiple testing framework for a diverging number of "correlated
chi-squared test statistics with an arbitrary dependence structure." Motivated
by applications in multiple neural spike train recordings with dependence in
both time and space, Project 3 develops new integrative methods for learning the
"sparse network structured dependence" among nodes underlying a wide class of
multivariate point process data with non-stationary event times.
