
* 1712962
* Planes of Change: New Statistical Methods for Complex Non-Standard Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2017,08/02/2019
* Moulinath Banerjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 350,000.00

The project aims to develop new statistical methodologies for analysis of
systems in a variety of fields, such as personalized medicine, internet traffic,
and economics, in which sharp threshold effects occur. Such sharp effects are
typically experienced when a system is subjected to a sudden shock (e.g., the
effect of political tension on stock prices, the effect of socio-political
upheaval on social-media networks, or the effect of a medical intervention on
disease progression). Such sharp changes are of critical interest to
practitioners in these different fields as they typically have important
implications for future decision-making. Statisticians model such sharp changes
in time, for example, through what are called "change-points;" when the sharp
change happens due to the effect of multiple variables simultaneously, such
regions are described in terms of "change-planes." This project aims to develop
novel methods of identifying such change-points or change-planes in problems
where massive amounts of data -- which have now become the norm given advances
in storage capabilities as well as collection mechanisms -- are available, and
furthermore, the number of variables on which data are recorded is also very
large. The performance of such methods will be carefully analyzed using
mathematical theory as well as computer-generated simulations, and the methods
will also be validated on real data coming from a variety of sources. It is
anticipated that the results of the research will have impact in a variety of
natural science as well as social science disciplines.

The overarching theme of this project is to develop methodology and inference in
a class of problems in which thresholds or boundaries (in one or multiple
dimensions) that induce discontinuities arise naturally, either in the
statistical model or in the estimation paradigm. The problems are studied both
in the setting of massive amounts of data as well as in scenarios where the
number of covariates can exceed the number of observations. The boundaries
considered in one-dimension are change-points, while those in multiple
dimensions are hyper-planes. The studied problems present two different kinds of
complexities: (a) massive amounts of available data, and/or (b) large numbers of
covariates relative to number of observations. In particular: (i) A number of
ideas are developed for sampling intelligently from (retrospectively observed)
long time-series to determine the locations of multiple change-points via
procedures that require analyzing only a vanishing fraction of the entire series
(thereby providing computational benefits), yet produce estimates that match, in
precision, the standard estimates that would have been obtained analyzing the
entire series. This idea is extended to regression/likelihood based models with
covariates in multiple dimensions where the parameters of the regression or the
likelihood are different on either side of a hyper-plane in covariate space.
(ii) Problems involving hyper-planes, either in the structure of the model or in
the criterion function to be optimized, with high-dimensional covariates are
studied and new variable selection and estimation methods are investigated. The
problems under consideration here are important from the perspective of
applications but difficult because the high-dimensional paradigm has to be
extended to intrinsically discontinuous settings, outside the (almost) square-
root-n rate. Effective solutions to these problems will advance statistical
methodology for these important classes of systems.
