
* 1712554
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Inference Using Random Forests and Related Methods
* DMS,POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2017,07/19/2017
* Giles Hooker,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2021
* USD 215,078.00

This project seeks to develop methods to quantify uncertainty in machine
learning algorithms and to incorporate machine learning and statistical
inference. Machine learning has been enormously successful at using data to make
predictions; it is used in an extensive range of applications from handwriting
recognition to high frequency trading to driverless cars and personalized
medicine. However, while machine learning algorithms make good predictions, they
tell humans very little about how those predictions were arrived at: What were
the important factors? How did they affect the prediction? They also don't
distinguish predictions for which there is a lot of information about the
probability of different outcomes (even if that covers a wide range) from those
where very little information is available. For example, a machine learning
algorithm may very accurately predict whether a person is likely to develop
diabetes, but provides little if any information regarding how that person might
lower his or her risk. This project will build on initial mathematical theory to
develop methods to explain how Random Forests arrive at their predictions and
how statistically confident those predictions are, and produce ways to link
machine learning methods to other statistical models.

This project seeks to develop methods to quantify uncertainty in machine
learning algorithms and to incorporate machine learning and statistical
inference. The project will extend on a theoretical framework representing
Random Forests as U-statistics to produce a practical implementation of
statistical uncertainty quantification in machine learning. In particular, it
will improve on methods to estimate sample variability in Random Forest
predictions, develop computationally efficient screening tools for covariate and
interaction selection, and incorporate ensemble methods as non-parametric terms
in partially-linear models while retaining statistical inference via a modified
boosting algorithm. These methods will be demonstrated on a citizen science data
base in ornithology and in various biomedical applications.
