
* 1712990
* The Weighted Bootstrap and Berry-Esseen Bounds in High Dimensions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2017,05/03/2017
* Mayya Zhilova,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 162,447.00

Resampling methods are widely used for statistical inference in numerous
applications. In particular, bootstrapping is known to perform well in
situations when the amount of available data is rather small. In many modern
applications the data are complex and high-dimensional, motivating development
of new approaches in statistical inference, including resampling methods. In
this project, the investigator will study weighted bootstrap procedures in a
high-dimensional framework with a limited amount of data, for various classes of
statistical models. The main goals of this research are to understand essential
properties of the weighted bootstrap, such as its limitations and accuracy, and
to advance resampling methods in high-dimensional settings.

In this project, the investigator will study the problem of approximation in
distribution of a function of a sample average in a high-dimensional non-
asymptotic framework, for various classes of functions. Two basic types of
approximations, which are closely related to each other, will be studied: an
approximation using the weighted bootstrap procedure, and Berry-Esseen type
inequalities. In both cases, the investigator aims to establish higher-order
approximation bounds that extend classical Gaussian approximation theory and
yield considerable improvements in accuracy with respect to both dimension and
sample size. The study will be focused on optimality of the resulting bounds,
and on explicit form of the error terms. Another important direction of the
research in this project is extension of the proposed higher-order approximation
methodology to the case of heavy-tailed distributions, which play an important
role in many applications in finance and engineering. The work on the project
aims to employ and further develop various modern techniques, such as higher-
order approximation and comparison inequalities, concentration inequalities for
multilinear symmetric forms, geometric properties of Gaussian measures in high
dimensions, and methods related to multivariate moment problems.
