
* 1712822
* Estimation, Computation, and Uncertainty Quantification in Structured Regression Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2017,04/19/2017
* Bodhisattva Sen,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 239,994.00

In statistical modeling, regression is the primary tool to study the
relationship between a response variable and a collection of predictors. In this
research project, questions related to estimation, computation, and uncertainty
quantification in some structured regression models will be investigated. The
imposed "structure" refers to known features (domain knowledge) of a system and
helps to reduce the complexity of the fitted statistical model/procedure.
Further, imposing such structures yields interpretable (yet flexible) models.
Special emphasis is given to methods applicable to multivariate data, an area
that has received relatively less attention, though often necessary in
performing effective data analysis. Some of the methodological development
undertaken in this project will address important scientific questions arising
from astronomical data. The investigator also plans to continue the tradition of
mentoring undergraduate summer interns and to participate in the NYU GSTEM
outreach program, a six-week summer program for high school girls.

The three main topics pursued in this project are: (i) incorporating covariate
information in multiple hypothesis testing problems; (ii) convexity constrained
estimation and inference in regression models; and (iii) statistical methods
that are geared towards detecting piecewise constant/affine structure in a
(multivariate) regression function. New methodology will be developed to address
these topics along with the development of efficient algorithms for computation.
Further, a systematic theoretical study of these procedures, focusing on their
adaptive (risk) properties, will be undertaken, and the important issues of
inference and uncertainty quantification will be addressed. The intended
applications of the research are diverse, ranging from estimation of radial
velocity distribution of stars in a distant galaxy (astronomy), to developing
methodology for detecting interactions between pairs of neurons (neuroscience),
to estimating production and utility functions (economics), and to constructing
confidence intervals for parameters in a continuous multivariate piecewise
affine regression function (engineering).
