
* 1712933
* High Dimensional Mediation Analysis with Multi-Omics Data
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 09/01/2017,11/09/2021
* Bhramar Mukherjee,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 351,765.00

Rapid development of various high-throughput biological technologies has
revolutionized the field of genomics. Various genomic studies produce molecular-
level traits by measuring gene expression levels and characterizing various
covalent modifications of DNA and histone proteins. The measured molecular-level
traits, including gene expression and methylation levels, are thought to mediate
the effects of DNA and/or the environment on many traits and diseases, and hold
the key to understanding the genetic and environmental basis of disease
susceptibility and phenotypic variation. In particular, these high-dimensional
biomarkers absorb and reflect environmental insults to the genome and serve as
measures of an individual's internal molecular and cellular environment that
change dynamically over the time course of life. In this project, statistical
methods will be developed to perform high-dimensional mediation analysis, in
order to further our understanding of the molecular basis of disease
susceptibility and phenotypic variation, and facilitate the integrative analysis
of various molecular-level traits from omics studies. The proposed statistical
methods will be used to study how the inherited DNA environment and the external
environment, as measured through environmental toxicants, socioeconomic
conditions, neighborhood characteristics, psychosocial stress and other life
events, influence omics measures of the internal environment, and in turn lead
to adverse health outcomes.

Technically, the molecular-level traits from omics studies will be treated as a
multivariate set of high-dimensional mediators for integrative analysis. A novel
high-dimensional mediation analysis framework will be developed to handle
multiple exposures and multiple mediators simultaneously. The proposed high-
dimensional mediation analysis methods will extend existing mediation analysis
methods from handling univariate mediator and/or univariate exposure to a high-
dimensional setting by making additional modeling assumptions on the effects of
mediators and exposures to enable model identifiability. While the problem is
formulated in a causal inference framework, inference will be conducted using a
Bayesian variable selection framework that identifies important exposures and
mediators simultaneously. The research combines ideas from variance component
score tests, Bayesian variable selection, and causal inference in a unified
manner to lead to new theoretical insights on estimation of direct and indirect
effects. Methodological extensions will also be made to conduct mediation
analysis based on sharing summary statistics that are becoming increasingly
common in genetics studies. The newly developed methods will be applied to large
ongoing cohort/case-control studies, and software will be developed for scalable
implementation of the proposed methods.
