
* 1712558
* New Nonparametric Modeling Methods for High-Dimensional Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2017,08/16/2019
* Shujie Ma,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 124,970.00

Advances in modern technology have created numerous massive datasets, providing
a great amount of information, but also new analysis challenges. The remarkable
increase in the amount of data arises not only in the number of observations
over time, but also in the number of variables that are simultaneously measured
at each time. This results in high-dimensional time series data that are
increasingly encountered in many fields, including finance, economics, genomics,
social media, biomedical imaging, and so forth. High dimensional time series can
be evolutionary, non-normally distributed, and/or heterogeneous. Methods for
analyzing these types of data are still in their infancy due to the considerable
methodological challenges encountered to describe their complex structure.
Because of the intricacies of modern datasets, conventional statistical methods
to extract information are often inappropriate. There is an immediate need for
efficient and data-driven nonparametric methods to handle these problems. This
project seeks to develop new nonparametric modelling methods with theoretical
insights for structural change detection, robust estimation, heterogeneity
exploration, and dynamic interdependency investigation. The project will help
fill methodological gaps by greatly advancing the understanding of the
intricacies of high-dimensional time series data. The new flexible methods may
can benefit many scientific areas, including public health, medicine, economics,
and the social sciences. The overall goal of this project is to develop new
flexible statistical methods and theories to address the analytical challenges
encountered in describing the evolutionary, non-normal, and heterogeneous
features of high-dimensional time series data. This will be done via four inter-
connected research topics. (1) A novel three-step method with theoretical
guarantees will be developed for structural change detection and identification
of factor models by exploiting nonparametric local estimation, shrinkage
methods, and grid search techniques. The method can automatically detect breaks
(if they exist) and identify their locations. (2) A new paradigm, covariate-
assisted quantile latent factor models, is proposed for dimension reduction of
high-dimensional time series. The method is robust to heavy-tailed
distributions. The model assumptions are very general: the factors are
unobserved, and both of the factors and their loadings can vary across
quantiles. In addition, the method does not require moment conditions on the
errors. (3) A concave fusion method is proposed for exploring heterogeneous
functional curves driven by unobserved classes. The method permits structural
change detection and heterogeneity exploration, which are difficult problems due
to latent processes and the high-dimensional and dependence features in the
data. (4) A new dimensionality reduction tool will be devised for a time-varying
coefficient vector autoregressive model by exploiting non-centered functional
principal component analysis. A novel computational estimation algorithm will be
developed by combining proximal algorithms and optimization over Stiefel
manifolds. The method can illuminate dynamic relationships in high dimensional
nonstationary time series.
