
* 1712535
* Identification and Statistical Inference in Graphical Models with Feedback and Latent Variables
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2017,07/30/2019
* Mathias Drton,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 125,000.00

The last decade has seen great advances in scientific experimentation. In
biology, for instance, it has become routine to collect complex data that
simultaneously quantify the levels of expression of many genes or proteins. This
project addresses the development of statistical methodology that allows
processing of such data to obtain insights on cause-effect relationships among
the units in the studied system. Specifically, the proposed research addresses
two key challenges, namely, how to tackle problems in which some important
variables remain unobserved, and how to cope with the presence of causal
feedback loops. The research develops statistical techniques to infer cause-
effect relationships and expands our understanding of which conclusions may
possibly be reached under imperfect information.

Both feedback and latent variables bring about great challenges in graphical
modeling because, in their presence, consideration of conditional independence
is no longer sufficient to characterize and compare models. This project focuses
on linear models that allow for refined modeling of feedback loops and/or the
effects of latent variables. The PI will develop criteria for parameter
identifiability, which is no longer guaranteed with feedback or latent
variables. The work will also determine conditions for when a model is of
expected dimension as given by a parameter count. Knowledge of dimension is
needed for instance when setting degrees of freedom in statistical tests. Next,
the project will lead to a better understanding of constraints other than
conditional independence. Finally, the PI will develop new model selection
methods in Gaussian as well non-Gaussian models.
