
* 1712956
* Bridging the Gap Between Theory and Applications: Robust and Scalable Statistical Estimation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2017,08/17/2017
* Stanislav Minsker,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,985.00

Major challenges in modern data-rich environment require new statistical
algorithms that succeed under realistic scenarios and model assumptions, such as
estimation in the distributed setting, ability to handle heavy-tailed data,
outliers, and missing observations. Research that will be performed by the
Principal Investigator (PI) in the course of this project focuses on two
important problems faced by contemporary statistical science: scalability and
robustness. The goal of the project is to advance our understanding of
statistical techniques that involve (a) high-dimension covariance matrix
estimation, and (b) distributed statistical estimation protocols. Obtained
results will be of interest to scientists working on theory as well as
applications.

One part of this project aims at answering open questions related to high-
dimensional covariance matrix estimation for the heavy-tailed distributions.
Such distributions serve as a viable model for data corrupted with outliers, an
almost inevitable scenario in applications. Covariance matrix is one of the most
fundamental objects in high-dimensional data analysis: many important
statistical tools, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and regression
analysis, involve covariance estimation as a crucial step. For instance, PCA has
striking connections to nonlinear dimension reduction and manifold learning
techniques, genetics, computational biology, among many others. However, the
assumptions underlying the theoretical analysis of most existing estimators,
such as various modifications of the sample covariance matrix, are often
restrictive and do not hold for real-world scenarios. Using tools from the
random matrix theory, the PI will develop a new class of robust estimators that
are numerically tractable, show good practical performance and enjoy strong
theoretical guarantees under much weaker conditions than currently available
alternatives. Specifically, the goal of the project is to design estimators that
admit tight concentration around the unknown "true" covariance matrix under weak
assumptions on the underlying distribution, such as existence of moments of only
low order. Another part of this project is devoted to novel algorithms for
scalable estimation that can take advantage of the "divide and conquer"
approach. Divide and conquer paradigm assumes that data is stored and analyzed
in a distributed way by a cluster consisting of several machines: each of the
machines in a cluster works on its own sub-sample while communication among
different machines is limited, and final results are obtained by piecing the
outcomes of these distributed computations together. The PI will develop a class
of new divide and conquer strategies supported by strong theoretical evidence.
The project will investigate connections between the distributed estimation
strategies and robustness of resulting algorithms -- an important characteristic
of large distributed systems.
