
* 1712996
* Point-to-Point Process Models for Spatio-temporal Networks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2017,07/30/2019
* James Sharpnack,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2021
* USD 125,000.00

Real-time data collection systems allow researchers to monitor and analyze
billions of streaming events. Transportation data often consists of trips, the
streaming events, from one location to another. This forms a spatio-temporal
network, in which the connections occur between locations. Such spatio-temporal
networks are prevalent in econometrics, transportation and infrastructure
applications, internet security data, neurology data, and epidemiological
networks. The majority of statistical methodology for modelling networks assumes
that a single static network is observed. In contrast, this setting presumes
that each network connection is an event that happens at specific times, so one
must adapt network models to accommodate this novel data modality. Predicting
these events is particularly challenging because the event rate can depend on
time and the two associated spatial locations, resulting in an explosion of the
number of parameters. One can make assumptions, which will depend on the
application, that reduce the effective number of parameters in a data adaptive
fashion. For example, this research will study spatial community structure in
transportation planning applications, temporal trends in internet security data,
and complex dependencies between events for financial transactions. This will
require a broad probabilistic framework that can accommodate such assumptions,
and computationally tractable statistical methodology for predicting connections
in spatio-temporal networks.

It is natural to model these edge events in such dynamic networks as point
processes with conditional intensities, and the resulting model for the entire
system will be called a point-to-point process. This novel approach has the
advantage of modelling the network in continuous time, so that natural
likelihood-based procedures can work directly on transactional dataframes where
each row corresponds to an edge event. The research focus is divided into three
topics and areas of application. First, for transportation networks, it is
natural to segment spatial locations using low rank methods, the study of which
will require adapting the stochastic block model to the point-to-point process
framework. Secondly, detecting and localizing temporal changepoints in dynamic
networks can be accomplished by employing group fusion penalties and trend
filtering. Thirdly, for financial transaction networks and epidemiological
networks, complex dependencies can be examined by adapting Hawkes models to the
point-to-point process framework. The research will examine the theory of these
statistical problems and develop computationally tractable algorithms.
