
* 1712826
* Developing New Frontiers in Functional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2017,06/19/2017
* Matthew Reimherr,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 190,347.00

This project is concerned with developing statistical tools for several types of
data that have become increasingly common during the big data revolution
occurring in the sciences. The first type of data are called manifolds, which
are low-dimensional structures in higher-dimensional spaces, and occur
frequently in biomedical imaging studies. The second type of data consists of
large numbers of predictors as are commonly found in genetic studies. The goals
of this project are to develop statistical tools to analyze samples of manifolds
or functions, as outcomes, alongside large numbers of scalar predictors. In
addition, due to the potential for privacy breaches in such data, the project
also aims to develop privacy mechanisms that guarantee the anonymity of subjects
when statistical summaries and analyses of these data are released. This work
will have broad impacts in both statistics and bioinformatics.

The project develops statistical methods for complex high-dimensional data using
techniques from functional data analysis (FDA). The research is divided into
three areas: manifold data analysis (MDA), high-dimensional functional
regression, and statistical disclosure control (SDC). MDA, which is the focus
here, combines FDA and manifold learning techniques to analyze statistically
samples of manifolds. Methods for high-dimensional functional regression will be
developed for handling large numbers of scalar predictors alongside
functional/manifold outcomes; the tools will exploit smooth and sparse
structures for increased statistical performance. Lastly, SDC methods for FDA
will be developed. Privacy remains a central concern for researchers and society
as a whole, but very little has been done for functional data, which may contain
substantial amounts of individual level information. Functional data require
carefully constructed privacy mechanisms to ensure that anonymity is maintained
while preserving the scientific import of the objects. These three areas are
motivated by joint anthropological work, ADAPT, analyzing high-resolution 3D
facial images, with data consisting of thousands of subjects, thousands of
measurements per face, and hundreds of thousands of genetic markers. The goal is
to uncover the genetic architecture of the human face, and to better understand
the ancestry of different facial features. The developed methods will be applied
to this example, theoretical results will be derived, and sophisticated software
will be provided.
