
* 1713003
* High-dimensional Clustering: Theory and Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2017,08/14/2019
* Sivaraman Balakrishnan,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2021
* USD 380,000.00

The past two decades have witnessed an explosion in the scale and complexity of
data sets that arise in science and engineering. Broadly, clustering methods
which discover latent structure in data are our primary tool for navigating,
exploring and visualizing massive datasets. These methods have been widely and
successfully applied in phylogeny, medicine, psychiatry, archaeology and
anthropology, phytosociology, economics and several other fields. Despite its
ubiquity, the widespread scientific adoption of clustering methods have been
hindered by the lack of flexible clustering methods for high-dimensional
datasets and by the dearth of meaningful inferential guarantees in clustering
problems. Accordingly, the goal of this research is to develop new and effective
methods for clustering complex data-sets, and to further develop an inferential
grounding -- which will in turn lead to actionable conclusions -- for these
methods. This research will lead to the development of new clustering methods,
as well as to a deeper understanding of the fundamental limitations of methods
aimed at uncovering latent structure in data.

The research component of this project consists of four aims designed to address
related aspects of this high-level goal: (a) analyze and develop new clustering
methods for high-dimensional datasets, with a particular focus on practically
useful methods like mixture-model based clustering, and minimum volume
clustering; (b) develop novel methods for inference in the context of
clustering, motivated by scientific applications where it is important not only
to cluster the data but also to clearly characterize the sampling variability of
the discovered clusters; (c) develop fundamental lower bounds for high-
dimensional clustering (d) develop novel methods for clustering functional data
with inferential guarantees. These research components are closely coupled with
concrete educational initiatives, including the development and broad
dissemination of publicly-available software for high-dimensional clustering;
tutorials and workshops at Machine Learning conferences and fostering further
interactions between the Departments of Statistics and Machine Learning at
Carnegie Mellon.
