
* 1713012
* Beyond Riemannian Geometry in Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2017,08/02/2019
* Sayan Mukherjee,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 220,000.00

A challenge in modern data science is how to integrate information from
3-dimensional shapes into statistical models. Examples of applications where
this challenge is central is associating the shape of a tumor to molecular
processes or associating the shape of the roots of a rice plant to crop yield.
In graphics and anatomy, there is the related question of how to warp one object
into another, such as the molar of a child to a molar of an adult. This project
seeks to develop methodology to transform these shape data, such as meshes or
3-dimensional images, into representations for which standard statistical models
are available. These methods are crucial to advancing data-enabled science in
extracting, conceptualizing, interpreting, and visualizing information residing
in datasets comprising complex objects such 3D shapes. Cutting edge ideas in
mathematics, specifically from the field of geometry, will be used to address
the fundamental problems of (i) modeling structural variation in diverse
collections of shapes and (ii) modeling transformations between shapes.
Solutions to these problems are crucial to many practical applications and
disciplines including biology, medicine, social sciences, and ecology. As such,
an important component of the project is validation of methods and tools through
applications in radiology and anthropology

Geometric concepts beyond Riemannian geometry and smooth manifolds will be
leveraged to develop novel statistical methodology to address complex challenges
in data analysis. Methods and tools, grounded on solid mathematical foundations,
will be developed for modeling complex objects (such as shapes and surfaces) and
complex relations within data (such as multi-commodity flow or aligning shapes).
The research will address two statistical challenges using geometric tools: (1)
representing surfaces and shapes via integral geometry, and (2) learning group
actions or transformations between pairs of objects using the geometry of fiber
bundles. Addressing the first challenge results in a framework for parametric
and non-parametric statistical models for collections of shapes and surfaces,
without the requirement of landmark points and without requiring the shapes to
be isomorphic. Addressing the second challenge provides a statistical framework
for alignment problems ranging from aligning a collection of shapes such as
teeth, to optimization problems on networks such as multi-commodity flow. The
solutions proposed will impact statistics and geometry, and the methods may
catalyze transformative advances in practical applications and scientific
disciplines as diverse as biology, medicine, social sciences, and ecology.
