
* 1723158
* Spatial-temporal models and methods for big nonstationary multivariate
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2016,12/15/2016
* Montserrat Fuentes,VA,Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 139,729.00

High dimensional statistical problems are prevalent in the environmental
sciences, particularly in soil, atmospheric, and oceanic data applications. In
these cases the processes of interest are inherently nonlinear and dynamic.
Different sources of information for these systems include spatial observational
data as well as physics and chemistry based numerical models. Over the past
decade there has been an increase in the amount of available real-time
geographic information as well as advances in the sophistication and resolution
of deterministic atmospheric and oceanic models. A broad class of spatial-
temporal models is developed for multivariate processes on Euclidean spaces and
the sphere to explain the variability and the cross-dependency between different
variables. This general class of models goes beyond standard assumptions, in
particular of stationarity. The properties of the proposed methods, as well as
the asymptotic properties of the estimates are studied. Likelihood approximation
methods for massive spatial data are presented to efficiently implement the
proposed statistical models. The proposed framework and models are used to
better model soil pollution, air pollution, and wind fields. These high spatial
resolution wind fields are used to predict energy production from windmills,
they are also the primary forcing for numerical forecasts of the coastal ocean
response to force winds such as the height of the storm surge and the degree of
coastal flooding. The goal is to obtain more accurate estimation of wind fields
over land and water to improve the quality of storm surge forecasts, and wind
energy.

The most important scientific contributions of this research project are: the
introduction of flexible spatial models on the sphere for prediction and
estimation of environmental spatial processes observed over larger regions on
the Earth's surface; methods for likelihood approximation of big spatial
temporal lattice data in general situations; general and flexible models for
spatial prediction of multivariate environmental processes on spatial lattices,
introducing the concept of conditional correlation in spatial lattice models;
and advanced methods for spatial prediction and estimation in the presence of
massive data from observations and physical and chemistry models. In these cases
the processes of interest are inherently nonlinear and dynamic. Different
sources of information for these systems include observational data as well as
physics-based numerical models. Over the past decade there has been an increase
in the amount of available real-time observations as well as advances in the
sophistication and resolution of deterministic chemistry, atmospheric and
oceanic models. Our methodology will provide more accurate representation and
prediction of the underlying space-time process of interest. Through our
collaborative work, we will help the enhancement of science by implementing
these methods to hurricane wind fields and to weather and air and soil pollution
to improve weather and air/soil quality mapping. The investigators will
disseminate broadly the methods proposed here to enhance mathematical and
scientific understanding. The PI will offer short courses in Spanish in Hispanic
countries to broaden the participation of underrepresented geographic and ethnic
groups. A course in advanced spatial statistics methods will be taught by the
PI, and the new statistical methods proposed here will be introduced to the
students. The investigators will continue their efforts to broaden the
participation of minorities and women in Sciences and the PI through this
project will continue her involvement on K-12 educational efforts, through the
Kenan Fellows for Curriculum and Leadership Development Program and the Science
House at NCSU.
