
* 1724882
* Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data (SAND8)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2017,03/20/2017
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The eighth international workshop on Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND8)
will take place May 31-June 2, 2017, in Pittsburgh, PA. Experimental methods for
discovering the neural basis of behavior have been advancing rapidly and, as a
result, brain data sets are increasing in size and complexity. Methods for
better understanding such rich data sets, which can enable design of ever-more
informative experiments, are desperately needed. This workshop series is
concerned with identifying, discussing, and disseminating many of the most
promising approaches to analysis of neural data of all kinds. It also encourages
young researchers, including graduate students, to present their work; exposes
young researchers to important challenges and opportunities in this
interdisciplinary domain, while providing a small meeting atmosphere to
facilitate the interaction of young researchers with senior colleagues; and
includes as participants women, under-represented minorities and persons with
disabilities, who might benefit from the small workshop environment. The data
discussed in this workshop range from anatomy to electrophysiology, to
neuroimaging. Cross-disciplinary communication between experimental
neuroscientists and those trained in statistical and computational methods is a
priority. SAND8 will bring together neurophysiologists, statisticians,
mathematicians, engineers, physicists, and computer scientists who are
interested in quantitative analysis of neural data. SAND8 will begin with a
morning-long panel discussion on "Emerging Challenges of Brain Science Data,"
and end with several talks that connect statistical analysis to mathematical
modeling. In between there will be keynote talks by senior investigators and
shorter presentations by junior investigators, the latter selected on a
competitive basis. There will also be a poster session, to which all
participants are invited to contribute. Talks and posters may involve new
methodology, investigation of existing methods, or application of state-of-the-
art analytical techniques. In addition, there will be a lunchtime discussion
devoted to opportunities and challenges for women in computational neuroscience.
For further information please see http://sand.stat.cmu.edu.
