
* 1737933
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Bayesian Concentration Rates from Double Empirical Priors
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Ryan Martin,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 87,369.00

Statisticians frequently encounter problems that involve complicated models with
high-dimensional parameters, particularly in "big data" settings. From a
Bayesian perspective, it is imperative in these problems that the prior
distribution be chosen to sit in a good position. Information about where is a
good starting position can come from the data. There is a potential danger with
this basic strategy, namely, that a double use of data might cause the model to
track the data too closely, resulting on over fitting. To avoid this, the PIs
introduce a regularization technique that suitably re-weights the likelihood,
preventing the model from learning too quickly. This general "double empirical
Bayes" strategy, where the prior is centered on the data and the likelihood is
re-weighted, will be applied to several important and challenging high-
dimensional problems, including estimation of sparse high-dimensional precision
matrices, which is relevant to estimation of large complex networks.

In this project, the PIs will develop this new double empirical Bayes framework
for inference on high-dimensional parameters with a relatively low "complexity"
or "effective dimension". For example, in function estimation problems, posited
smoothness on the function is a constraint on its complexity. The first step of
the double empirical Bayes strategy is to use a prior, indexed by the complexity
of the parameter, centered at a complexity-specific estimate of the parameter
based on data. To prevent the posterior from tracking the data too closely, the
second step is to re-weight the likelihood to be combined with the data-
dependent prior. The result is a sort of posterior distribution on the parameter
space, and the PIs will provide general conditions for this posterior to
concentrate around the truth at optimal rates. An additional advantage of this
new approach is that the complexity-specific priors, for suitable centering, can
be taken of relatively simple form, which facilitates computation. The PIs will
investigate the double empirical Bayes analysis of several important high-
dimensional inference problems, including density and function estimation,
variable selection problems in non-linear models, and estimation of sparse
precision matrices. Software will be developed for each application.
