
* 1743227
* Design and Analysis of Experiments
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2017,07/12/2017
* Hongquan Xu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The Design and Analysis of Experiments Conference (DAE 2017) will be held at
UCLA on October 12-14, 2017. The goal of the conference is to bring together
leading researchers of international repute, graduate students and researchers
from industry and government, and provide a forum for interaction, discussion,
and exchange novel research ideas in design and analysis of experiments. Funds
will be used to support students and junior researchers to attend the
conference. The conference will be widely announced and selected individuals and
organizations will be specially contacted to broaden the diversity of the
participants. Of particular note is that junior researchers who participated in
earlier DAE conferences continue to speak very highly of the impact of
mentorship and funding they had received from DAEs has had on their careers.
Many of them have gone on to make significant contributions in the development
of the theory and applications of experimental design, including a few who have
received NSF career awards and several more who are now recognizable researchers
in the field. Organizers of the conference have full confidence that DAE 2017
will follow the tradition in the previous years and have a significant impact on
nurturing young researchers in design and analysis of experiments. Organizers
will plan for mentoring activities by carefully pairing senior and junior
participants in advance, provide some funding for the students and junior
researchers and continue to make a serious effort to broaden participation by
under-represented groups.

Design and analysis of experiments are indispensable in the scientific process
as they form an integral part of the discovery process in virtually all
scientific disciplines. The present era of big data has brought very exciting
and new areas of research for design and analysis of experiments. DAE 2017 is
timely and will help advance cutting edge research ideas to tackle challenging
emerging issues. Themes of DAE 2017 include internet experiments, designs for
big data, computer experiments, uncertainty quantification, optimal designs in
the pharmaceutical industry, computational methods in design of experiments,
applications of designed studies to solve industrial and engineering problems,
and designs for non-normal data. Additional information is available at the
conference web site: http://www.stat.ucla.edu/~hqxu/dae2017/
