
* 1810960
* Statistical Analysis Using Density Surrogates
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,07/15/2020
* Yen-Chi Chen,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 100,826.00

Density surrogates are quantities that can help measure the likelihood of seeing
observations with certain characteristics. This project aims at developing novel
statistical approaches based on density surrogates and analyzing the underlying
theoretical properties. Methodologies developed from this project will be
applied to solving scientific questions such as investigating human activities
using GPS data and detecting matter distribution inside our Universe.

This project focuses on developing new statistical methodologies for analyzing
complex data sets using density surrogates. Density surrogates are quantities
similar to the probability density that characterizes the underlying
distribution of the observed random sample. Examples of density surrogates
include the linkage criterion in a hierarchical clustering, radius of the
k-nearest neighborhood, and expected value of a kernel density estimator. This
project proposes several novel density surrogates and designs new statistical
tools. These new density surrogates can be used to perform statistical analysis
in situations where the conventional density-based approaches fail.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
