
* 1810914
* Order Determination for Hidden Markov and Related Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,05/10/2018
* Samuel Kou,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are powerful tools for processing time series data
and are widely used in scientific and engineering applications, including speech
recognition, machine translation, computational biology, cryptanalysis, and
finance. The fundamental components of an HMM include the noisy observations and
the corresponding hidden states. In most applications, the number of hidden
states (the order of the HMM) is not known beforehand but conveys important
information about the underlying process. For example, in molecular biology, the
total number of hidden states may be the number of distinct 3D conformations of
a protein; in chemistry, the total number of hidden states may be the number of
distinct chemical species in an organic reaction. This project plans to
investigate order determination for HMMs, finite mixture models, and
hierarchical HMMs; the latter two models are special cases and extensions of
HMMs. The project aims to develop a consistent and competitive method for order
selection. In addition to a thorough theoretical investigation, comprehensive
numerical studies and applications in biology and chemistry will be conducted.
The project will not only significantly advance the theoretical understanding of
HMMs, but also provide powerful tools for researchers to analyze data. The data
applications will help advance molecular biology and biochemistry. The project
also aims to support and train undergraduate and graduate students, with special
attention being given to recruiting students from under-represented groups into
statistics and related fields. Education at the undergraduate and graduate
levels will be integrated into the research activities.

The project will establish the marginal likelihood method as a consistent and
competitive order selection method for HMMs, finite mixture models, and
hierarchical HMMs. Five research studies will be carried out, enumerated as
follows. (1) Investigate the order of HMMs, where the goal is to identify and
develop consistent methods for HMM order determination. (2) Investigate order
selection issues in finite mixture models. Finite mixture models can be
reformulated as special types of HMMs. The goal is to develop a method for
consistently estimating the number of mixture components. (3) Investigate order
determination of hierarchical HMMs, where multiple HMMs are linked through a
hierarchical structure. The aim here is to identify and develop consistent
methods for determining the order of hierarchical HMMs, taking special effort to
address the challenging issue that multiple HMMs often have quite diverse
characteristics, such as lengths. (4) Study computational challenges and
investigate and implement efficient computational methods for the order
determination of HMM and related models, including the implementation and
release of an open source, publicly available R package. (5) Apply the new
method to ion channel data and single-molecule data on co-translational protein
targeting. The PI also plans to develop courses that introduce and guide
students in HMMs, mixture models, and hierarchical HMMs. The success of the
proposed research will develop a theoretical basis and associated methodology
for consistent order determination of HMMs and related models. The research
achievements and the education components will broadly impact the analysis of
HMMs, hierarchical HMMs, and model selection and also help train a new
generation of scholars and researchers in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
