
* 1810945
* Conference on Predictive Inference and Its Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2018,03/29/2018
* Daniel Nettleton,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The Department of Statistics at Iowa State University will host the Conference
on Predictive Inference and Its Applications on May 7 and 8, 2018, in Ames,
Iowa. The conference program includes plenary presentations from 16
distinguished speakers and a poster session featuring presentations from
students, postdoctoral scholars, and early-career researchers. Goals of the
conference include raising awareness about the importance of prediction,
showcasing research of current and emerging leaders in the field, motivating the
development of more accurate prediction methods, and encouraging interactions
and collaborations among a diverse collection of scientists with complementary
skills and abilities. In addition to attracting PhD statisticians and graduate
students majoring in statistics, the conference has the potential to draw
participation from the broader data science community that includes researchers
from bioinformatics, business analytics, computer science, electrical and
computer engineering, economics, and social sciences among other areas. The
Conference on Predictive Inference and Its Applications will provide a valuable
venue for developing new methodologies that enable accurate prediction and
assessment of uncertainty in our data-rich world. Such methodologies provide
valuable insights and lead to better decision making in science and industry.

Problems involving the prediction of unobserved but eventually observable
quantities are ubiquitous in the modern world. Historically, the discipline of
statistics has placed greater emphasis on hypothesis testing and parameter
estimation than it has on prediction. Other research communities connected to
but not equivalent to statistics, including computer science, machine learning,
analytics, big data, data mining, and data science have more fully embraced
prediction problems and developed a variety of useful prediction tools.
Nonetheless, statistical thinking and innovation have an important role to play
in addressing prediction problems now and in the future. In some cases,
statistical thinking can be used to generate appropriate measures of uncertainty
to accompany point predictions provided by existing tools. In other cases,
statistical thinking can lead to methods for predictive inference that strike a
better balance between bias and variance or make more efficient use of the data
than existing approaches. The formal presentations and ideas that arise from
discussions at the conference are intended to motivate scientific progress and
result in publications that will appear in refereed journal articles. This
research will enhance the state of the art in prediction methodology, which in
turn will lead to advances in many fields where accurate predictions and
accurate assessments of prediction error are essential. The conference website
is available at PredictiveInference.github.io.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
