
* 1810958
* Estimation of Smooth Functionals of Covariance and Other Parameters of High-Dimensional Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,05/07/2018
* Vladimir Koltchinskii,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

A crucial problem in statistical inference for complex, high-dimensional data is
to develop statistical estimators of parameters represented by high-dimensional
vectors or large matrices. Optimal error rates in such estimation problems are
often rather slow due to the ``curse of dimensionality", and it becomes
increasingly important to identify low-dimensional structures and features of
high-dimensional parameters that could be estimated efficiently with error rates
common in classical, ``low-dimensional" statistics. Such features are often
represented by functionals that depend smoothly of unknown parameters and the
goal is to take advantage of their smoothness to develop efficient estimation
procedures. The problems of this nature often occur in a variety of applications
such as signal and image processing, machine learning and data analytics. The
purpose of this project is to study these problems systematically and to develop
new approaches to efficient estimation of smooth functionals. The project is in
an interdisciplinary area between mathematics, statistics and computer science
and it includes a number of activities to facilitate interactions with
researchers in these areas and to ensure the impact of proposed research on
education.

The main focus of the project is on the development of general methods of
estimation of smooth functionals of covariance operators based on high-
dimensional or infinite-dimensional observations. It is expected that these
methods will be applicable to other important high-dimensional models such as
Gaussian shift models (both in vector and in matrix case); linear regression
models (including trace regression and regression models in quantum state
tomography); some non-linear models. The methods to be developed include a new
approach to bias reduction in smooth functional estimation problems based on
iterative application of bootstrap (bootstrap chains) and concentration and
normal approximation bounds needed to establish asymptotic efficiency of
estimators with reduced bias. The goal is to determine optimal smoothness
thresholds for functionals of interest that ensure their efficient estimation,
in particular, in a dimension free high-complexity setting, with complexity of
the problem characterized by the effective rank of the true covariance. Other
directions include the study of efficient estimation of smooth functionals under
regularity assumptions on the parameter set and applications of methods of
functional estimation to hypotheses testing for high-dimensional parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
