
* 1810829
* Statistical Methods for Multi-Study Predictions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2018,07/28/2020
* Giovanni Parmigiani,MA,Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Huixia Wang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Science faces significant challenges in relation to replicability of studies.
These challenges affect prediction models used in a broad spectrum of business,
scientific, and social activities. The investigators have identified
underutilized opportunities to make most prediction modeling techniques more
likely to produce replicable results by training them on multiple studies, and
rewarding good replicability in this training phase. Recent work indicates that
this novel and general strategy provides insight into the replicability of
predictions, and is a promising venue for systematic improvement. As many areas
of science and technology are becoming data-rich, multiple datasets are more
commonly available for training, and it is also more important that they be
simultaneously considered and systematically used for improving replicability.
Steps towards more easily replicable predictions would increase public
confidence in the scientific process, facilitate dissemination of results, and
robustify public engagement with science and technology.

The goal of this project is to make progress in the area of cross-study
replication of predictions. The investigators have identified two fundamental
and underutilized opportunities: 1) to train on multiple studies; 2) to leverage
ensembles of prediction models, each trained on one, or a subset, of the
studies. The combination of these two elements can be used to design robust
prediction algorithms that are trained to incorporate replicability across
different contexts and populations. In this project, the investigators propose
to implement and evaluate specific prediction techniques within this paradigm;
to investigate their statistical properties theoretically and empirically; to
compare them to existing alternative multi-study statistical methods; and to
build free, open-source software to implement the successful strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
