
* 1810831
* Fast and Robust Gaussian Process Inference for Bayesian Nonparametric Learning
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2018,05/11/2018
* Yun Yang,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 120,000.00

Advances in modern technology have empowered researchers to collect massive data
to conduct inference and making predictions. With the abundance of available
observations, traditional statistical methods under the parametric assumption
that a model can be characterized by a pre-specified number of parameters become
inadequate and less attractive. Bayesian nonparametric models are attractive in
this context which allow the resolution level of the analysis to be determined
in a data-driven manner, and provide automatic characterization of uncertainty.
The goal of this project is to develop new theory, methodology and computational
tools for Bayesian nonparametric inference via Gaussian process priors.

Given the availability of massive data, nonparametric inference offers an
attractive framework for flexibly modeling the underlying structure and
extracting useful information. For instance, such challenges occur in chemical
physics, computational biology, computer vision, engineering, and meteorology.
This project aims to lay down a solid methodological, algorithmic, and
theoretical foundation for nonparametric inference based on Gaussian processes.
In particular, Gaussian process-based approaches tend to be vulnerable to data
contamination and have heavy computational costs. To alleviate the high-
computational cost of Gaussian process inference procedures, the investigator
puts forward two novel computational frameworks which differ at their respective
approximating targets as being either the prior or the posterior. To enhance the
robustness of Gaussian process inference against data contamination, the
investigator proposes a novel class of Bayesian hierarchical models for
incorporating this extra measurement error structure, leading to a class of
robust Gaussian process inference procedures. The new theoretical development
offers valuable insight to experiment-design practitioners into the impact of
measurement errors upon prediction and estimation, and provides evidence on the
deep connection between computational complexity and statistical learnability.
These computational and theoretical frameworks also benefit other disciplines
such as applied mathematics, computer science and finance where stochastic
processes such as Gaussian processes are routinely used.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
