
* 1811747
* Leveraging Covariate and Structural Information for Efficient Large-Scale and High-Dimensional Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,07/03/2018
* Xianyang Zhang,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

The proliferation of big data is accompanied by a vast number of questions, in
the form of hypothesis tests, which call for effective methods to conduct large-
scale and high-dimensional inferences. These influential methods must involve
statistical analysis on many study units simultaneously. Conventional
simultaneous inference procedures often assume that hypotheses for different
units are exchangeable. However, in many scientific applications, external
covariate and structural information regarding the patterns of signals are
available. Exploiting such side information efficiently and accurately will lead
to improved statistical power, as well as enhanced interpretability of research
results. The main thrust of this research is to advance statistical
methodologies and theories for large-scale and high-dimensional inference with a
particular focus on integrating potentially useful external covariate and
structural information into inferential procedures. This research aims to
develop innovative methodologies and theories to address several significant
problems in large-scale and high-dimensional inference. In Project 1, the PI
will introduce a new multiple testing procedure that can automatically select
relevant covariates to improve the efficiency in inference when a large number
of external covariates are available. In Project 2, the PI will develop a new
multiple testing framework, which can integrate various forms of structural
information. Because prior information is seldom perfectly accurate, a
particular focus will be on developing procedures that are robust to
misspecified/imperfect prior information. In Project 3, the PI shall propose new
procedures for simultaneous inference in high-dimensional regressions with side
information. The statistical tools will be used to identify skilled fund
managers, assess the performance of climate field reconstructions, and analyze
genomic data in an integrative way. Methods and computer code developed will be
made publicly available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
