
* 1811083
* Collaborative Research: Highly Principled Data Science for Multi-Domain Astronomical Measurements and Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2018,07/11/2018
* Yang Chen,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 79,996.00

Massive data resources are coming online in every conceivable area of human
exploration, and particularly in fields that are heavily observation-based such
as astronomy and astrophysics. To extract the most information from these data,
scientists and statisticians need to conduct highly principled data science, by
using methods that are scientifically justified, statistically principled, and
computationally efficient. This project outlines plans to achieve this goal
while addressing four specific challenges in astronomical data involving space,
time and energy. The proposed research has the dual impact of more reliable
statistical methods in astronomy and of new general statistical inference and
computational methods. In addition to providing methods and free software, the
investigators also plan to communicate to the astronomical community the benefit
of principled statistical methods through workshops and sessions at conferences.
A fundamental impact of the proposed research is the more general acceptance and
use of principled methods among astronomers. The general methods for efficient
modeling of scientific phenomena, science-driven classification and clustering,
and for statistical computing, can also help to solve complex data challenges
throughout the natural, social, medical, and engineering sciences.

Striking advances in both space-based and terrestrial instrumentation
continuously increase the quality and quantity of data available to astronomers.
Observations are made across the electromagnetic spectrum and compiled into
enormous catalogs of high-resolution, but heterogeneous spectrograph, imaging,
and time series data. The proposed research aims to use such multi-domain
astronomical measurements to better understand the physical environment,
structure, and evolution of astronomical individual sources, clusters, and
ultimately of the entire universe. There are four major projects. (1) The PIs
will develop methodology to solve the instrument calibration problem, which is a
fundamental challenge in astrophysics, by fitting scientifically motivated
statistical models to data from multiple astronomical objects observed by
multiple instruments. (2) The PIs propose a statistically and computationally
efficient algorithm to detect the boundaries of a power law distribution
prevalent in various areas of astronomy and of far-reaching importance. (3) The
PIs will extend image-processing algorithms designed for detecting point sources
to complex extended multi-scale structures via a post-hoc analysis, which makes
the computation efficient. (4) With astronomical images exhibiting complex
structure, the PIs propose to explore image segmentation methods to distinguish
overlapping point sources; the algorithm achieves the flux-conserving property,
which is crucial for giving physically meaningful estimates that existing
methods lack. These projects all involve significant challenges in developing
efficient statistical methods, designing fast computational algorithms, and
balancing subtle trade-offs between complexity and practicality. With their
extensive and successful track record, the PIs will address these challenges by
developing inferential and efficient computational methods under highly-
structured models that involve multi-scale structure and/or multiple levels of
latent variables. The central theme of the proposed research is the integration
and pursuit of three desiderata in each of its four projects: scientific
justification, statistical principles, and computational efficiency. This
triple-goal advances the development of specifically designed methods that
leverage computationally efficient and statistically principled data-driven
techniques which explicitly incorporate scientific understanding of the
astronomical sources. This ensures that the statistical analyses enhance the
scientists' ability to answer specific questions about the underlying
astronomical and physical processes. This strategy requires state-of-the-art
statistical inference, sophisticated scientific computing, and careful model-
checking procedures, all of which have been the hallmark of the work by this
team of investigators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
