
* 1811779
* Exact and Asymptotic Distribution Theory for General Gaussian Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,05/11/2018
* Philip Ernst,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

This project will further the development of exact and asymptotic distribution
theory for Gaussian processes and their quadratic forms. While modern advances
in data science owe much progress to computational methods and the rapid growth
in computer technology, statistics and applied probability are rife with
examples where a careful mathematical analysis allows discoveries that no amount
of computational power can uncover. This project is one such example and will
use the PI's work on Yule's so called "nonsense" correlation, a 90-year old open
problem that was solved last year via mathematical analysis tools. This explicit
calculation showed the precise scale of the apparent correlation between two
independent continuous series of data, such as what one encounters in economics,
climate science, finance, and many other fields. This mathematical explanation
of an apparent statistical paradox will enable the investigation of other
important questions in mathematical statistics. The project will investigate a
possible connection between some important open questions and a set of tools in
probability theory whose power mathematical statisticians have only begun to
investigate. The project will provide fertile ground for statistics graduate
student training at Rice and Michigan State Universities; students will benefit
from a wide scope of opportunities, from rigorous study of mathematical tools,
to their use in statistics, to applications in fields of great societal value.

This project will investigate the probability law of the Pearson correlation
between two independent or dependent Gaussian processes. Analyses of
distributions in the second Wiener chaos (quadratic forms of normals) are a new
set of tools that will be brought to bear. Those tools are flexible enough to
handle any Gaussian process via their so-called Karhunen-Loeve expansions. In
terms of applications, what is most striking is that any statistical estimation
or test based on these projected studies would only require a single or a pair
of observations; this is particularly useful for situations, such as in
environmental statistics or in economics, where experiments cannot be designed,
and one has to work with the available observable data collected dynamically in
time. The second emphasis in this study, on Polya frequency functions and
related densities, uses some of the same mathematical tools, thanks to a
realization that the densities can be represented and expanded explicitly in the
second Wiener chaos. The project seeks to prove when a density is strongly log-
concave (e.g. its logarithm has a second derivative which is bounded away from
zero.) This question, which in mathematical statistics is phrased more broadly
in terms of Polya frequency functions, has distribution of sums of independent
and non-identically distributed exponentials, expands to the case of general
second-chaos distributions. The project could have important consequences in the
practice of statistics, especially in areas where comparing non-trivial time
series is a challenge, and in many scientific fields informed by properties of
log-concavity and strong log-concavity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
