
* 1811888
* Statistical Modelling of Multivariate Functional and Distributional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,05/23/2018
* Alexander Petersen,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2021
* USD 149,860.00

Modern recording devices are collecting data of greater complexity and, when
these data are measured over space or time, also at ever-increasing resolution.
While providing more detailed information about the associated physical
phenomena occurring around us, they also pose statistical challenges related to
interpretable modeling and feasible computation for such data. Data measured
over space, time, or some other continuum, are fittingly termed functional data,
and constitute an important subfield of modern statistics. This project will
develop important methodology for the analysis of two types of functional data.
The first set of projects aim at the estimation of dependency patterns between
components of so-called multivariate functional data, where a common set of
features is measured over time for each subject in a study, such as neuroimaging
scans where signals are recorded over time at a variety of spatial locations.
Another important class of functional data are samples of distributions or
histograms, which regularly arise in the analysis of demographic data as
mortality distributions, for example, but also in other important fields such as
neuroscience and finance. This project outlines methods for dimension reduction
and regression that respect the well-known positivity and area-under-the-curve
constraints for distributions, yielding interpretable data summaries and model
fits that provide the practitioner with a clearer understanding of the
information contained in their data.

Both fMRI and EEG yield time-dependent signals at multiple brain locations,
resulting in multivariate functional data. Quantifying connectivity patterns to
define brain networks, for example in order to identify normal and pathological
characteristics, is an important neuroscientific problem that can be addressed
using multivariate functional data techniques. This project seeks to advance the
use of functional graphical models to estimate underlying brain dependency
networks, including improved computational efficiency compared to existing
methods. These methods are equally applicable in other domains that produce data
of similar structure, such as longitudinal medical studies, where a common set
of measurements is recorded repeatedly over time. Also considered in this
proposal are methods for distributional data, which can be thought of as
collections of curves or surfaces, each corresponding to a probability
distribution. For example, neuroimaging data naturally provide such
distributional samples, as levels of myelination or signal correlations within
brain regions are high-dimensional data that can be effectively summarized at
the subject level by a histogram or distribution. Given a sample of such
distributional data, this project investigates statistical methods of
interpretable dimension reduction and dependency of distributional response
functions on relevant covariates through distributional regression. A key tool
is the Wasserstein metric for distributions, which has been widely successful in
applied settings, but has not been utilized to its full extent in statistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
