
* 1811998
* Development of a General Framework for Nonlinear Prediction Using Auto-Cumulants: Theory, Methodology, and Computation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2018,07/21/2020
* Soumendra Lahiri,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Data exhibiting nonlinear characteristics appear routinely in many areas of
applications, such as weather forecasting, signal processing, etc. These
features are also present in many economic and demographic time series collected
by various national agencies for policy formulations that have important
implications for the public and the society. However, the current methodology is
heavily reliant upon linear approaches and some ad hoc methods are often used to
handle nonlinear data, rendering the final results of analysis difficult to
interpret. As a result, there is acute need for systematic development of new
theoretical and methodological framework for improved prediction that takes into
account the nonlinear features of the time series data. The proposed research
seeks to address this need directly by developing new capabilities that will
build on the existing linear theory for Gaussian and provide substantially
improved prediction. In addition to advancing the statistical science and
related scientific applications, it will also have potential impact on the
practice of seasonal adjustments for better public policy formulation in the US
and other nations.

This project seeks to develop new theory and methodology for prediction for
non-Gaussian, nonlinear processes, utilizing the tools of higher-order auto-
cumulant functions and polyspectra. Specifically, the goals of the project
include : (i) developing quadratic and higher order nonlinear predictors, with
demonstrable improvements, (ii) extending forecasting approaches for a new class
of so-called quadratically predictable processes; (iii) developing nonlinear
models-fitting via an appropriate generalization of the Whittle likelihood,
derived from the mean squared error of the one-step ahead quadratic forecasting
filter, (iv) developing theoretical foundations of auto-cumulants for multi-
linear forms that are paramount to derive third and higher order polynomial
predictors,(v) developing algorithms and supporting software in R for
implementation of the methodology. The results from the project are expected to
provide tools for substantially improved forecasting and signal extraction for
univariate and multivariate time series data exhibiting nonlinear
characteristics that are prevalent in many areas of sciences (e.g., Astronomy,
Atmospheric sciences, Finance, Signal Processing) and real life applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
