
* 1811768
* New Approaches for Censored Quantile Regression Models via Data Augmentation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2018,05/11/2018
* Naveen Naidu Narisetty,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 04/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

With the availability of massive amounts of data in the modern Big Data era,
heterogeneous behavior is a common phenomenon. It is an important challenge to
develop statistical methods for extracting useful insights from datasets
exhibiting heterogeneity, without making strong modeling assumptions that could
restrict the applicability of these methods. One efficient way of doing this is
to model the quantiles of an outcome variable conditional on covariates, a
method referred to as quantile regression. The current project develops novel
statistical methods and computational techniques for quantile regression models
when some of the observations are only partially observed. The proposed research
will enable the use of the rich class of quantile regression models for a large
class of applications that were previously not amenable to these techniques. The
proposed framework will include the high-dimensional setting where the number of
covariates could potentially exceed the number of observations, a common
occurrence in many biological, medical, and economics applications. The research
will be broadly disseminated in scientific journals, at conferences and
seminars, and software packages in R will be developed. As the proposed research
is placed at the intersection of modern statistical methodology, computation,
and theory with substantial applications, it will be suitable for training
graduate students with a broad range of skills. The proposed research will
develop novel and efficient statistical methods for quantile regression models
when the responses are subject to arbitrary censoring, that is, multiple
censoring types including single, double and interval censoring can occur within
the same dataset, and the covariates can be high-dimensional. Three fundamental
problems in censored quantile modeling will be considered in this project: (i)
develop efficient inferential methods under arbitrary censoring and study their
theoretical properties, (ii) devise computationally scalable algorithms having
statistically desirable properties that can handle high-dimensional covariates,
and (iii) develop models that account for subgroups having heterogeneous
quantile effects. A fundamental challenge that will be tackled is how data
augmentation and the Bayesian framework can be efficiently utilized when an
explicit likelihood is unavailable. An important feature of the methods is their
computational scalability while having desirable statistical properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
