
* 1811245
* Theory and Methods for Causal Inference in Chronic Diseases
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2018,07/06/2018
* Shu Yang,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 120,000.00

Chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease and HIV create an immense health
and economic burden, both within the USA and globally. With recent technological
advances, the chronic disease research enterprise is rapidly becoming data-
intensive and data-driven. Massive and complex data provide unprecedented
opportunities for discovering optimal treatment strategies for chronic diseases.
However, these complex data also present novel challenges for statistical
analysis. Patients may visit the clinic at irregular intervals, may drop out of
studies, and may discontinue prescribed treatments prematurely. In addition,
there may be "confounding by indication", in that some treatments may have been
prescribed preferentially to sicker patients. These features can be barriers to
effectively translating rich information into meaningful knowledge. The
overarching theme of this project is to develop new data analysis methods that
tackle these important and recurring challenges. This work aims to advance
statistical science through the development of novel approaches to address these
difficult challenges, where existing methods do not apply or suffer from major
drawbacks. The research will also provide subject matter scientists with a
principled way to approach scientific questions in these settings to discover
optimal treatment strategies for patients.

This research project has the following goals. 1) Develop estimators of survival
distributions as a function of time to treatment discontinuation using a
dynamic-regime marginal structural models approach. Treatment discontinuation
arises frequently in clinical practice, complicating the analysis and
interpretation. The objective here is to develop an instructive demonstration of
how careful conceptualization of this problem leads to an unambiguous definition
of a sensible treatment effect and to valid inferences, shaping a principled
approach to dealing with treatment discontinuation. 2) Develop efficient
estimators for Structural Nested Mean Models (SNMMs) from longitudinal
observational studies in the presence of informative censoring using
semiparametric theory. Time-varying confounding by indication is a widespread
phenomenon and causes selection bias in the estimation of treatment effect.
SNMMs have been proposed to overcome this issue; however, their use in practice
is still unpopular, partly because the efficiency of the estimators is highly
dependent on the choice of estimating equations, and the theory is still
underdeveloped in many settings. The investigator plans to develop improved
estimators of causal parameters in SNMMs in the presence of censoring, which
gain both efficiency and robustness to nuisance model specification over
existing methods. 3) Develop a new framework of continuous-time SNMMs. In many
realistic situations, the outcomes and treatments are more likely to be measured
at irregularly spaced time points. Most of the existing SNMMs literature uses a
discrete-time setup, which is overly simplified and therefore impractical. The
investigator aims to provide a unified framework for SNMMs with continuous-time
processes, establishing a novel area of research in causal inference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
