
* 1811976
* Uncertainty Quantification in High-Dimensional Structured Regression Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2018,05/11/2018
* Pierre Bellec,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 179,997.00

Structured, high-dimensional regression problems is a current topic of major
interest due recent applications in modern scientific fields. Such structured,
high-dimensional data arise naturally in bioinformatics, signal processing,
quantum mechanics and networks. Handling this massive high-dimensional data is
impossible unless the underlying parameter of interest has additional structure.
Examples of additional structure that arise in applications include sparsity or
low-rankness and powerful estimation methods have been developed in the last
decade to successfully recover the true parameter whenever such additional
structure is present in the data. However, identifying whether such additional
structure is present in the data is more challenging than the corresponding
estimation problem. New phase transitions are seen and novel methods are needed.
The goal of the current project is to develop statistical methodology aimed at
identifying the existence of such additional structure, and to study the
theoretical phase transitions of the problem.

The high-dimensional setting considers the situation where the number of
unknown parameters outnumber the number of samples. Estimation procedures have
successfully solves this high-dimensional setting under additional structural
assumption on the problem: Common structural assumptions include sparsity or
low-rankness, where the unknown parameter possesses some low-dimensional
property. In the so called sparse or low-rank regime, consistent estimation of
the unknown parameter becomes possible even in the high-dimensional "large p
small n" settings. The proposed research will focus on uncertainty
quantification in such structured, high-dimensional settings. Methodologies will
be developed to construct confidence sets and confidence bands tailored to
structured high-dimensional problems. A major challenge that will be studied
both theoretically and empirically is identifying whether the sparse or low-rank
regime actually occurs, or equivalently the construction of adaptive confidence
sets. An adaptive confidence set captures the true parameter with high
probability, and its size shrinks optimally with respect to the unknown sparsity
or low-rankness of the problem. The optimality properties of adaptive confidence
sets will be studied, as well as the corresponding phase transitions with
respect to the problem parameters. The proposed research is motivated by and
will be directly applicable to scientific fields where high-dimensional data
arise. An adaptive confidence set has major applications in practice as it
provides a certificate that the sparse or low-rank regime actually occurs, and
such certificate asserts that the high-dimensional estimation and inferential
methods used in practice are actually accurate. Identifying whether the sparse
regime actually occurs has direct applications in bioinformatics and signal
processing, while identifying whether the low-rank regime occurs has direct
applications in quantum tomography and matrix completion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
