
* 1811866
* Optimal Shrinkage and Empirical Bayes Prediction under Asymmetry, Censoring and Nonexchangeability
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2018,05/12/2020
* Gourab Mukherjee,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Huixia Wang
* 12/31/2021
* USD 127,443.00

In every branch of big-data analytics, it is now commonplace to use notions of
shrinkage in the construction of robust algorithms and predictors. The concept
of shrinkage is important because it provides an elegant framework for combining
information from related populations and often leads to substantial improvements
in the performances of algorithms used for simultaneous inference. Driven by
applications in a wide range of scientific problems over the last decade, the
traditional roles of statistical shrinkage have rapidly evolved as new
perspectives have been introduced to address and exploit complex, latent
structural properties of modern datasets. These new applications often involve
non-standard inferential attributes such as asymmetric predictive objectives as
well as intricate modeling caveats, such as nonexchangeable prior structures and
censored observations. These new age statistical problems pose challenges not
only in developing flexible shrinkage algorithms but also in optimally tuning
them to obtain efficient shrinkage properties. This project will develop new
empirical Bayes predictive methods that possess optimal shrinkage properties and
can produce significant enhancements over existing algorithms built on the
mathematical convenience of symmetric loss functions and exchangeable prior
structures.

The common theme underlying this project is that of using optimal shrinkage
properties to develop efficient predictive methods. Existing shrinkage
algorithms rely heavily on decision theoretic identities that break down under
asymmetry and nonexchangeability, and so, there is an urgent need to develop new
statistical methodologies, theories, and algorithms. The PI will develop new
conditionally linear decision rules for prediction under asymmetry in
nonexchangeable Gaussian hierarchical models and will extend the proposed
methodologies to non-Gaussian models as well as to settings with non-linear
structural constraints. Additionally, optimal empirical Bayes rules will be
developed that will work with censored data and can be used for prediction in
multi-stage decision making scenarios with asymmetric objectives. The results
developed in this project will provide practitioners with an improved
understanding of where existing prediction approaches fail under asymmetry,
censoring, and nonexchangeability and why algorithms specifically developed to
operate under these conditions should be used.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
