
* 1811659
* Collaborative Research: Critical Points and Excursion Probability of Random Fields: Theory and Statistical Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,05/09/2022
* Armin Schwartzman,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 74,999.00

Random fields are playing increasingly important roles in statistics, due to
their use as spatial models in many scientific areas such as neuroimaging,
astronomy, geosciences, oceanography and microscopy, where many problems involve
dependent data at spatial locations. In these applications, researchers are
interested in detecting signals hidden in a noisy background which can usually
be modeled as a random field. This project aims to derive theoretical properties
of random fields and use these results to create efficient statistical tools to
extract important and useful information from spatial data. This is done by
focusing on specific features of random fields such as peaks, which serve as
local representatives of the signal in their immediate vicinity. Thus, local
signals can be discovered by detecting peaks whose height is above what would be
expected by chance. This project develops such signal detection procedures with
rigorous statistical inference theory. By identifying regions of brain activity
in brain images to finding stellar objects against the cosmic background
radiation, the aforementioned scientific disciplines will benefit from the
proposed methods, which provide new efficient tools to analyze spatially
dependent data and detect signals in the presence of noise.

This project will study critical points and excursion probabilities of Gaussian
and related random fields, and then apply the obtained theoretical results to
important statistical problems involving signal detection in image analysis,
multiple hypothesis testing and parameter estimation. For critical points, the
project will investigate exact computable formulas for the expected number,
height distribution, and overshoot distribution, and establish approximations to
the moments of the number of critical points. For excursion probabilities, the
project will investigate the expected Euler characteristic approximation for
smooth Gaussian fields with non-constant variance and for non-Gaussian fields,
and fractional Brownian motion on manifolds. As statistical applications, the
project will devise tests for local maxima in non-stationary Gaussian noise and
testing of cluster extent and mass for detecting signal regions. In these
applications, p-values are computed using the developed theory. Statistical
applications also include estimation of parameters in the height distribution of
local maxima and detection of change-points. This project uses interdisciplinary
tools from probability, statistics, and geometry to develop the desired
theoretical results and statistical methods. It will create interesting
connections between several mathematical areas involving topology and random
matrices theory, and to other disciplines, including neuroimaging, cosmology,
and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
