
* 1812508
* 2018 Quantitative Biology (q-bio) Summer School at Rice University
* DMS,STATISTICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 05/01/2018,04/05/2018
* Marek Kimmel,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 32,500.00

The award provides partial travel/subsistence support for participants of the
"2018 q-bio Summer School at Rice University,' to be held June 11-24, 2018 at
Rice University, immediately preceding the international q-bio Conference.
"Q-Bio" stands for Quantitative Biology and reflects the Summer School's goal to
combine biological and mathematical methods to understanding the evolution and
function of biological cells in health and disease. Individual cells respond to
stimuli such as viruses in different ("noisy") ways, but their interaction is a
coordinated immune response which can be predicted using mathematics. Another
example is the effect of chemotherapy on leukemias, which may leave small
numbers of residual malignant cells and lead to recurrence of disease. Again, it
is possible to predict, using mathematics and computer simulations, how and when
this may happen. The q-bio School encourages early career scientists to pursue
quantitative systems biology and provides a forum for the exchange of new
results and ideas. The unique formula of the School includes active
participation in research projects, some of which lead to scientific progress
and publications. The Summer School originated in 2007 on the campus of Los
Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and past summer schools have been very
successful, with over 85% positive reviews and 76% former participants actively
engaged in quantitative biology research. The current School at Rice University
campus takes advantage of the Houston Health Center, the Baylor College of
Medicine and MD Anderson Cancer Center. The School will be followed by the
Annual q-bio Conference at Rice University. Over 11 years the q-bio Summer
School has developed an extensive network of 4-500 alumni and actively promotes
participant diversity.

Two educational tracks are envisioned in 2018: Cancer Dynamics and Stochastic
Cell Regulation. The program will last two weeks and include: ten 1-hour
research seminars; ten 1.5-hour general lectures; 30 hours of in-depth breakout
discussions, chalk talks and computer lab demonstrations; 8 career-focused panel
discussions; 20 student oral presentations; two poster sessions; 20+ hours of
mentored project work; and formal and informal networking opportunities. The
Stochastic Cell Regulation track explores stochasticity and cell-to-cell
variability in the measurement and modeling of biochemical systems,
concentrating on how small numbers of important molecules (i.e. genes, RNA, and
protein) affect dynamics of living cells. The Cancer Dynamics track addresses
biological and mathematical issues related to modeling of evolution of cancer.
Lectures cover topics spanning many time- and length-scales, from fundamental
issues of cell proliferation and mutation dynamics to molecular events affecting
specific pathways in cells and population genetics effects. This section of the
summer school includes instructor-suggested group projects, in which students
formulate and explore stochastic models of cancer evolution, applying these
tools to model experimental and clinical data. More information can be found at
the q-bio School's website

http://q-bio.org/wp/qbss/2018schedule/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
