
* 1812030
* New Methods and Theory of Statistical Inference for Non-Gaussian Graphical Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,06/29/2018
* Zhao Ren,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2021
* USD 129,999.00

The undirected graphical model (GM), a powerful tool for investigating the
relationship among a large number of random variables in a complex system, is
used in a wide range of scientific applications, including image analysis,
statistical physics, astrophysics, finance, and biomedical studies. With recent
technological advances, unprecedented amounts of information can be collected
for a given system, making meaningful inferential guarantees of GMs more
challenging. Despite recent successes in development of methods and theory for
Gaussian GMs, the underlying assumption of continuous and normally distributed
data is violated for some important data types. For example, ordinal, binary and
count data are all discrete in nature and cannot be naively transformed into
Gaussian distributions. In biomedical studies, examples of non-Gaussian type
data include DNA Copy Number Variation, mutation and (single cell) RNA-sequence
data. Compared to recent advances in Gaussian GM, research in modeling and
theoretical foundations for non-Gaussian data types has fallen behind. To bridge
this gap, the PI will identify some of the major modeling and inferential
challenges and propose several new graphical models for non-Gaussian data. In
addition, the PI will further develop, evaluate and improve new statistical and
computational inference methods for these models with theoretical guarantees.

The proposed research will significantly advance fundamental theoretical
understanding on modeling and statistical inference of non-Gaussian data in
graphical models via three tasks. (I) Development of a new two-step inference
procedure to employ the covariate-adjusted truncated Poisson graphical model
(TPGM) which provides a unified framework for modeling both binary and count
type data. The inferential procedure fully respects the intrinsic sparse
structure of the graph making it more reliable. A novel likelihood-based non-
linear score vector for bias correction will be developed. (II) A novel zero-
inflated TPGM fully accounting for the zero-inflation pattern in the data is
proposed to model single cell RNA sequence data at the cell level. The
inferential procedure based on EM algorithms paves a road to better
understanding of the genetic networks in different cell types, and thus a better
understanding of the mechanisms of various diseases. Theoretically, a composite-
likelihood-based EM algorithm is utilized to overcome computational
difficulties. (III) Development of a novel latent semiparametric graphical model
to draw inferences on intrinsic graph structure by integrating both ordinal and
continuous type data. The method takes into account potential confounding
effects to draw meaningful conclusions. Beyond fundamental advances in
statistical modeling and theory of graphical models, the research will have
immediate impact in applications from a number of scientific disciplines
including biology, pharmacy, finance and genomics. The results will be
disseminated through publications, open-source software and presentations at
conferences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
