
* 1812199
* Statistical Methods for Detection of Primordial Gravitational Waves
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,06/29/2018
* Ethan Anderes,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,997.00

With the detections by the LIGO gravitational wave observatories announced in
early 2016 the long-awaited era of gravitational wave astronomy has begun.
Scientists can now very directly explore nature under extreme conditions such as
those that occur with merging black holes or neutron stars. Cosmologists intend
to use gravitational waves to probe deep into the earliest moments of the big
bang. Rather than monitoring changes to the lengths of the 4km-long arms of the
LIGO detectors, cosmologists are seeking the imprint of gravitational waves on
polarization patterns in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) -- light that,
for the most part, last interacted with matter when the universe was just a few
hundred thousand years old. If the simplest and most empirically successful
scenario for the generation of density perturbations in the early universe is
correct, the resulting signal should be observable. Such a detection would open
up a new, and more direct, window on this ultra-early epoch as well as our first
experimental probe of quantum-mechanical aspects of the gravitational field and
allow us to test theories of the origin of spatial structure (density
inhomogeneities) in our universe. To achieve the sensitivity to primordial
gravitational waves (PGWs), being targeted by experiments in the planning stages
now (such as the ?Stage IV? experiment), requires the development of new
statistical tools -- in particular for the quantification of uncertainties in
the removal of contaminants to the signal of interest. This project will
directly address these statistical challenges by focusing on the two main
obstacles for the detection of primordial gravitational waves in the CMB:
contamination from gravitational lensing and millimeter wavelength radiation
from the interstellar medium in our own galaxy. The statistical methodology
resulting from the proposed work will not only enable some very exciting
science, but also inform a broad range of statistical problems associated with
large spatial datasets.

This project directly addresses the two main statistical challenges associated
with the detection of primordial gravitational waves in the cosmic microwave
background (CMB): contamination from gravitational lensing and the emission of
millimeter wavelength radiation from the interstellar medium in our own galaxy.
The first part of the project is the development of a full-scale Bayesian
solution to the delensing problem using a new re-parameterization technique
derived from a dynamical systems characterization of delensing and an artificial
decoherence technique specifically designed to overcome the slow mixing of Gibbs
samplers associated with CMB delensing. This custom re-parameterization, using
the physics of how lensing aliases E-modes and B-modes in the CMB polarization,
can exhibit properties of both a sufficient parametrization for the E-mode and
an ancillary parameterization for the polarization B-mode. This is crucial for
fast mixing of the main Gibbs chain and for high acceptance rates of Hamiltonian
Markov chains for Bayesian delensing. The second main part of the project
directly addresses the challenges associated with foreground contaminants: in
particular the quantification of uncertainty that propagates through the
observations to the estimated B-mode fluctuations from primordial gravitational
waves. The project will focus on developing new random field models of the non-
stationarity and non-Gaussianity aimed at quantifying uncertainty rather than
the estimation, and subsequent removal, of foreground emission. The resulting
models and techniques will also inform general statistical applications
associated with non-stationary random field models and the hierarchical modeling
of non-Gaussian spatial random fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
