
* 1812048
* Nonparametric Inference and Prediction for Complex Data by Data Depth, Confidence Distribution and Monte Carlo Method
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2018,08/09/2018
* Regina Liu,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

In the era of information and data explosion, the demand of effective data
analysis methods for solving problems and assisting decision-making has never
been greater. This demand comes from all domains, from modern scientific
endeavors, government and industry policy-making, financial and business
strategic planning, to even the most basic social-economic studies. Despite
recent great strides made in mathematical and statistical sciences, many new
challenges have been brought to the fore by the need of confronting the
pervasive massive, diverse and complex data. The PIs of this project will
develop several novel approaches to addresses general inference and prediction
problems in settings where data sources are diverse or where the conventional
statistical large sample theory fails to apply.

Motivated by several real applications, this project will develop nonparametric
approaches for: individualized inference from diverse data sources (referring to
as i-Fusion), prediction for complex data, and exact inference for estimating
equations. Underlying these proposed approaches is the common tool kit
consisting of data depth, confidence distribution and Monte Carlo methods. The
proposed approaches are expected to be broadly applicable, efficient and
computationally feasible. Three specific projects are: A. Develop the new
i-Fusion for drawing efficient individualized inference by effectively combining
learnings from relevant data sources; B. Develop CD Monte-Carlo methods for the
exact inference for estimating equations; C. Develop nonparametric predictive
distributions for efficient prediction with complex data. The proposed
methodologies will be developed with theoretical support and applied to the
areas: i) prediction of volumes of application submissions to interrelated units
in a government agency; and ii) performance forecast for individual companies by
borrowing information possibly shared by others, and, potentially, iii)
identification of hot spots in tracking glacial striation around the globe.
These applications are motivated by the PIs' ongoing collaborative projects with
the CCICADA of Department of Homeland Security, and possibly Rutgers Climate
Risk and Resilience Initiative. These projects involve real databases and are
ideally suited for engaging and training students and new researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
