
* 1821289
* Collaborative Research: Using Precursor Information to Update Probabilistic Hazard Maps
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 09/01/2018,08/01/2018
* Robert Wolpert,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,997.00

In many natural hazard scenarios, precursory information becomes available
before an event. Responding to an impending hazard means that time is limited;
analysis and decision-making must proceed on an accelerated timetable. This
project develops methodology for responding to signals from a variety of data
sources that have been interpreted as suggesting that a volcanic eruption is
threatened. Prior research has attempted to elucidate how physical processes
predict an eruption. For example, seismic signals, gas emissions, and tilt data
have all been implicated as volcanic eruption precursors. But none of these
signals have been shown to make robust predictions. This project undertakes a
different approach, developing methods to integrate precursor data, decide on
the likely evolution of eruption scenarios, and rapidly build simulation studies
and statistical emulators, to provide timely and actionable information on which
to decide a course of action. The new methodology will provide tools to rapidly
construct probability-based hazard forecast maps for cascading geophysical
events.

The prediction and management of extreme events, from volcanic eruptions to
floods to stock market crashes, requires a careful analysis of the hazard event,
its inputs, and its consequences. Data of different kinds, and of differing
fidelity, must be incorporated into a detailed analysis of the impending hazard.
The investigators will build upon their past research characterizing volcanic
hazards. This work provides long-term hazard analysis and provides a bridge from
incoming precursory information, such as seismic signals and gas emission, to
eruption impacts, such as likely paths of mass flows. The investigators aim to
develop methodology to update input distributions for physical simulations and
to integrate outcomes into new adaptive designs for surrogate construction,
rapid evaluations of limited simulations, and massive parallel emulation. The
project will also investigate a methodology based on observed power-law
relationships between precursory information and their growth to estimate the
time to eruption and other outcomes under uncertain data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
