
* 1840278
* Statistics at a Crossroads: Challenges and Opportunities in the Data Science Era
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2018,08/07/2018
* Xuming He,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 175,076.00

The workshop "Statistics at a Crossroads: Challenges and Opportunities in the
Data Science Era" is scheduled to take place at the Crystal Gateway Marriot,
Arlington, Virginia, October 15-17, 2018. A previous workshop was held at the
National Science Foundation in 2002 to discuss the future challenges and
opportunities for the statistics community. That was a time when the statistics
community saw rapid changes and sustained growth from the emergence of more and
larger-scale data. Since then, the growth of the field, including the size of
the undergraduate and graduate programs in statistics and the breadth of
interactions between statistics and other fields, has accelerated. In the
meantime, both the public and the private sectors have embraced big data, as
more and more people recognize that big data can provide insights into the
nature of biological processes, precision medicine, climate change, social and
economic behavior, risk assessment and decision making. The statistics community
recognizes that we are at a crossroads with an unprecedented opportunity to
modernize the discipline to become the major player in data science, but also
with a non-ignorable risk to make ourselves obsolete in the broad community of
data science. The proposed workshop asks a critical question, where do we go
from here? The workshop seeks to invite leading researchers and educators in
statistics and data science to address the question and to produce a report
narrating the challenges to, and opportunities for, statistics stakeholders
(e.g., individual researchers, academic departments, and funding agencies).

The steering committee of the workshop has identified six themes for in-depth
discussion. They are (1) Foundations of statistics and data science; (2)
Statistics and computation; (3) Emerging applications; (4) Data challenges; (5)
Inference in the age of big data; and (6) Statistics education in the new era.
These themes were identified to cover a wide range of issues and research topics
that are timely and forward-looking for the purpose of discussion. Pre- and
post-workshop discussions via online forums are planned to seek broader
community input. The workshop report will be made available to the National
Science Foundation and to the scientific community at large. The recommendations
made at the workshop will provide guidance to young researchers and students who
pursue careers in quantitative fields and beyond. The workshop will also promote
participation of women and other under-represented groups in the research
community. More information can be found at the workshop website
https://hub.ki/groups/statscrossroad/overview.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
