
* 1841307
* The Annual Data Institute Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/15/2019,03/14/2019
* James Wilson,CA,University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* huixia wang
* 02/29/2020
* USD 15,000.00

From March 10th - 12th, 2019, the Data Institute at the University of San
Francisco (USF) will host the Data Institute Conference at the downtown campus
of USF in San Francisco. In the past decade the explosion of available data has
fundamentally changed the way researchers across disciplines approach problems.
Industry is experiencing a similar disruption as data driven decision-making is
driving innovation toward new skills and roles that are often coined "data
science." While academic researchers have traditionally been the center of
innovation and research, industry is pouring significant resources into
developing solutions to many of these same problems. This isolated and
paralleled approach to finding solutions is ripe for a conference dedicated to
exchanging ideas across this traditional divide. This conference aims to draw
leaders of data science in industry and academia to explore the latest
theoretical advances and technological applications in data science to promote
the next generation of cross-disciplinary research. This conference will make an
equally important impact to the greater scientific community with a focus on
recruiting and increasing diversity in data science with attendees that are not
traditionally represented in STEM fields. This proposal is devoted to the
support of students, post-doctoral scholars, and early-career researchers,
especially those from underrepresented groups.

Data Science is a rapidly developing field with fluid boundaries but largely
contains research areas in the statistical, mathematical and computational
sciences. This conference will bring together both junior and senior researchers
from industry and academia to exchange ideas on the recent advances of data
science in these areas. Tracks include network analysis, experimental design,
high dimensional signal processing and machine learning, as well as tracks
dedicated to recent applications of these statistical topics to deep learning,
social good, and marketing. There is a clear need for this novel approach to a
conference in data science. Most conferences in this space have attendees
numbering in the thousands and are either very broad with dozens of parallel
sessions or focused on a single topic in data science. This will be of moderate
size (~350) with three or fewer parallel sessions at any given time with many
overlapping research threads so as to maximize the opportunity to collaborate
and establish new research between academics and industry practitioners. To
learn more about the Data Institute Conference, please visit the website:
https://www.sfdatainstitute.org/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
