
* 1841149
* 2018 ENVR Workshop "Statistics for the Environment: Research, Practice and Policy"
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2018,08/03/2018
* Veronica Berrocal,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,500.00

The workshop, Statistics for the Environment: Research, Practice and Policy,
will serve as the biennial workshop of the section on Statistics and the
Environment (ENVR) of the American Statistical Association and will be held in
Asheville, North Carolina, October 11-13, 2018. The workshop is designed to
achieve three major goals: (i) provide a venue for environmental statisticians
and practitioners to share ideas, facilitate collaboration and discuss ways to
increase the impact and use of statistics in environmental practice and policy;
(ii) provide an opportunity for environmental statisticians and environmental
scientists to discuss and present novel statistical methods and new research
findings in environmental and ecological disciplines; and (iii) provide training
in new statistical methods developed to address some of the statistical and
computational challenges typically posed by environmental and ecological data.

The workshop will span two and a half days. During the first day, two short
courses on high performance computing and hierarchical modeling, respectively,
will take place. The second and third day will be devoted to scientific sessions
with invited research talks on statistical methods for environmental and
ecological data as well as applications. A contributed poster session will be
held at the end of the second day. Topics discussed in the invited sessions
include: statistical methods to handle massive, spatially correlated datasets
and strategies for efficient computing; statistical models for spatial extremes;
statistical methods for causal inference in an environmental context and
understanding the (causal) effects of environmental exposures on human health
and the environment, to name a few. The last day of the workshop will feature an
invited panel discussion that will highlight cogent needs in environmental
practice and policy and will examine possible avenues for impactful
environmental statistics research. More information on the workshop is available
at: http://community.amstat.org/envr/events/envr2018workshop

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
