
* 1848575
* CAREER: Statistical Analysis of Nonconvex Optimization in Unsupervised Learning
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2019,07/06/2022
* Xiaodong Li,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 319,403.00

Unsupervised learning techniques have been widely used in real-world
applications such as searching, ranking, recommender systems, social networks,
online advertisements, online transportation, virtual assistants, and so on. In
many practical applications of unsupervised learning methodology, nonconvex
optimization based estimation methods are convenient due to their scalability to
large data. This scalability is crucial in various applications such as computer
vision and natural language processing. However, nonconvex optimization is
computationally unstable or even infeasible in general due to unfavorable local
minima that may exist. In consequence, statistical properties for global minimum
based estimates may not provide meaningful guidelines for practitioners. This
project aims to study the statistical properties of local minimum based
estimates for nonconvex optimization methods in a range of unsupervised learning
problems. The proposed research projects are significant in identifying reliable
nonconvex frameworks by understanding the trade-off between computational
feasibility and statistical efficiency. A new platform will be provided for
collaborations across different fields such as statistics, mathematics and
computer science. The activity is planned to engage female and underrepresented
minority students in the study in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields through both theoretical and computational training
and hands-on data analysis.

Since nonconvex optimization methods are known to be adaptive to missing data
and various parameterizations, the proposed projects are focused on the
statistical analysis for low-rank factorization based unsupervised learning,
such as matrix completion, robust PCA, pairwise ranking and network
representation. Recent developments in landscape analysis for nonconvex low-rank
factorization reveal that there could be no spurious local minima if (i) the
ground truth satisfies strong structural assumptions; (ii) model mismatching is
not permitted; (iii) the sample size is large. In contrast, the proposed project
is focused on conducting the landscape analysis in more general settings: First,
model-free frameworks will be proposed to study the geometric properties of
nonconvex optimization without requiring structural assumptions on the data or
exact model matching; Second, the effects of model mismatching on the landscape
of the nonconvex objective functions will be analyzed; Third, statistical
efficiencies for local minima based estimates and their relationship with the
intrinsic dimensions and sample sizes will be established; Fourth, algebraic
structures of general parameterized low-rank factorization will be exploited in
order to establish a unified landscape analysis for a broad class of
unsupervised learning problems. Moreover, in order to test the empirical
behavior of the proposed methods, the activity is planned to identify
appropriate benchmark datasets in learning-to-rank, predictive network analysis
and recommendation systems in order to compare the empirical performances of the
proposed approaches with baseline methods in the literature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
