
* 1903479
* International Conference on Design of Experiments 2019
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2019,05/03/2019
* Manohar Aggarwal,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The International Conference on Design of Experiments (ICODOE 2019) will be held
at the Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Memphis, during May
18-21, 2019. The design and analysis of experiments plays a critical role in the
process of discovery and improvement in science, medicine, engineering and
manufacturing and has enormous impact on the daily lives of just about every
person in the United States and throughout the world. The goals of the ICODOE
2019 conference are (a) to encourage and support early career researchers,
graduate students, and underrepresented groups (minority and women), and give
them the opportunity to form networks for future research interaction, (b) to
provide these researchers with state of the art knowledge in the area of
experimental design, and (c) to bring outstanding researchers from across the
world to present their active research in the field and its various
applications. The conference will have a significant impact on the education of
junior researchers and will help in the advancement of knowledge and cross
fertilization of techniques of experimental designs across disciplines.

Rapid developments have taken place in research on design and analysis of
experiments, and the conference will have sessions on a wide variety of topics
of current importance, including the following issues. (i) Computer Experiments
which have an ever growing impact on science, engineering and technology. The
complexity of scientific questions emerging from successful interdisciplinary
collaborations, make the development, assessment and utilization of complex
computer models of critical importance; (ii) The rapid development of science
and technology has enabled researchers to generate and collect data with
considerable size and complexity in all fields from academia to industry. These
data provide remarkable opportunities for discovering new knowledge and
insights, yet these opportunities have not yet been fully explored due to the
computational burden. A systematic experimental design thinking for large-scale
statistical analysis is essential; (iii) With the increasing popularity of
social media, designs for online experiments are becoming vitally necessary.
Other sessions will include the design of simulation experiments needed in
manufacturing, new developments in factorial designs for industry, design of
discrete choice experiments for marketing, psychology, and medical studies,
adaptive designs for clinical trials, optimal design of dose-finding studies for
pharmaceutical research, computational aspects of large-scale optimal
experimental designs and Bayesian nonlinear designs, designs for experiments
with multiple objectives or multiple stages, and issues of robustness including
the interface of design with machine learning. The website for ICODOE 2019 is
http://www.memphis.edu/msci/icodoe2019/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
