
* 1914917
* Complex Problems in Functional Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2019,08/16/2021
* Jane-Ling Wang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Functional data analysis (FDA) deals with infinite-dimensional data in the form
of random functions. Such data have become increasingly common due to new
technology to record and store massive data. The field has gained much traction
and research has accelerated, but there remain many unsolved problems and new
opportunities for research. This research focuses on four projects that address:
1) an open problem regarding the choice of the domain of interest in a
regression setting with a functional covariate and scalar response, 2)
implementing the RKHS (reproducing kernel Hilbert space) approach for
conventional functional linear models when the functional covariates are
observed sparsely, 3) dynamic modeling for multivariate functional data, and 4)
challenges for the analysis of functional snippet data, for which each subject
is observed in a different interval much shorter than the domain of the
functional data. The developed methods will be applied to various data with
functional components to evaluate the effect of pollutants on lung cancer
mortality and to explore the interaction of these pollutants. The proposed
research thus has direct impacts on public health research. In addition, the
proposed approaches for functional snippets have broad applications in
accelerated longitudinal studies, which are common in social and health
sciences. The computer code of developed algorithms will be integrated into an
existing R-package, fdapace, on CRAN. The research findings will be incorporated
into graduate curricula, undergraduate and graduate research projects, and short
courses at workshops, and be presented at professional meetings. Project 1 is
important for interpreting the influence of a functional covariate, yet to date,
there is no algorithm that can reliably identify the relevant domain and the
theory is incomplete. We propose to resolve these open problems through a new
framework that involves a dynamic RKHS approach to overcome the challenges. This
has the potential to break new ground in the well-established field of RKHS. A
weakness of the RKHS approach is that it has difficulty to handle sparsely
observed functional covariates. In Project 2, we propose a solution by imputing
incomplete functional covariates and show that the regression coefficient
function can be recovered through the imputed functional covariates. A new line
of theory will be developed to deal with the approximation errors in the
Karhunen-Lo\'eve expansion for functional data. These new results will
facilitate future research that involves imputation for functional data. Project
3 aims at modeling the derivatives of multivariate functional data using the
component processes as covariates. We propose a concurrent approach that avoids
an ill-posed inverse problem and has the advantage to accommodate time-lags of
the predictor component processes. Project 4 deals with another open problem in
FDA. We propose two nonparametric approaches for functional snippets and will
develop supporting theory. These new approaches provide a new frontier of
research in FDA, as once the covariance can be estimated accurately, existing
FDA approaches, such as principal component analysis, classification or
clustering, can be readily adapted for functional snippets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
