
* 1914496
* Towards Efficient Bias Correction in Data Snooping
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,07/29/2019
* Xuming He,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The choice of a statistical model is often a critical part of data analysis
because a useful model helps researchers extract relevant information from noisy
data to reach interpretable findings. While scientific or economic theories do
help formulate models in some applications, most data analysts have to rely on
empirical models. Using the same data to select a model and then to perform
model-based statistical inference is commonly known as data snooping.
Unfortunately, data snooping is intrinsically risky without a careful analysis
of the potential bias resulting from such practices. The primary goal of this
project is to study how to understand and correct bias from data snooping and
develop sound statistical inference methods. The research will provide valuable
tools for scientists, researchers, and policy makers who rely on data-driven
models for uncertainty assessment and confirmatory data analysis.

This project focuses on regression-adjusted inference on treatment effects and
inference on the best selected subgroup. The proposed work is motivated by the
pressing need for more fundamental research related to the handling of "post-
selection bias" in statistical analysis. The repeated data-splitting method for
de-biased inference on a structural parameter (for example, the average
treatment effect) enables efficient bias removal in addressing an intrinsic
scientific question. The proposed inference on the best selected subgroup
provides a bias-correction to a natural estimate of the subgroup effect size,
and therefore reduces the risk of data-snooping and false discoveries in
subgroup analysis. In the big data era, data-driven models and subgroup analyses
are often used to take advantage of anticipated sparsity in the data structure
or to explore data heterogeneity. The proposed research aims to provide
insights, theory, and tools for more informed decision making in such endeavors.
The project will involve collaborations with researchers investigating the risk
of concussion as well as scientists in the biotechnology industry who routinely
rely on subgroup analysis. Graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged
in the proposed research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
