
* 1914411
* Variable Selection, Instrument Search and Estimation in Problems with Nonignorable Missing Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,08/09/2019
* Jun Shao,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

Missing data are ubiquitous in many applications including sample surveys,
clinical trials and medical/health studies. Handling incomplete data is
particularly challenging when the missingness is related to the unobserved data.
This project seeks to develop statistical models and methods for analyzing
datasets with nonignorable missing values. The research topics are motivated by
problems encountered by survey agencies as well as in data sets from
biomedical/health studies. The results will have significant impact both in
terms of new methodological development for handling incomplete data as well as
in applications to real datasets from a number of scientific fields.

When the missing data mechanism depends on unobserved data, the missing data are
referred to as nonignorable. Handling nonignorable missing data is a challenging
problem as the unobserved values follow a distribution different from that of
the observed data leading to issues of identifiability and estimability of the
underlying unknown parameters. The proposed research focuses on the following
three areas: (1) Instrument search and model selection. A recent method for
handling nonignorable missing data is built on the use of a covariate (called an
instrument) that enables researchers to identify and estimate population
parameters. In applications, however, such an instrument must be constructed
from a given set of observed covariates. The proposed research will develop
methods for finding instruments in different situations, including
semiparametric propensity models, pseudo likelihood methods, and problems with
both missing responses and covariate values. Together with instrument search,
model selection regarding the parametric component will be also investigated.
(2) High dimension reduction and variable selection. In many big data
applications, the dimension of the covariate vector is often very large,
however, only a few covariates are useful. While there is extensive research
related to dimension reduction and variable selection over the past two decades,
there are no results available in the presence of nonignorable missing
responses. The proposed research focuses on covariate selection or dimension
reduction under two semiparametric frameworks. (3) Multivariate data with
nonignorable missing values. The proposed research will develop methods for
problems with both missing responses and covariates, survival analysis with
survival-dependent missing covariates, and personalized medicine with
longitudinal data having dropouts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
