
* 1914556
* Computer-Intensive Methods for Nonparametric Analysis of Dependent Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,07/29/2019
* Dimitris Politis,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Ever since the fundamental recognition of the potential role of the computer in
modern statistics, the bootstrap and other computer-intensive statistical
methods have been developed extensively for inference with independent data.
Such methods are even more important in the context of dependent data where the
distribution theory for estimators and test statistics may be difficult or
impractical to obtain. Furthermore, the recent information explosion has
resulted in datasets of unprecedented size that call for flexible,
nonparametric, and, by necessity, computer-intensive methods of data analysis.
Time series analysis in particular is vital in many diverse scientific
disciplines, e.g., in economics, engineering, acoustics, geostatistics,
biostatistics, medicine, ecology, forestry, seismology, and meteorology. As a
consequence of the proposal's development of efficient and robust methods for
the statistical analysis of dependent data, more accurate and reliable
inferences may be drawn from datasets of practical import resulting into
appreciable benefits to society. Examples include data from
meteorology/atmospheric science (e.g. climate data), economics (e.g. stock
market returns), biostatistics (e.g. fMRI data), and bioinformatics (e.g.
genetics and microarray data).

The project focuses on the development of methods of inference for the analysis
of dependent data that do not rely on unrealistic or unverifiable model
assumptions. In particular, the principal investigator and his collaborators
will work on: (a) Subsampling and resampling for Big Data, including bootstrap
for multivariatetime series of large dimension; (b) New model fitting and
resampling for ARMA (p,q) models with both p,q large; (c) New smoothing
estimators of time-varying covariance matrices for locally stationary
multivariate time series; (d) Resampling for time series with an (almost)
periodic component; (e) Model-free Bootstrap for stationary and non-stationary
data; (f) Estimating the degree of smoothness and support of the common density
of stationary data; (g) Improved nonparametric estimation of a hazard rate
function; (h) A bootstrap test for the null hypothesis of `overdifferencing';
(i) Markov-type resampling and Linear Process Bootstrap for stationary random
fields; and (j) Different aspects of resampling of functional and high-
dimensional time series.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
