
* 1915803
* Highly Multivariate Geo-Statistics Using Graphical Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2019,06/15/2021
* Abhirup Datta,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Researchers in forestry, ecology, climate sciences, environmental health, and
many other fields routinely analyze geo-tagged data collected at thousands of
locations using spatial statistics. Modern Geographical Information Systems
(GIS) are empowered to simultaneously measure many different variables at each
location. This heralds a shift towards a multivariate paradigm in spatial
statistics. A joint analysis of all the variables help identify common
geographical patterns and sources for the different variables. In this project,
the PI pursues statistical methodology that can adequately address the emerging
complexities of such highly-multivariate geospatial datasets. The innovations
include a) utilizing available scientific information about the dependence among
variables, b) ensuring computational scalability of the algorithms, and c)
improving interpretability of findings from the multivariate analysis. The
genesis of the proposed innovations lies in substantive questions related to
climate modeling, air and water quality. These research domains study some of
the most threatening challenges to the human society in the twenty-first
century. The statistical methods developed in this project will enable
practitioners in these fields to conduct highly-multivariate spatial analysis
using modest computing resources. The project also provides the opportunity to
train graduate students in many diverse and essential areas of statistics as
well as in advanced statistical computing.

Gaussian Processes (GPs) have long been used for modeling multivariate spatial
surfaces. Multivariate GPs are often created by mixing univariate ones which
obfuscate the individual spatial characteristics of each resultant surface.
Direct constructions like the multivariate Matern GP are more interpretable but
entail complex parameter constraints offering little flexibility to exploit
prior information about inter-variable dependence. The PI proposes a novel
procedure to create multivariate GPs that endows each surface with an
interpretable GP measure with surface-specific variance, smoothness and spatial
decay, but also enables incorporating the dependency network among the variables
into the construction. A recurrent theme throughout is the versatile
exploitation of graphical models. Graphs defined in space, time and variable
domains are used to create multivariate GPs with desirable properties in terms
of interpretation, computation and structure. Another accompanying theme is
utilizing a standard decomposition of GPs to extend the discrete construction to
well-defined continuous stochastic processes, thereby enabling predictions at
any new location. Novel, simple, but efficient strategies will be explored for
parameter estimation. Finally, the PI separately focuses on non-Euclidean
spatial domains like estuaries and river networks. New univariate GPs will be
devised that respect the complicated contours of these domains. Subsequently,
harmonious application of graphical models will create multivariate locally
smooth GPs to analyze multivariate spatial data on such domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
