
* 1915277
* Collaborative Research: Spectral Functional Principal Components on Abelian Groups with Applications to Spatial Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2019,07/22/2019
* Joshua French,CO,University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 80,000.00

Massive data sets on gridded 2D and 3D domains have recently become available
through computer climate model outputs, records from satellite remote sensing
and brain scans, among others. These data sets have both temporal and spatial
dimension. For example, a state of vegetation is observed on a grid covering an
agricultural area at regular time intervals, every day or every week. Such data
can be viewed as functions of time, one function per spatial grid unit. Their
chief characteristic is the spatial dependence of curves observed at the grid
nodes. There is an increasing need to develop statistical tools, which will
allow researchers to extract useful information from such data. The PIs will
develop such tools. The data and problems that motivate this research arise in
several science fields, which have important impacts on society. For example,
conclusions drawn from future climate models help the government and
corporations plan for the allocation of various assets. Brain research on trauma
experienced by military veterans and on Alzheimer's disease are recognized as
important societal goals. The statistical research the PIs will conduct will
provide useful quantitative tools to help scientists in these fields.
Mathematical foundations of the new approach will be created, together with
domain-specific approaches. The new methods will be implemented in R packages
and made available to research community, government agencies and commercial
enterprises. In the course of the proposed research, two Ph.D. students will be
trained.

The PIs will create a new framework for inference for functional data defined on
domains with an additive group structure. The new dimension reduction approach
will have characteristics of a multi-scale, data-driven representation, which
takes into account the dependence of the functions defined on group elements,
for example spatial grid nodes. The PIs will use methods of Fourier analysis on
Abelian groups, spectral theory for functional data, invariance principles in
Hilbert spaces, computationally efficient spatio-temporal spline
representations, routines for downloading and manipulating massive data sets.
The PIs will develop several inferential procedures, including bootstrap-based
inference, tests for the spatial and distributional structure, and applications
to the evaluation of the accuracy of computer climate models. The PIs will also
develop corresponding computational techniques, which will lead to the
computationally fast representation of various data structures of large to
massive size.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
