
* 1915967
* Robust Wasserstein Profile Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2019,08/08/2021
* Jose Blanchet,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

A crucial part of any data-driven decision-making problem under uncertainty
involves being able to guarantee, with a high degree of confidence, a desirable
performance of estimated decision rules when actually deployed in practice.
This, precisely, is the key role of the guarantees given by statistical
inference. The goal of this project is to investigate a novel inference
methodology that precisely builds from inception data-driven decision-making
rules with enhanced out-of-sample properties. This is achieved by introducing a
game-theoretic formulation, in which the decision maker optimizes against an
adversary that optimally exploits potential weaknesses of a decision when adding
perturbations to the data (within reasonable size, yet arbitrary directions). A
statistical framework is designed to estimate an optimal amount of data
perturbations to obtain robust, yet practical, decision rules. The framework
naturally leads to optimal (in certain sense) confidence regions for the
underlying decision making parameters. The output of this project has
implications in various areas of applied decision making under uncertainty, in
particular, machine learning, artificial intelligence, operations management,
and transportation are applications of special interest. The graduate student
will work on computational methods for large scale optimal transport. The novel
inference methodology to be investigated in this project unifies and extends a
large class of estimators (such as generalized Lasso and regularized logistic
regression among many others), which have been successfully applied in practice.
These are encompassed within a distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
framework. A DRO formulation is a class of games in which the statistician
chooses a parameter or an action to minimize certain expected loss and an
adversary chooses a perturbation of the empirical measure against the
statistician (maximizing the expected loss) within a certain size (called the
distributional uncertainty size). In the context of this proposal, this
perturbation is measured in terms of optimal transport costs (or Wasserstein
distances). The use of the Wasserstein distance and the DRO formulation
justifies the name Robust Wasserstein Profile Inference of this inference
methodology. The proposal studies the optimal selection of the distributional
uncertainty size and associated optimal confidence regions induced by the DRO
formulation. Specific applications, for example, to shape constrained estimation
and stochastic optimization problem in engineering will be studied by the PI.
The proposed research provides a rich interplay between the theory of optimal
transport, statistical inference and convex optimization. Finally, the PI will
attempt to recruit high-quality personnel from under-represented groups. The PI
will also disseminate the scientific output of this proposal via open access
sites, in addition to the standard vehicles (conferences and journal
publications).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
