
* 1915099
* Impact of Molecular Biomarkers on Survival Outcomes: Signal Detection, Model Selection, and Statistical Inference in High-dimensional Settings
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2019,04/19/2022
* Haolei Weng,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

The goal of this project is to provide a theoretically justifiable and
computationally feasible framework for analyzing large-scale data collected from
epidemiology and other biomedical sciences, social science, marketing,
environmental science, and econometrics. The proposed methods will provid a
convenient means to identify the gene-specific impacts on survival and quantify
the uncertainty of the estimates in high-dimensional settings. As a result, the
methods will help detect patients' specific characteristics that make them
respond differently to treatment or more susceptible to diseases, which is key
to precision medicine. The PI further plans to disseminate the proposed research
in education by redesigning graduate-level courses and training graduate
students.

The project, through its three major aims, features a series of methods to
address fundamental issues arising from high-dimensional survival data analysis.
The first aim is to detect gene-specific impacts on cancer patients' survival
and to provide an integrated framework of detecting individual genes' relevance
to survival when genes have heterogeneous patterns of influence. The second aim
focuses on sequentially selecting important predictors for predicting survival
outcomes. This approach is different from existing forward regression
approaches, which are not applicable to handle censored outcome data with high-
dimensional covariates. The third aim is to develop methods to quantify the
uncertainty of survival models with high-dimensional predictors by integrating
model selection, estimation, and inference steps.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
