
* 1916220
* Interactive Methods for Data-Adaptive Multiple Testing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,08/29/2021
* William Fithian,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

In modern applications, very large and complex data sets are routinely collected
without a specific research question in mind. Rather, the express goal is to
explore the data in search of novel insights, discovering relationships and
structure they may not expected to be found, then report inferences for those
findings. This project provides a series of iterative algorithmic frameworks for
interactive multiple testing, which blend exploratory and confirmatory analyses.
The frameworks are adaptive in an unusually strong sense: at each step of the
procedure, the algorithm reveals more data to the analyst who makes data-driven
decisions that guide the procedure.

The starting point of this project is the PI's recent work on the AdaPT and STAR
algorithms, which give flexible and powerful frameworks for controlling the FDR
while exploiting side information (AdaPT) or enforcing constraints on the
rejection set (STAR). Given predictor for each p-value, AdaPT lets analysts
interactively estimate Bayes-optimal p-value weights from the data using any
machine learning method, while provably controlling finite-sample FDR. The STAR
likewise allows for generic interactive modeling while also guaranteeing that
the rejection set satisfies natural structural constraints such as hierarchy
principles in regression. Both methods guarantee FDR control by means of
optional stopping arguments, giving near-total flexibility to the analyst to
adaptively model the data. The PI will work on four projects that continue this
research program by developing new interactive methods and applying AdaPT to
current scientific problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
