
* 1916476
* Statistical Inference and Experimental Design for Recurrent Event Data with Applications in Neuroscience
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2019,07/29/2019
* Shizhe Chen,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Modern technologies allow neuroscientists to record and control neural
activities at cellular resolution in living, intact brains. While these
technologies open up a path toward understanding the brain, they also pose new
challenges for neuroscientists and statisticians. Modern neuroscience
experiments produce massive recordings of neural activities in the form of
recurring spikes. Despite the large volume, missing data and measurement errors
pose significant statistical challenges. Moreover, with techniques such as
optogenetics and multi-photon imaging, it is increasingly clear that statistical
experimental designs should be utilized to facilitate modern neuroscience
experiments. The research focuses on answering two questions of interest to the
scientific community: (1) how to rigorously analyze the newly-acquired neural
data, and (2) how to optimally design neuroscience experiments to aid scientific
discovery.

There are two main aims in this research project. The first aim focuses on the
development of statistical theory and methods for analyzing neural data using a
class of point process models known as the Hawkes process. While the Hawkes
process is widely used in neuroscience applications, the underlying theoretical
properties are not well-studied. The proposed research will seek to (a) develop
novel theory for the Hawkes process under realistic assumptions, (b) establish a
causal inference framework for partially observed networks using instrumental
variables, and (c) account for calibration errors in spike detection. In the
second aim, an automatic procedure for model-based design of optogenetics
experiments for mapping neural microcircuits will be developed leveraging
results obtained as part of the first aim. Computationally efficient algorithms
for online learning and designing on neural data will also be developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
