
* 1916237
* Binary Expansion Statistics: A Nonparametric Inference Framework for Big Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,08/03/2019
* Kai Zhang,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,999.00

In the Big Data era, the large numbers of observations and variables pose
unprecedented challenging problems of complex forms of dependency and high
computing expenses. This situation is especially common in important problems in
Astronomy, Biology, Economics, Engineering, Finance, Genetics, Genomics,
Neurosciences, etc. To meet these challenges, the PI proposes to study these
problems through a novel framework of binary expansion statistics. The overall
objective of the project is (i) to provide an in-depth understanding of complex
dependency in Big Data with new theory and methods, and (ii) to build a stronger
connection between Statistics and Computer Science. The PI anticipates the
achievement of his goals through an integration of research and education plans.

The binary expansion statistics framework is able to "divide and conquer" any
complex dependency, i.e., to approximate and decompose nonlinear dependency into
interactions of Bernoulli variables in the binary expansion filtration and then
aggregate the information to produce nonparametric inference of dependence. This
approach connects the inference problems to important concepts in Statistics and
Computer Science such as multiple testing, Hadamard transform, and bitwise
operation. The research agenda is to further develop this framework and study
several fundamental problems to develop optimal theory, methodologies and
algorithms. The PI also has comprehensive plans on educating graduate and
undergraduate students and on disseminating the research results to the broader
scientific community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
