
* 1916198
* Non-Convex Landscapes and High-Dimensional Latent Variable Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,08/03/2019
* Zhou Fan,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 182,654.00

In many fields of science and engineering, probabilistic latent variable models
are a powerful and widely-used tool for drawing inferences from complex data.
They provide a flexible framework by modeling the complexity in observed data as
arising from interactions between simpler random and unobserved quantities.
Latent variable models used in modern applications are often high-dimensional,
and this leads to both statistical and computational challenges for inference:
Surprising phenomena emerge in which structure in one latent variable can create
spurious and problematic artifacts in classical inference procedures for
another. These classical procedures also commonly lead to non-convex
optimization problems over a large number of parameters, which are difficult to
computationally solve.

This research will study a flexible framework by modeling the complexity in
observed data as arising from interactions between simpler random and unobserved
quantities. The aim is in answering the following questions: How and why can one
source of latent variation lead to artifacts in classical statistical estimates
for another? What are the geometric properties of objective function landscapes
in these models that render them difficult to optimize? And, can we design
improved inferential procedures that correct for these artifacts and are easier
to compute? The research will apply techniques from random matrix theory, free
probability theory, and statistical physics to obtain a better understanding of
these questions in high-dimensional settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
