
* 1916884
* Quality and Productivity Research Conference - Data and Science Is a Winning Alliance
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2019,03/29/2019
* Michael Baron,DC,American University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2020
* USD 25,655.00

This project funds student participation in the 36th Quality and Productivity
Research Conference, or QPRC, hosted by American University in Washington, DC on
June 11-13, 2019. This QPRC has a special theme devoted to the Data Revolution,
"Data and Science Is a Winning Alliance." The conference aims to demonstrate and
explore the interplay between data and science, and to discuss modern scientific
approaches to handling big, multidimensional, unstructured data. The sessions
will address how data and science, the two fundamental sources of knowledge, are
leveraging each other to accelerate discoveries and increase quality and
productivity. The program will include a comprehensive discussion of cutting-
edge modern methodologies in diverse aspects of data science and current
progress made in such computer-intensive fields as stream data mining, machine
learning, functional data analysis, image reconstruction, and facial
recognition. Participating statisticians, data scientists, quantitative
analysts, and representatives of different branches of industry and government
will exchange novel ideas and share experiences in working with modern big data
to discover knowledge and applying it in numerous fields.

Plenary and invited paper sessions at the 36th QPRC are scheduled in the
following subjects: machine learning, applied data mining, time series and
forecasting, text analytics, data science, cybersecurity, data visualization,
big data analytics, statistical process control monitoring, functional data
analysis, and spatial data science. The conference also includes contributed and
poster sessions and a technical tour. It is preceded by a one-day course "Big
Data Analytics: Dealing with Structured, Semi-structured, and Unstructured
Data." Strong student participation is a vital component of the 36th QPRC.
Efforts will be made to broaden participation by recruiting students from under-
represented groups and engaging students from numerous universities and graduate
programs across the United States. Students are invited to submit contributed
and poster presentations and compete for travel scholarships. The conference
details are on its web site, https://www.american.edu/cas/qprc/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
