
* 1916199
* Collaborative Research: Integrating multi-dimensional omics data for quantifying disease heterogeneity
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2019,08/07/2019
* Jian Huang,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 120,286.00

Many complex diseases such as cancer demonstrate significant across-patient
heterogeneity. For a better understanding of disease biology and optimally
selecting treatment strategies, it is important to properly model disease
heterogeneity. This project will develop a novel framework for modeling disease
heterogeneity through the effective integration of information from multiple
types of highly complex omics measurements. The proposed analysis framework and
approaches will have significant broader impact. Applications of the methods
will lead to more accurate identification of heterogeneous patient groups as
well as their omics characteristics, which will facilitate the
identification/definition of disease subtypes, treatment selection, and clinical
decision-making. Data on skin and lung cancer will be analyzed leading to
heterogeneity models that will be valuable to basic science researchers and
clinicians. The project also involves education and training of graduate
students at Yale University and the University of Iowa.

High-dimensional omics data have been shown to be highly effective for
heterogeneity analysis. Taking advantage of recent developments in multi-
dimensional profiling under which data are collected on multiple types of omics
measurements, the investigators will systematically develop novel integrated
analysis strategies and approaches. Specifically, three sets of methods will be
developed under the novel PFR (penalized fused regression) framework. Model
averaging will be further developed to facilitate computation and provide
additional insights into the proposed approaches. Extensive and rigorous
methodological, computational, and theoretical investigations will be conducted.
This project will make fundamental contributions to high-dimensional statistics
and disease heterogeneity analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
