
* 1916170
* Two-Phase Sampling with Interval-Censored Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,08/19/2019
* Qingning Zhou,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Interval-censored failure time data arise when the time to a failure event is
not exactly observed but known or observed only to fall within some time
interval. Such data are collected in many fields, including epidemiology,
medicine, demographics, economics, finance, psychology and social sciences. This
research will propose new cost-effective sampling designs with interval-censored
failure time data, in response to the needs of cost reduction and improved power
for detecting the exposure-failure-time relationship in epidemiological and
biomedical studies. The proposed designs coupled with robust and efficient
statistical methods will enable study investigators to collect more informative
samples and produce more precise statistical inference at a fixed budget, and
they will be especially useful when the failure rate is low and the exposure
variable is expensive or difficult to obtain. The graduate student support will
be used for theoretical investigation of the proposed methods as well as
conducting numerical studies and manuscript preparation.

The new designs proposed in this research are generally two-phase biased-
sampling schemes where one observes the expensive exposure at phase II with a
probability depending on the phase I information collected on failure times,
cheap covariates, or auxiliary variables. All proposed designs will produce
biased-sampled interval-censored data with missing covariates. No methods
available in the literature can appropriately handle such data. This research
will develop robust and efficient semiparametric likelihood-based methods that
properly account for the proposed sampling schemes. Nonparametric techniques
such as sieve and kernel estimation will be employed. New arguments based on
modern empirical process theory will be developed for theoretical investigation
of the proposed methods. Efficient computational algorithms and user-friendly
software that implement the proposed designs and methods will be created and
disseminated. Successful completion of the proposed research will have a
significant impact on how future cost-effective epidemiological and biomedical
studies be conducted and how data from these studies be efficiently analyzed.
This research will also have potential impact on how to perform cost-effective
studies and data analyses in other fields that produce interval-censored failure
time data, such as demographics, economics, finance, psychology and social
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
