
* 1916221
* Theory for General Regression with Heavy Tails and Shape Constraints: A Multiplier Empirical Process Approach
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2019,05/24/2021
* Qiyang Han,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Modern high-dimensional complex-structured datasets are usually very noisy and
heavy-tailed. The project will address two major inter-related questions arising
from the challenges due to these highly noisy datasets and unstable tuning-
sensitive nonparametric methods. The first question concerns the noisy nature of
high-dimensional complex-structured datasets. It addresses the extent to which
we can believe in the results of estimation procedures designed for regression
models with very light-tailed errors, while keeping in mind that such an ideal
assumption may fail miserably in practice due to numerous outliers. The second
question concerns the subtle and usually unstable tuning-sensitive
multidimensional nonparametric methods. It aims at understanding how far
alternative tuning-free and stable statistical estimation methods with
additional shape constraints can be reliable. The graduate student will be
involved in developing theory and methods for multi-dimensional shape
constrained models, implementing algorithms, performing numerical experiments,
and validating the theoretical properties of the statistical methods.

The proposed research questions share a close common tie at the level of their
underlying probabilistic structures exhibited by multiplier empirical processes,
a special form of the empirical processes. Unfortunately, existing tools
necessarily fail to provide sharp understandings due to complex structures
within the processes. The PI will develop probabilistic tools and techniques in
connection with these multiplier empirical processes. These tools and techniques
will play a crucial role in understanding the phase-transitional behavior of the
commonly used least squares and other related frequentist and Bayes methods in
regression models with heavy tails and shape constraints. The particular
problems under investigation include (a) behavior of penalized least squares
estimators in nonparametric models with heavy-tailed errors, (b) behavior of
Bayes procedures under quasi-Gaussian likelihood with heavy-tailed errors, (c)
behavior of least squares estimators in multi-dimensional isotonic and convex
shape constrained models and (d) behavior of maximum likelihood estimators in
general additive models with shape constraints.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
