
* 1916233
* Collaborative Research: Innovations for Bayesian Tree Ensemble Methodology
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2019,07/10/2019
* Robert McCulloch,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 159,997.00

An essential goal of modern statistical analyses across many disciplines is to
gain insight into the behavior of real-world processes both to identify
important correlates of variation and to obtain improved predictions. For
example in marketing, the statistician may be interested in learning the
purchasing behavior of consumers from an analysis of a database of consumer
transactions that includes various consumer descriptors (e.g. age, income level,
geographic location) as well as purchase amounts. The statistician would then
typically attempt to build a mathematical model that characterizes the
relationship between the consumer descriptors and the expenditure amount. In
doing so, however, certain issues bear strongly on the model's value and
effectiveness. First, the validity of a model may strongly depend on prior
assumptions about the nature of the modeled process, information that can be
difficult to ascertain. For instance, a consumer behavior model which builds in
a simple assumption that consumers with higher income levels are always expected
to purchase more, may be inadvertently ignoring subtleties that violate this
assumption when other factors are simultaneously taken into account. Second,
sometimes even a valid and effective model may be such a complicated object that
the extraction of meaningful information can itself be very challenging. For
example, after establishing particular set of predictors as important drivers of
consumer purchasing power, it will still be of key interest how to best measure
their relative importance in the model. Focusing on the powerful and flexible
approach of Bayesian regression tree ensemble modeling, the main thrust of this
project will be to innovate this methodology to address these and other modeling
avenues. This new methodology will enable practitioners to address their
research questions in an assumption-lean framework that allows the ensemble
models to make use of their data to adaptively and flexibly incorporate
contextual modeling assumptions. To greatly enhance interpretability, it will
also provide automatic, information based summaries of variable importance to
help the practitioner understand and interpret the available descriptor
information. In addition to these and further methodological contributions, the
project will develop software for the implementation of this methodology as a
freely available R package, enabling practitioners to more easily leverage our
developments in their practical work. This is where the graduate student
supported by this award will help.

The research will focus on three general innovations to Bayesian ensemble
modeling to further enhance its ability to extract meaning from complex data
within an assumption lean framework. The first contribution will develop
theoretically valid measures of variable importance. These measures will provide
computationally efficient calculation of indices which meaningfully gauge the
relative importance of predictor variables, both marginally and in terms of
interactions. The second contribution will provide an approach to monotone shape
constrained inference which does not require any prior assumption of
monotonicity. This multidimensional nonparametric regression approach will
enable the discovery and estimation of any and all the monotone components of
the regression function, and to do so with no constraint assumptions whatsoever.
The third contribution will vastly extend the applicability of Bayesian ensemble
modeling by developing a generalization of BART for arbitrary response data
distributions, such as dichotomous responses and count data. This major
technical innovation will be based on a conjugacy-free formulation that will
extend the reach of BART to many new application areas and problem types than
were previously possible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
