
* 1916204
* Statistical Modelling and Inference for Next-Generation Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2019,07/08/2021
* Lily Wang,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2021
* USD 165,269.00

With the rapid growth of modern technology, many large-scale imaging studies
have been or are being conducted to collect massive datasets with large volumes
of imaging data, thus boosting the investigation of "next-generation functional
data". These enormous collections of imaging data contain interesting
information and valuable knowledge, which has raised the demand for further
advancement in functional data analytic approaches. Although functional data
analysis (FDA) has gained widespread popularity in recent years, enhancing the
capability of next-generation FDA remains a long-standing challenge. This
research targets integrating state-of-the-art statistical modeling devices with
modern computational and inferential techniques to develop a set of flexible and
intelligent statistical tools to enable learning and discovery from next-
generation functional data. The efficacy of the tools developed in this research
will be tested by neuroimaging studies. The proposed methods and theory are also
applicable to a broader range of fields that require modeling and analysis of
images and other complex data types collected over space and/or time, such as
geography, environmental science and remote sensing studies. The graduate
student support will be used for day-to-day research activities, including parts
of the theory/methodology developments and data analysis.

This research will enrich the methods for dealing with functional data observed
from complex data objects (high-dimensional, correlated images or shapes), which
commonly arise in imaging studies, such as, health/medical imaging or remote
sensing imaging. The PI aims to address some challenging research problems in
analyzing next-generation functional data by: (1) innovating a statistically
sound framework to extract useful information from large-scale longitudinal
imaging studies; (2) developing flexible and intelligent statistical models to
delineate the association between massive imaging data and covariates of
interest and to characterize and visualize the spatial variability of the
imaging data; and (3) developing efficient, scalable algorithms with high-
performance statistical software packages to meet the challenges posed by
dynamic imaging studies. In particular, the proposed research involves four
projects. Project 1 provides a unifying approach to characterize the varying
association between imaging responses with a set of explanatory variables.
Project 2 focuses on the interface between high-dimensional and next-generation
functional data to address several fundamental bottlenecks in large-scale
imaging genetics studies. Projects 3 and 4 deal with longitudinal/dynamic
imaging studies, and a comprehensive functional regression framework to analyze
repeated functional responses from these studies will be developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
