
* 1916787
* CAREER: Scalable methods for discovering multivariate dependencies in high dimensional data.
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 08/28/2017,09/14/2022
* Balakanapathy Rajaratnam,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 293,153.00

This proposal aims to develop principled methods for discovering multivariate
dependencies which cater to ultra high dimensional settings. A common theme that
unites the proposed methods is scalability and identification of their
limitations. A popular approach to identifying sparse inverse covariance
matrices is through penalized likelihood methods. We propose a novel approach
for solving the penalized Gaussian log-likelihood that is faster than its
competitors by many orders of magnitude. The second research component in the
proposal investigates the statistical properties of thresholded matrices in
finite samples, with a view to obtaining a positive definite covariance
estimation method which is highly scalable. The third research aspect of the
project investigates quantifying the variability and uncertainty of estimated
graphical network models. A methodology that takes advantage of a convex pseudo-
likelihood formulation of the graphical model selection problem is introduced.
This allows for the development of a highly scalable uncertainty quantification
method with theoretical safeguards. The fourth research aspect of the project
examines the use of the methodology proposed in the previous three sub-
components to an application in the area of climate change, where high
dimensional covariance estimation is required. The proposal also has a
significant teaching and outreach component which aims to introduce statistics
to aspiring young scientists at various stages of their undergraduate and
graduate studies.

The availability of high-throughput data from various applications, including
genomics, environmental sciences and others, has created an urgent need for
methodology and tools for analyzing high dimensional data. Extracting and making
sense of the many complex relationships and multivariate dependencies in the
data and developing principled inferential procedures is one of the major
challenges facing statisticians and data scientists. The theoretical and
methodological work proposed in this project is motivated by applications and
interdisciplinary collaborations in fields as diverse as the earth and
environmental sciences, genomics and cancer research, and the social sciences.
In genomics for instance, one is often interested to know how various genes are
associated, and how these associations differ between an experimental (diseased)
and control group. Gene regulatory networks also serve as important tools to
study the evolutions of diseases. In the context of the climate change debate,
modeling temperature at different points on the globe requires parsimonious
modeling of the way in which these variables are related. Modeling correlations
also arises naturally in material sciences and engineering where one is
interested in seeing how different atomic particles interact when new materials
are produced. Hence the proposed project for estimating correlations in very
high dimensional settings will have widespread applications, since understanding
associations/relationships between many variables is an endeavor that is common
to many scientific disciplines. The proposed work, though firmly rooted in the
statistical sciences, is very much interdisciplinary, and involves
collaborations and partnerships between statisticians/data scientists and
biomedical scientists, engineers and earth scientists.
