
* 1916371
* Prior Calibration and Algorithmic Guarantees under Parameter Restrictions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2019,08/15/2019
* Debdeep Pati,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 107,000.00

Statistical learning of many real systems can be significantly enhanced by
harnessing and translating domain knowledge into meaningful parameter
restrictions. With the advent of high throughput datasets, such restrictions are
often present on high-dimensional parameter spaces thereby complicating
inference. This research aims to develop novel statistical methods and
computational algorithms for such problems drawing motivation from a number of
real applications. Working within a nonparametric Bayes framework, the first
part of the research project lays emphasis on the importance of calibrating
prior distributions in these constrained problems and theoretically quantifying
the impact of the constraints on parameter learning. The second part aims to
develop efficient Markov Chain Monte Carlo and variational algorithms and
analyze their convergence behaviors for the said problems. The PIs will also
propose undergraduate courses that will focus on the modeling and applied
components of Bayesian methods. When teaching the courses, the PIs will use
daily life as well as scientific examples across different disciplines to
inspire students' learning. The Activity-Based Learning (ABL) courses aim to
enrich students' academic experience and learning outcomes by connecting theory
with practice and concepts with methods, using data & insights obtained through
engagement with the larger world.

The research project is motivated by statistical and computing challenges posed
by a number of real scientific applications where various complex restrictions
are posed on key parameters, necessitating novel statistical methods and
associated computational algorithms. Operating in a Bayesian paradigm which
enables incorporation of various constraints in a principled framework and
provides readily available uncertainty estimates often sought after in
scientific applications, a major emphasis will be laid on calibration of prior
distributions under these constrained spaces. Examples will be provided where
seemingly innocuous prior choices routinely used in practice can lead to biased
inferences in certain specific situations. A rigorous theoretical understanding
of such phenomenon will be provided along with development of alternative
default priors on these constrained spaces. The methodological and theoretical
developments will be accompanied by efficient computational algorithms using
novel approximation techniques in the context of Markov chain Monte Carlo and
variational algorithms that meet the scalability demanded by the specific
applications and beyond. The algorithm development will be paralleled by novel
convergence analysis, bridging ideas between the optimization and sampling
literature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
