
* 1916339
* Sensitivity Analysis for Informative Missingness with Semiparametric Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2019,08/06/2019
* David Todem,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Missing data are common in almost all empirical research. Examples abound in
epidemiologic studies, clinical trials, social science studies (for example
sample surveys) and other substantive investigations of scientific inquiry. With
incomplete data, a long-standing question in statistical research concerns how
to conduct unbiased and reliable inferences, especially when the missingness
process depends on the unobserved data. This question has become particularly
relevant in this era of big data, where empirical data, albeit massive, may be
subject to a selective nonresponse. Motivated by practical problems in medical
imaging data, functional and longitudinal data, this research project will
develop new methods and practical tools for handling incomplete data, focusing
on sensitivity analysis. Results obtained from this research will have
significant impacts on sensitivity analysis methods for nonrandom missing data
under semiparametric estimation and inference.

With recent technological advances in this era of big data, many missing data
models arising in various substantive applications involve infinite-dimensional
parameters that are only identifiable on the grounds of unverifiable assumptions
about the data generating process. A popular approach for addressing
identifiability concerns, at least in the context of finite-dimensional
parameter settings, has been to impose some structural constraints on the model
upon which the parameters of primary interest are presumed identified.
Inferences are then conducted within the framework of a sensitivity analysis to
accommodate uncertainties resulting from these untestable restrictions. Despite
its popularity, this approach has not been systematically studied when the
working population model involves a nonparametric component in addition to the
parametric component. This project proposes to fill this gap by formalizing
inferences via rigorous sensitivity analyses when there are identifiability
concerns under semiparametric estimation and inference. Unlike in finite-
dimensional parametric models, conducting such analyses is not trivial owing to
the complexity of the theoretical arguments and the computational burden. The
goal of this project is to further our understanding of the theory that embeds
inference in non- and weakly-identified semiparametric models arising in missing
data problems within the framework of a sensitivity analysis. Conducting a
sensitivity analysis under semiparametric formulations is technically not
trivial owing to the inferential strategy posing substantial challenges beyond
those encountered with finite-dimensional parametric models. In this project,
asymptotic expansions, resampling techniques including the bootstrap, related
techniques from empirical processes and computer-aided simulations will be
employed to study the central theoretical properties and the finite sample
performance of the proposed procedures. The foundational nature of the proposal
in establishing the connection between the empirical process theory and
sensitivity analysis is transformative. This connection within the class of
semiparametric models arising in both classical and modern statistics will be
explored and studied. A further part of the intellectual merit lies in its
interdisciplinary approach with the transfer of ideas between high level
computing, empirical process techniques, and subject matter science informing
the model describing complex systems with many parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
