
* 1916376
* A Unified Multi-Stage Approach to Generalized Sequential Decision Making Problems with Covariates
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2019,06/18/2021
* Wei Qian,DE,University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 165,781.00

Sequential decision making problems are commonly encountered optimization tasks
with important modern applications. With rapid advances in data-driven
technology, the diverse application examples include online service
recommendation for smart phone users, intelligent implementation of intervention
plans for medical service, automated financial service processing, and many
others. Generally, faced with multiple decision arms, a service provider needs
to choose one to be delivered for each upcoming service user, and targets to
maximize the overall reward and benefits for all these service users.
Furthermore, in this Big Data era, individual user covariates and metrics are
often accessible to service providers, which holds great promise in personalized
(mobile, medical, or business) service decision making to enhance user reward
outcomes. This project will significantly advance the methods and theory for the
sequential decision making problems with covariates, and address important
questions that are also of interests to multiple statistics-related fields such
as computer science, operations research, business analytics, health sciences,
and broader machine learning communities. The promising use of personalized
service will be promoted through close interdisciplinary collaborations with
business and medical research communities. The graduate student supported by
this grant will help with statistical theory, programming, and data analytics.

Under both parametric and nonparametric frameworks, a unified multi-stage
approach will be developed to optimally solve a series of generalized sequential
decision making problem settings formulated as multi-armed stochastic bandit
problems with covariates. In particular, the investigators aim to (1) develop a
new algorithm to handle high-dimensional user covariates under assumptions much
relaxed from existing work while improving performance; with integration of a
class of high-dimensional regression methods and new technical tools for
non-i.i.d. samples inherited from the algorithm, establish rigorous finite-time
regret analysis and useful statistical properties; (2) propose a new
nonparametric framework as the censored bandit problem with covariates and show
optimal cumulative regret and flexible use with possibly censored reward
response and non-linear decision boundary; (3) study a class of high-dimensional
dimension reduction methods to mitigate curse of dimensionality issues in the
nonparametric regression settings and significantly extend the use of classical
nonparametric methods in high dimensional problems. Both theoretical and
empirical studies to incorporate complex covariate structures inspired from
business and medical research questions for decision making will create valuable
training and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The
graduate student supported by this grant will help with statistical theory,
programming and data analytics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
