
* 1916161
* RUI: Partially Observed Curves, and Big-Data Virtual Bootstrap
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Majid Mojirsheibani,CA,The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,975.00

Many real data sets in scientific disciplines, such as biomedical, engineering,
and social sciences, contain missing, censored, or partially observed values,
and this can make the task of statistical estimation and inference significantly
more complicated. Part of this research project focuses on the development of
new flexible statistical methods to perform accurate prediction and inference in
the presence of incomplete and missing data. Here, the data could be high-
dimensional as well as functional, where each data value can be a curve. In
another part of this research project, the PI considers the development of new
efficient computer-intensive methods to deal with Big-data scenarios, where the
data size may be too large to invoke classical approaches. Big-data has been one
of the current research frontiers in recent years and there has been a growing
interest in Big-data-driven decision-making procedures in both academia and the
industry. There are still many computational and theoretical challenges in this
area that require new methodologies. The PI's new approaches will solve a number
of important statistical problems at the intersection of machine learning and
statistical inference.

The research deals with three broad classes of problems related to prediction
and inference in some nonstandard setups. These include the problem of
functional classification when the covariate curves may be unobservable on some
subsets of their domain. However, unlike some of the earlier results in the
literature, the PI's approach does not impose any missing-at-random (MAR) type
assumptions on the mechanisms that cause the absence or censoring of
information. The approach allows for incomplete covariate to appear in the new
unclassified curves as well as in the data. Given the observed covariate
fragments, the aim is to construct strongly consistent nonparametric classifiers
based on local-averaging methods. The second class of problems deals with
uniform asymptotics for kernel regression estimators in the presence of missing
response variables. This is generally acknowledged to be a difficult problem.
The limiting distribution of the maximal deviation of such estimators can be
used to construct asymptotically correct uniform confidence bands, or to perform
goodness-of-fit tests, for an unknown regression function. Here, the PI will
consider both MAR and non-ignorable missing response assumptions. The third set
of problems focuses on the development of new weighted bootstrap methods for
Big-data scenarios. The PI's approach aims at reducing the computational burden
associated with the repeated sampling of Big-data, while still retaining the
benefits of bootstrap methodology. The developed methods will be used to better
approximate the sampling distribution of kernel and deconvolution density
estimators, as well as their important functionals (such as sup- and Lp-norms),
in the Big-data scenario.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
