
* 1916467
* Statistical Design, Sampling, and Analysis for Large Scale Experiments
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,11/03/2021
* Lulu Kang,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 129,450.00

In the big data paradigm, even the controlled experiments can become large-
scale, in the sense that the sample size is massive, and the dimension of the
input variables is high. Such "big data" problem challenges many statistical
approaches and significantly increases the amount of computation in estimation
and inference. In this project, the PI focuses on specific instances of large-
scale experiments and develops a set of novel theories and methodologies on
experimental design, sampling, and analysis. The research has two major parts.
In Part 1, the PI focuses on the type of experiments that contains a large
dimension of covariate variables. For example, in a clinical trial, the
covariates can be patients' rich medical history. How should the treatment
settings be assigned to each patient? The PI provides the answer through a
general experimental design framework so that the treatment effects are
estimated accurately despite the influence of the covariates. In Part 2, the PI
focuses on the Gaussian Process (GP) regression, one of the most popular
statistical learning tools. The computation required is prohibitive for
analyzing large-scale experiments such as the climate model simulations. The PI
develops a dimension reduction framework and an active learning method that
significantly improves the efficiency and accuracy of the GP model.

Three major methodologies are considered. In Parts 1-3, the PI introduces a new
discrepancy-based design to achieve covariate balance for experiments with a
large dimension of covariates. The discrepancy criterion also has appealing
theoretical properties that lead to a more accurate estimation of the parameters
including both treatment effects and covariates' effects. Optimal design
algorithms are developed for both offline and online experiments. In Part 4, the
PI develops a novel dimension reduction method that finds the optimal convex
combination of low-dimension kernel functions for the GP model. It is shown that
the proposed method is a significantly less computational and more accurate
approximation of certain types of underlying functions. In Part 5, an active
learning method based on the generalized Cook's Distance is developed for the GP
regression. It is more efficient than the standard random sampling method. The
research is novel in ideas, rigorous in theories, and useful in practice, and
will open new directions in the statistical design and analysis of experiments
area. The PI has a detailed education plan to develop new course modules,
tutorials, and workshops based on the research products from this project. The
research outcomes are readily applicable to a variety of scientific,
engineering, medicine and other fields where large-scale data collection and
analysis are demanded.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
