
* 1921366
* Scientific Computing Meets Machine Learning and Life Sciences
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, STATISTICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,09/07/2021
* Chunmei Wang,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,500.00

The workshop "Scientific Computing meets Machine Learning and Life Sciences"
will be held on the campus of Texas Tech University in Lubbock, TX, from October
7 through October 9, 2019. This workshop will bring together leading experts and
early career researchers from mathematics, statistics, computer science, machine
learning, data sciences, and life sciences to report on cutting-edge and state-
of-the-art computational algorithms in scientific computing and to identify
computational and statistical challenges and open problems in machine learning
and the life sciences. In addition, the workshop will provide a forum for an
international and diverse group of researchers to foster communication, to
facilitate new collaborative interactions, and to initiate joint research
projects that will address the open and emerging issues and the computational
and statistical challenges posed in machine learning and the life sciences. The
three-day workshop will consist of presentations, posters, and group discussions
that will stimulate an intensive exchange of ideas and foster fruitful
interactions. This award supports the attendance of both researchers and
graduate students, with priority given to graduate students, postdoctoral
scholars, early career investigators, members of under-represented groups, and
researchers who do not have other federal support.

Scientific computing is an increasingly important tool in many areas of science
and engineering, such as biomedical imaging, genomics, proteomics, phylogeny,
computer vision, and precision medicine, allowing biological data and systems to
be explored that are not amenable to theoretical or experimental investigations.
Machine learning is a method of data analysis that automates analytical model
building. It is a branch of artificial intelligence based on the idea that
systems can learn from data, identify patterns, and make decisions with minimal
human intervention. The advent of the big data era pushed machine learning to
the forefront and has spurred broad interests in machine learning in recent
years. The field of life sciences has advanced through a synergistic interplay
between deep understanding of biology and mathematical techniques, especially
from computational mathematics, probability, and statistics. Still, biologists
are overwhelmed by the amount of data being generated and the new methods
required for data-management. Quantitative theories are needed to help interpret
and to contextualize observations. A variety of new challenges in scientific
computing for machine learning have emerged in recent years that are related to
the life sciences, such as developing predictive models for disorder detection,
drug repurposing, toxicity prediction, electronic health record analysis,
language translation, etc. These issues and many other open problems will be
discussed among the diverse group of scientists participating in the workshop.
More information is available at http://www.math.ttu.edu/scmlls2019/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
