
* 1945667
* CAREER: High-Dimensional Statistical Models for Unsupervised Learning
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2020,07/07/2022
* Arash Amini,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 237,576.00

The growing awareness of the importance of data and data analysis, coupled with
the unprecedented growth in the amount of data in recent years, has led to
concerted efforts by researchers in the fields now collectively referred to as
data sciences, to develop new models capable of handling big complex datasets.
The vast majority of the available data is unlabeled, which makes the modeling
problem more challenging. This project will advance the field of modeling big
complex unlabeled data. The focus will be on learning from network data as well
as learning dependency structures from regular data. Some of the concrete
problems investigated are: What can an epidemic spreading over a network tell us
about the structure of the network and the origin of the epidemic? What can the
structure of the network tell us about the latent features of the nodes, for
example, their grouping, or community in the case of social networks? Are there
more refined structures in real networks beyond simple grouping or community
structure? Can we learn complex networks from regular data that tell us about
the nature of the dependency among the underlying variables (for example, what
variables are the causes of a given variable)? How well do these often complex
models fit the real data? Advancing on these questions has a direct impact on
many scientific domains dealing with data. For example, genomics and
computational biology, neuroscience, epidemiology, network security, social
sciences and marketing, all benefit from advances in network analysis. Advances
in dependency structure learning can improve causal inference procedures with
impact on all scientific fields. This project on network epidemics has the
potential to be transformative with immediate applications to the public health
domain.

This project advances the state-of-the art in inferring complex relations from
data in an unsupervised fashion. As a result, network inference and graphical
modeling will play prominent roles in our approach. We will consider four main
tasks: 1) Developing goodness-of-fit tests for structured network models, in
particular those used in community detection and clustering. Despite advances in
network modeling, there are concerns that current models are not capturing the
complexity of real networks. A first step toward realistic network modeling is
developing tools for assessing how well the models fit. 2) Advancing the state-
of-the-art in modeling complex networks, presenting ideas on capturing self-
similarity in real networks as well as hierarchical statistical models for
multilayer networks. 3) Advancing inference based on network dynamics: Many
networks are accompanied by dynamics governed by the network structure, e.g.,
the spread of rumors and diseases. We often observe the result of the dynamics
(who gets infected over time) and would like to make inference about the origin
of the dynamic or the structure of the underlying network. We will address the
challenges in dealing with these questions in real networks where the presence
of many cycles and incomplete information about the dynamic pose serious
difficulties. 4) Advancing inference of high-dimensional dependency structures:
Characterizing dependencies (correlation, causation, etc.) among a collection of
random variables is a fundamental task of statistical analysis. The principal
investigator will explore learning high-dimensional directed graphical models
from data that are suitable for causal interpretations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
