
* 1951474
* A Statistical Learning Framework for Phylogenetic Inference: Information, Uncertainty, and Geometry
* DMS,STATISTICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2020,07/20/2020
* Vu Dinh,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 219,573.00

Phylogenetics, the study of the evolutionary relationships among individuals or
groups of organisms from molecular sequence data, is a dominant theme in
biological research. In the last few decades, the explosion in the amount of
available data for phylogenetic inference has offered great opportunities to
further our understanding of various biological processes. At the same time,
they also move phylogenetics to a new learning regime, where traditional
theories can no longer guide developments and interpretations of phylogenetic
algorithms. The main goals of this research are to improve our understanding of
the central concepts of phylogenetics through the viewpoints of statistical
learning and information theory and to provide essential tools for phylogenetic
analyses in this new learning setting. By providing a framework to design,
analyze and improve phylogenetic estimators, the research will greatly extend
the set of problems for which reliable analyses can be obtained. Most notably,
our research in the setting when the number of species increases is especially
amenable to the biology of small evolving units, including studies of viruses
and antibody-making B-cells. The education component of this study involves
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students with independent research in
phylogenetics and will produce various demonstrations, tutorials and statistical
packages for phylogenetic inference.

The proposed research lays out the foundation for explicit quantification of
phylogenetic information and uncertainty, with a focus on the setting where
sequence data are continually being generated and analyzed. This approach
enables the use of local phylogenetic methods as a means to analyze likelihood-
based methods and helps investigate systematic ways to stabilize uncertainty
while retaining essential information. Two analytical tools to construct and
analyze phylogenetic methods in non-asymptotic settings will be developed: a new
class of concentration inequalities for evolutionary-related random variables
and a Taylor-like local-to-global expansion of phylogenetic likelihood on the
space of phylogenetic trees. These newly derived tools will be used to study
several important inference problems, including species tree/supertree
reconstruction and parameter estimation in viral phylogenetics and trait
evolution. The research activities will provide important insights into the
influences of phylogenetic information and uncertainty on the stability of a
phylogenetic estimate.

This award is co-funded with the Statistics program and the Life Science Venture
Fund in DMS.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
