
* 1952306
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Quantile-Based Modeling for Large-Scale Heterogeneous Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2020,03/27/2020
* Kengo Kato,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The rapid development of technology has led to the tremendous growth of large-
scale heterogeneous data in science, economics, engineering, healthcare, and
many other disciplines. For example, in a modern health information system,
electronic health records routinely collect a large amount of information on
many patients from heterogeneous populations across different disease
categories. Such data provide unique opportunities to understand the association
between features and outcomes across different subpopulations. Existing
approaches have not fully addressed the formidable computational and statistical
challenges. To tap into the true potential of information-rich data, this
project will develop a new computational and statistical paradigm and solid
theoretical foundation for analyzing large-scale heterogeneous data. In addition
the project will also provide research training opportunities for graduate
students. The project will build a unified, quantile-modeling based framework
with an overarching goal of achieving effectiveness and reliability in analyzing
heterogeneous data, especially when both the number of potential explanatory
variables and the sample size are large. The specific goals are (1) to develop
resampling-based inference for large-scale heterogeneous data; (2) to develop
Bayesian algorithms and scalable and interpretable structure-aware approach for
better inference; (3) to develop quantile-optimal decision rule estimation and
inference with many covariates; (4) to develop novel estimation and inference
procedure for large-scale quantile regression under censoring. The project will
address some of the key barriers in scalability to data size and dimensionality,
exploration of heterogeneity and structures, need for robustness, and the
ability to make use of incomplete observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
