
* 1952386
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Generative Learning on Unstructured Data with Applications to Natural Language Processing and Hyperlink Prediction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,04/02/2020
* Wing Hung Wong,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This project addresses the pressing needs of analyzing ?big? unstructured data
and tackles some artificial intelligence questions from the statistical
perspective, which requires the focused and synergistic e?orts of a
collaborative team. Specifically, the project develops generative models for
statistical learning and leverages dependence relations modeled by graphical
models in hyperlink prediction, which are applicable to topic sentence
generation and protein structure identification. It will lead to a substantial
improvement in the accuracy of generative learning based on numerical
embeddings, particularly in topic sentence generation and hyperlink prediction.
The integrated program of research and education will have significant impacts
on machine learning and data science, social and political sciences, and
biomedical and genomic research, among others. The project requires extensive
algorithm and software development for natural language processing and
multimedia data integration. The PIs, their postdocs, and students will develop
innovative computational algorithms and software for the analysis of large-scale
unstructured complex data. The advanced computational tools will be disseminated
to facilitate technology transfer.

The project will address some fundamental issues in two important areas of
unstructured data analysis in machine learning and intelligence. In particular,
the proposed research will develop a statistical framework for generative
learning, which is primarily motivated by applications for unstructured data,
namely topic sentence generation and high-order hyperlink prediction. The
research will develop powerful generative methods for generating instances or
examples to describe and interpret the corresponding learning model. Moreover,
it will develop network models for modeling high-order interactions and
relations of units by identifying hidden structures in networks. It will proceed
in two areas: (1) instance generation and topic sentence generation; (2)
hyperlink prediction for multiway relations in hypergraphs. In the first area,
instance generation, particularly sentence generation, will be performed
collaboratively with numerical embeddings in categorization and regression. In
the second area, hyperlinks will be predicted based on observed pairwise as well
as unobserved high-order relations, characterized by graphical models with
hidden structures. Special effort will be devoted to inverse learning, the
integration of data from multiple sources, and extracting latent structures of
networks. Finally, the research will develop computational tools and design
practical methods that have desirable statistical properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
