
* 2001433
* CAREER: Hierarchical Models for Spatial Extremes
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2019,12/12/2022
* Benjamin Shaby,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 429,135.00

Rare events can have crippling effects on economies, infrastructure, and human
health and well being. But in order to make sound decisions, understanding how
large the most severe events are likely to be is imperative. The PI will focus
on developing statistical tools for understanding the spatial structure of the
most extreme events. These new tools will improve on existing models because
they will be both more realistic and more computationally tractable. The PI will
also apply these tools to help scientists and policymakers study risks posed by
severe environmental phenomena like inland floods, wildfires, and coastal storm
surges. Furthermore, the PI will organize workshops to foster closer integration
of statistical and Earth science research, as well as develop graduate courses
and a textbook focused on modern statistical methods for Earth science.

The PI will develop stochastic models for extreme events in space that are 1)
flexible enough to transition across different classes of extremal dependence,
and 2) permit inference through likelihood functions that can be computed for
large datasets. It will accomplish these modeling goals by representing
stochastic dependence relationships conditionally, which will induce desirable
tail dependence properties and allow efficient inference through Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC). The first research component will develop sub-asymptotic
models for spatial extremes using max-infinitely divisible (max-id) processes, a
generalization of the limiting max-stable class of processes, based on a
conditional representation. The second research component will develop sub-
asymptotic spatial models for extremes based on scale mixtures of spatial
Gaussian processes. The PI will conduct closely interwoven computational
development and theoretical explication of the joint tail dependence that the
proposed hierarchically specified max-id and scale mixture processes induce.
Finally, the PI will apply these models to problems of high societal impact,
such as extreme precipitation risk, wildfire susceptibility, and coastal storm
surge exposure. The PI will enhance connections between extreme value
statisticians and communities of climate and atmospheric scientists, mitigation
researchers, and stakeholders, through 1) biannual international workshops on
weather and climate extremes, 2) a Ph.D. level course in spatial statistics
which will include new advances and applications of spatial extremes, and 3)
writing the textbook Modern Statistics for Earth Scientists. The PI also will
add modules on extremes to Penn State's Sustainable Climate Risk Management
(SCRiM) summer school, and contribute to SCRiM's electronic resources and
interactive teaching materials for educators, decision makers, underrepresented
groups, and the general public. The PI will strengthen existing collaborations
with government agencies which are responsible for communicating and mitigating
risk to the public posed by extremal environment phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
