
* 2006475
* Higher Order Asymptotics for Some Nonstandard Problems in Time Series and in High Dimensions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2019,11/14/2019
* Soumendra Lahiri,MO,Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 92,407.00

Correlated and high dimensional data appear routinely in many areas of sciences,
including atmospheric sciences, finance, and molecular genetics, as well as in
an ever increasing number of everyday activities such as social networking.
While a vast amount of data are being generated and are available for analyses,
traditional methods often fail to elicit information in such applications. This
research project has two major goals. First, it seeks to develop new
mathematical tools for analyzing a recent complex statistical approach for
correlated data that has been known to produce astonishingly accurate results in
empirical studies, but lacks any theoretical justification. It is hoped that the
new theoretical tool will lead to further refinements of existing statistical
methodology for correlated data. The second part of the project is concerned
with complex inferential issues for high dimensional data where the number of
unknown parameters far exceeds the sample size, such as determining the role of
a few important genes among a collection of several thousand genes from data on
a few hundred patients. The project seeks to develop theoretical and
methodological statistical tools to enable researchers to address important
inference questions without stringent model assumptions.

The project aims to develop some critical theoretical tools and nonparametric
statistical methodology for the analysis of time series and high dimensional
data. Specifically, this project will focus on (i) developing asymptotic
expansion results for the "fixed-b" asymptotic approach in time series that has
shown significant improvement over traditional methods in several empirical
studies but with very little theoretical underpinning; (ii) investigating higher
order properties of some general classes of statistical tests (e.g., Wald tests)
and of some more recently proposed nonstandard empirical likelihood tests, both
under the "fixed-b" formulation; (iii) developing new pivotal quantities for
block bootstrap in time series that nearly match the accuracy of bootstrap under
independence; (iv) developing asymptotic expansion results in high dimensions
under sparsity by exploiting some novel tools from approximation theory and
Banach space theory; (v) applying the asymptotic expansion results from (iv) to
investigate the "phase transition" phenomenon in asymptotic properties of
statistical methods in high dimensions, and (vi) investigating properties of
resampling methods for post-variable selection inference in high dimensions.
