
* 2012448
* Collaborative Proposal: Models and Methods for High Quantiles in Risk Quantification and Management
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2020,07/27/2020
* Liang Peng,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 80,000.00

In recent years, vulnerabilities in financial markets, economies, and public
health have posed increasingly severe risks to society. For monitoring natural
disasters and forecasting epidemics, financial institutions and governmental
organizations must invest in risk intelligence to clearly define, understand,
measure, quantify, and manage their tolerance for and exposure to risk. By
employing rigorous and robust analytics to measure, quantify, and forecast risk,
business leaders and regulators can rely less on intuition and more on
systematic methodologies to manage risk well and make sound policy decisions.
This project will develop improved and powerful analytic tools for applied
researchers, regulators, and practitioners to conduct risk assessment. These
tools and techniques will have broad impacts in wide-ranging fields such as
economics, finance, and insurance. The project also intends to provide training
opportunities for graduate students and broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in statistics and actuarial science.

This research project focuses on the uncertainty quantification, back-test, and
sensitivity analysis for both conditional and unconditional risk measures
computed from mathematical models. This project develops a computationally
efficient two-step inference for an ARMA-GARCH model and fits parametric and
semi-parametric distribution family to residuals. The investigators will study
semi-supervised learning for risk analysis when other variables with a large
sample size are available. They also plan to validate residual-based bootstrap
methods for quantifying risk uncertainty and develop efficient ways for risk
forecasts and back-tests. The new methodologies combine some modern statistical
techniques such as extreme value theory for forecasting catastrophic risk,
weighted estimation for handling both infinite variance and persistent
volatility, and empirical likelihood method for efficient hypothesis testing.
These techniques are robust and applicable to various problems in risk
management and other research fields requiring uncertainty quantification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
