
* 2013486
* Structural Learning and Statistical Inference for Large-Scale Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2020,07/28/2020
* Chunming Zhang,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 119,998.00

This project aims at developing new structure learning and statistical inference
procedures for capturing some essential structures of large-scale data, emerging
from scientific studies in genetics, biology, neuroscience, finance, and
meteorology, among others. New tools for stochastic modeling, computational
algorithms, and statistical inference applied to multi-channel brain EEG
recordings, multi-subject fMRI and multiple neuron spike trains in neuroscience
research, and identifying structural changes in climate data and copy number
variation in genetics, will be developed. Outcomes of this study will help
scientists to efficiently analyze large-scale imaging, temporal and spatial
data, and thus will have broader impacts on our society through their direct
impacts on these applications to science, public health, and information
technology. Dissemination of these developments will enhance new knowledge
discoveries, and strengthen interdisciplinary collaborations. The research will
also be integrated with educational practice through designing either regular,
seminar or short courses on new statistical approaches for analyzing complex
data as well as benefitting the training and learning of undergraduate, graduate
students and underrepresented minorities.

This research work focuses on statistical learning of fundamentally distinct
types of structures, with the ultimate goal of better understanding of complex
systems. Motivated from inferring neural connectivity from the ensemble neural
spike train data, Project 1 will learn the directed acyclic graph structure in a
large Poisson network, underlying a wide array of multivariate point process
data. The related probabilistic mechanism will provide new insights into
understanding statistical properties of the estimators for graph parameters
relevant to mining the causal relation among neurons. Inspired by feature
extraction and source separation from multi-channel brain EEG recordings and
non-linear temporal signal processing, Project 2 will develop a class of non-
linear non-smooth combinations of structured component analysis (SCA) to extract
hidden component signals from observed mixed signals. The SCA developed will be
more broadly applicable in scientific studies. Motivated from identifying and
understanding structural changes in climate trends, and structural variation in
gene copy numbers associated with genetic diseases, Project 3 will develop a
novel two-step adaptive procedure of jump detection, for simultaneously
selecting the unknown number of jump points and detecting their locations in the
flexible non-parametric regression model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
