
* 2014951
* Semiparametric Adaptive Designs and Statistical Inference for Both the Mean and the Quantiles
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2020,10/25/2022
* Hongjian Zhu,TX,The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Adaptive design is an important and active research area driven by diverse
requirements of clinical trials. However, most adaptive randomization designs
either do not make good use of the available covariates or depend on unnecessary
model assumptions, so the current state of adaptive designs does not match the
data-rich environment. This project seeks to develop new theory and methodology
for adaptive designs to streamline clinical trials by efficiently incorporating
a vast amount of covariate information without model misspecification. The
success of the project will allow a large quantity of available data to be
utilized in adaptive designs, and trial participants to avoid unnecessary unsafe
exposure. The research will have broad impacts on general experimental designs
and their applications in fields such as product quality, food industry, energy
and architecture, and computer simulation models. The PI will integrate research
and education by promoting the adaptive designs among students, researchers,
physicians, and project managers through courses and presentations, involving
women and underrepresented minority students in research, and making
presentations at minority-serving institutions. The project will focus on three
main research directions. First, the PI plans to develop a new family of
semiparametric covariate-adjusted response-adaptive (CARA) designs as well as
analysis approaches that can achieve the objectives related to efficiency and
ethics and incorporate many covariates without model misspecification. Second,
in many fields, scientists are more interested in the tail quantiles than the
mean. In addition, quantile inference is often a secondary analysis in clinical
trials, allowing researchers and policymakers to detect the points along the
distribution that may be the most amenable to the new treatment. The PI plans to
develop a new family of semiparametric CARA designs and methods for quantile
inference. Third, there is an urgent need to reduce development costs and
shorten the time-to-market of new therapies. The PI plans to develop seamless
phase II/III CARA designs with sequential monitoring. Both hypothesis testing
and estimation will be investigated. Thus, the advantages of adaptive
randomization, adaptive seamless design, and sequential monitoring will be
combined in a single trial. Both asymptotic and finite-sample properties will be
explored, and guidance for clinical trials will be offered.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
