
* 2014626
* Models for Complex Functional and Object Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/09/2020
* Hans-Georg Mueller,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Big data are increasingly encountered across society and all of the sciences and
pose novel challenges for statistical analysis, due to their complexity and
size. Challenging data analysis tasks that motivate this research originate in
brain imaging, genomics, the social sciences and many other areas of current
interest. To make sense of such data and extract relevant information requires
principled statistical methodology that is suitable for the analysis of large
samples of complex data. Examples include networks or age-at-death distributions
for which common algebraic operations such as sums or differences are not
defined. In many instances such data objects may also be repeatedly observed
over time, and the quantification of their time dynamics is then of great
interest. For example, one might be interested to determine whether sudden
changes occur and where these are located in time. Statistical methodology will
be developed that addresses these data analytic needs, along with theory and
efficient computational implementations. This new methodology is expected to
lead to substantial new insights. For example, it will be possible to quantify
phenomena such as changes in temperature, mortality or income distributions over
calendar years, or changes in brain connectivity networks as a function of age,
which will aid in distinguishing normal and pathological brain aging. The new
methodology will also make it possible to detect differences between groups of
complex data, for example between the mortality distribution of countries,
including the identification of clusters. The project also provides research
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

The focus of this research is the development of statistical methods and theory
for random objects, i.e., metric space valued random variables, including
object-valued functional and longitudinal data. Due to the lack of Euclidean
structure, existing methods from high-dimensional and functional data analysis
are generally not applicable for metric-space valued random objects. This
motivates the development of novel approaches that address the challenge of a
lack of Euclidean structure. Major lines of inquiry will be regression and
change-point models for random objects on one hand and methods for trajectories
of random objects including complex functional data on the other. New regression
and change-point models to be studied include distributions as predictors;
regression models for point processes; inference and single index modeling for
Frechet regression; and change-point analysis for sequences of object data under
various scenarios. For object-valued functional data, an emphasis will be the
development of time warping models for random objects and of models for
longitudinal random objects in various spaces, including the case where the data
are only sparsely and irregularly observed in time. Tools and theory for
principled statistical analysis of random objects to be developed will rely on
empirical process theory for M estimators in metric spaces, U statistics and
related approaches. These developments will lead to the creation of a toolbox
suitable for data analysis of object data and associated freely available
software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
