
* 2014861
* Analyzing Dependent Extremes via Joint Quantile Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2020,06/20/2020
* Surya Tokdar,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,999.00

What is common between Hurricane Harvey and the Great Recession? Both are
examples of ordinary and loosely connected processes attaining extraordinary
levels in a synchronized manner. Accurately predicting the size and frequency of
synchronized extreme outcomes is crucial to robust risk management. But this
task remains a difficult challenge to data science that has been mostly built
around the notions of average behavior and independence. A case in point is
regression analyses where one studies how a group of outcomes are simultaneously
influenced by a common set of predictors. Current statistical methods can either
address inter-dependency between multiple outcomes, or model transitions from
ordinary to extraordinary levels of a single outcome. But nothing satisfactory
exists to handle both. This research fills this gap with new data analysis tools
based on quantile driven regression analysis. The new tools are specialized for
analyzing data recorded over space and time or within network clusters. They are
subjected to detailed mathematical scrutiny for accuracy and reliability.
Applications to finance and environmental sciences are carried out to assess the
usefulness of the new tools in scientific investigation and policy making. The
project integrates statistical research with software development and graduate
education.

Quantiles are simply percentiles expressed in terms of a level varying from zero
through one, as opposed to a percentage point. The quantiles of a variable give
direct access to its smooth transitions between ordinary and extraordinary
levels. In standard quantile regression, one estimates the effects of predictors
at any given quantile level of an outcome. Such estimation is easy to carry out
when observation units are mutually independent; there is no need of a detailed
probabilistic model for the predictor-outcome relation. But data with known
dependency structures present a far more complex challenge; accurate estimation
requires adjusting for intrinsic noise correlation between units in close
proximity. Such a task remains beyond the scope of ordinary quantile regression
methods due to their model-free nature and their focus on single quantiles in
isolation. In contrast, joint quantile regression makes this task feasible by
incorporating a full probabilistic model for the outcome and enabling a joint
estimation at all quantile levels at once. The research investigates the use of
copula modeling to address noise correlation in joint quantile regression,
focusing greatly on appropriate customization of the copula formulation for each
data type. A rigorous asymptotic analysis is carried out toward statistical
guarantees of the resulting tools. Quantitative and visualization-based
diagnostic tools will be developed for model assessment and selection. All tools
will be incorporated in the R package ?qrjoint? available through The
Comprehensive R Archive Network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
