
* 2014053
* Collaborative Research: Segmentation of Time Series via Self-Normalization
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2020,06/27/2022
* Zifeng Zhao,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,999.00

This project aims to develop new statistical methodology and theory for change-
point analysis of time series data. Change-point models have wide applications
in many scientific areas, including modeling the daily volatility of the U.S.
financial market, and the weekly growth rate of an infectious disease such as
coronavirus, among others. Compared with existing methodologies, this research
will provide inference for a flexible range of change point models, which will
remain valid under complex dependence relationships exhibited by real datasets.
The methodologies ensuing from the project will be disseminated to the relevant
scientific communities via publications, conference and seminar presentations,
and the development of open-source software. The Principal Investigators (PIs)
will jointly mentor a Ph.D. student and involve undergraduate students in the
research, and offer advanced topic courses to introduce the state-of-the-art
techniques in time series analysis.

Time series segmentation, also known as change-point estimation, is one of the
fundamental problems in statistics, where a time series is partitioned into
piecewise homogeneous segments such that each piece shares the same behavior.
There is a vast body of literature devoted to change-point estimation in
independent observations; however, robust methodology and rigorous theory that
can accommodate temporal dependence is still scarce. Motivated by the recent
success of the self-normalization (SN) method, which was developed by one of the
PIs for structural break testing and other inference problems in time series,
the PIs will advance the self-normalization technique to time series
segmentation. Specifically, the PIs will develop a systematic and unified SN-
based change-point estimation methodology and the associated theory for (i)
segmenting a piecewise stationary time series into homogeneous pieces so within
each piece a finite dimensional parameter is constant; (ii) segmenting a linear
trend model with stationary and weakly dependent errors into periods with
constant slope. The segmentation algorithms to be developed are broadly
applicable to fixed-dimensional time series data and can be further extended to
cover high-dimensional and locally stationary time series with proper
modification of the self-normalized test statistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
