
* 2015120
* Novel Inference Procedures for Non-Standard High-Dimensional Regression Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/20/2020
* Hui Zou,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,999.00

Statistical theory of hypothesis testing plays a fundamental role in virtually
all scientific studies. In the era of big data, high-dimensional data are
ubiquitous in many scientific fields such as natural sciences, social sciences,
medicine, and public health. Therefore, modern applications often involve
hypothesis testing under high dimensions, which calls for new statistical
inference theory. As regression is the most popular statistical analysis tool in
applications, some recent work has been focused on hypothesis testing in high
dimensional least squares regression. However, it is well-known that the
standard least squares regression model has severe limitations in real
applications. This research aims to develop new statistical inference theory for
more flexible high dimensional regression models.

This research focuses on the development of inference theory for several
important non-standard regression models under ultra-high dimensions.
Specifically, the PI will develop tests for testing linear hypotheses under
three models: high dimensional expectile regression, high dimensional
heteroscedastic regression, and robust high dimensional regression. Asymptotic
distributions of the test statistics will be established rigorously. The
theoretical study will fill important gaps in the high-dimensional statistics
literature. A unified efficient algorithm will be developed to tackle the
computational challenges. The research will provide principled tools for
studying expectile functions, for examining the heterogeneity in high
dimensional data and for performing robust inference. Research training
opportunities for graduate students will be provided.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
