
* 2015447
* Collaborative Research: Fine-Grained Statistical Inference in High Dimension: Actionable Information, Bias Reduction, and Optimality
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,04/22/2021
* Yuting Wei,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 108,170.00

Emerging data science applications require efficient extraction of actionable
insights from large and messy datasets. The number of relevant features often
overwhelms the volume of data that is available, which dramatically complicates
the statistical inference tasks and subsequent decision making. In the existing
statistical literature, most of theory aims at understanding the average or
global behavior of a statistical estimator in high dimensions. In many
applications, however, it is often the case that the goal is not to explore the
global behavior of a parameter estimator, but rather to perform inference and
reasoning on its local, yet important, operational properties. The techniques
and methods developed in the project will further advance the interplay between
a broad range of areas including high-dimensional statistics, harmonic analysis,
statistical physics, optimization, complex analysis, and statistical machine
learning. The project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.

This project pursues fine-grained inferential procedures and theory, aimed at
enlarging the uncertainty assessment toolbox for various low-complexity models
in high dimensions. Focusing on a few stylized problems, this research program
consists of four major thrusts: (1) construct optimal confidence intervals for
linear functionals of eigenvectors in low-rank matrix estimation; (2) design
fine-grained hypothesis testing procedures for sparse regression under general
designs; (3) develop entry-wise inference schemes for principal component
analysis with missing data; and (4) conduct reliable and adaptive statistical
eigen-analysis under minimal eigen-gaps. Emphasis is placed on algorithms that
are model-agnostic and fully adaptive to data heteroscedasticity. Addressing
these issues calls for the development of new statistical theory that enables
reliable inference for a broad class of local properties underlying the unknown
parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
