
* 2015250
* Development of Methodologies to Formalize the Informal Rules of Causal Inference from Observational Studies Using Evidence Factors and Modern Optimization
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,07/07/2022
* Bikram Karmakar,FL,University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 147,856.00

Observational studies are relatively inexpensive, but often flawed, substitutes
for randomized experiments to examine the causal effect of a treatment. An
observational study may be flawed because, before treatment, the observed
treated group may not have been comparable to the untreated group, which can
lead to a biased estimation of a treatment effect. As one example, observational
studies suggested hormone replacement therapy prevents heart attacks among
postmenopausal women, while randomized trials showed otherwise. Still, on
multiple occasions, observational studies have provided strong statistical
evidence to support implementation of an intervention, such as when
observational studies provided strong evidence that smoking causes lung cancer.
In recent years, observational studies have provided evidence that teenage
vaping has a serious effect on lung disease which has led to policy
interventions to curb teenage vaping. But the strength of observational study
evidence is judged largely by informal/semi-formal rules. For example, the
evidence is considered stronger when a similar treatment effect is seen across
many independently conducted studies. How the rules that are used is not
typically transparent during the assessment of the statistical evidence, and
thus, how cautious one should be about how solid the evidence is for a causal
claim is often not transparent. This project aims to make how strong the
evidence is from observational studies more transparent by developing
statistical methodologies to formalize some of the existing informal rules on
strengthening scientific evidence from observational studies. To increase their
accessibility, the PI, with help from a graduate student, will also incorporate,
through software, lessons and projects, these methods in courses taught to
graduate students from different empirical fields.

This project will develop several methods for expanding the scope of use of
evidence factors in observational study designs. An evidence factors analysis
builds statistically independent pieces of evidence (called evidence factors)
which, if vulnerable, are vulnerable differently to potential biases. The PI
will develop methodologies for evidence factors analysis in novel study designs,
such as event studies. The quality of a design and an analysis of a study will
be evaluated by statistical power and design sensitivity. The scope of evidence
factors is limited if considered only under existing study designs. This grant
has the long-term goal of developing new and improved observational study
designs which incorporate evidence factors analysis. Construction of these
designs typically requires solving NP-hard problems. For example, evidence
factors can be built in stratified designs, but creating such a design, while
controlling for many confounders, requires solving an NP-hard graph partitioning
problem. The PI will develop approximation algorithms to solve these design
problems using discrete and combinatorial optimization methods. These algorithms
will likely also appeal to the applied mathematics community. This project will
also develop evidence factors analysis for robust inference in composite studies
which combine, in one design and analysis, aspects of different studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
