
* 2015481
* Correlated Graphical Models for High-Dimensional Heterogeneous Data: Theory, Optimization, and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2020,07/28/2020
* Yuping Zhang,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This project is motivated by the pressing need for analyzing modern high-
dimensional heterogeneous data from multiple sources. Driven by high-throughput
biotechnologies, it is increasingly common to have multiple types of
measurements on the same set of subjects. Integration of heterogeneous data
types is the key to gaining fundamental knowledge on biological processes.
Complex characteristics of modern biological data also result in challenges for
data analysis and statistical modeling. This project will contribute to
theoretical and methodological development through novel graphical models
suitable for fusing correlated and mixed data from static and dynamic
conditions. These approaches have great potential to translate rich data into
meaningful knowledge. The new statistical methods and theories will also advance
modern statistical science. The resulting products of this project will provide
valuable software tools to scientific communities. This research will promote
curriculum development, student training, and educational outreach.

Multimodal data from different experimental platforms have different properties
and characteristics. In many systems, including biological processes, regulation
is modularized and temporally dynamic in nature. Common regulatory principles
exist in certain related biological conditions. This project will focus on the
development of new data integration methods and theories through novel
correlated graphical models from a frequentist inference perspective. The
methods will be based on exponential Markov random fields beyond the traditional
Gaussian assumption. The new methods will allow for network discovery for high-
dimensional heterogeneous data from multiple static and dynamic conditions. This
project also involves the development of efficient algorithms for complex
optimization problems incorporating the structure-inducing regularization
mechanism.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
