
* 2015489
* DMS-EPSRC: Change-Point Detection and Localization in High Dimensions: Theory and Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2020,08/04/2020
* Alessandro Rinaldo,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 280,000.00

Statistical change point analysis is concerned with identifying abrupt changes
in data when measurements are collected over time. A fundamental challenge is to
discriminate among changes corresponding to structural, but possibly subtle,
variations in the underlying data generative model from those that may simply be
due to random fluctuations. Change point models arise naturally in a variety of
scientific and industrial applications, including security monitoring,
neuroimaging, financial trading, ecological statistics, climate change, medical
monitoring, sensor networks, disease outbreak risk assessment, flu trend
analysis, genetics and many others. Though a host of well-established methods
for the statistical analysis of change point problems is available to
practitioners, the prevailing framework suffers from important limitations: (i)
it often relies on traditional modeling assumptions of limited expressive power
that are inadequate to capture the size and inherent complexity of modern
datasets and (ii) it is not directly applicable to non-standard data types, such
as networks or graph-structured signals. The broad goal of this project is to
develop novel theories, practicable methods, and software tools for a variety of
new change point settings to tackle complex, big data problems and advance the
practice of statistical inference for change-point analysis. In addition to its
scientific output, the project will bring together a diverse group of
researchers, some from underrepresented groups in Statistics. The project will
provide research training opportunities for graduate students.

The project includes three main research aims: (1) to derive statistically
optimal and computationally efficient procedures for detecting the presence and
estimating the positions of change points in various offline high-dimensional
statistical models, ranging from simple univariate mean change point models to
more complicated settings involving high-dimensional parameters, such covariance
covariances, regression models, dynamic single and multi-layered network models;
(2) to derive novel guarantees and methods for change point detection and
localization in graph-structured signals; and (3) to develop methods for optimal
sequential change point analysis in complex data streams.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
