
* 2015298
* Collaborative Research: Inference for Networks: Bridging the Gap between Metric Spaces and Graphs
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Tianxi Li,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Network data, representing interactions and relationships between units, has
become ubiquitous in many science disciplines and technology areas. Analyzing
such complex and structurally novel data requires new ideas and tools beyond the
scope of classical statistics. A sequence of methods will be developed for
several common statistical analyses involving network data, motivated by various
applied problems in cyber-security, social behavior studies, genetics, and
medical imaging. These methods can be used to identify the risk factors for the
reliability of a complex system, to infer social and peer effects on health-
related behaviors, to flexibly model the differential networks between genes,
and to infer neuron functionality from brain images. The results will be
disseminated through publications and presentations, but will also be
incorporated in teaching. The research will include projects suitable for
student participation at various levels, and undergraduate research training
will be emphasized. The codes will be provided through statistical packages
implemented in the programming language R for broader use.

The broad theme of the research is developing versatile and flexible network
analysis tools by connecting and extending mature statistical methods in metric
space to network data. Overall, the technical challenges in developing these
tools range from the lack of clear definitions for sampling units and sample
sizes, to the discrete and noisy nature of network observations. Addressing such
challenges requires extensions and combinations of tools from different research
areas, including random matrix theory, optimization algorithms, and statistical
inference. Collaborations between the PI and researchers in computer science,
social science, and medical sciences will provide opportunities to apply the
developed methods to real-world problems in these domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
