
* 2015411
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian and Semi-Bayesian Methods for Detecting Relationships in High Dimensions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2020,08/04/2020
* Jun Liu,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

In this big-data era, massive data sets are being generated routinely and we are
seeing a growing need for powerful, reliable, and interpretable statistical
learning tools to help understand these data. The main ideas and approaches in
this projectl focus on developing effective statistical learning tools to learn
about complex and heterogeneous structures, such as those changing in time or
varying among different groups of individuals, in high-dimensions. The
activities will have a significant impact on high dimensional Bayesian analysis
and modeling of nonlinear relationships. While most current efforts for high-
dimensional Bayesian analyses have been focused on linear models, this project
focuses on two ways of generalizing standard linear models to meet certain
practical challenges: one is a generalized form of mixture modeling, termed as
individualized variable selection, which enables each individual observation to
have its own set of dependent variables through the employment of neuronized
priors. Another extension is the Bayesian inference of index models that form a
mixture structure. The project will lead to useful tools (or customized
software) for discovering interpretable nonlinear and interactive patterns among
a large number of potential variables. Various aspects of statistical modeling,
design, and learning strategies integrated in our algorithms are broadly
applicable to problems involving signal discovery in complex systems and high-
dimensional data. The project will also provide both educational and
interdisciplinary research opportunities for graduate students, and will result
in software useful to biomedical researchers, economists, social scientists, and
many other practitioners.

In a vast number of regression problems, especially under high-dimensional
settings, the structure of the association between covariates in hand and the
target quantity of interest might be heterogeneous over observations, which
calls for effective methods to detect such non-trivial structures. Standard
procedures, including traditional variable selections, commonly overlook the
existence of interplays of these heterogeneous factors. This research project
aims to develop statistical procedures that identify the complicated
relationship between response Y and a set of covariates X in flexible and
computationally efficient ways. Project 1 focuses on Bayesian individualized
variable selection (BIVS), which generalizes standard linear regression models
to quantify heterogeneous effects among individual observations that differ in
their dependent variables with different magnitudes. The PIs will investigate
its theoretical properties, including model selection consistency and its
robustness when the model assumption is violated. Project 2 is devoted to the
development of an efficient Bayesian method to infer the semi-parametric
relationship between the response and covariates through general index models.
The PIs will explore its computational feasibility and theoretical properties
such as the posterior contraction rate on the estimation of the sufficient
dimension reduction space. Project 3 focuses on a fast tuning parameter
selection procedure by employing a generative process via neural networks. By
using this procedure, the cross-validation can be efficiently implemented for
general models, such as the BIVS and Bayesian index models, regularized variable
selection, and nonparametric function estimation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
