
* 2015259
* Collaborative Research: Transfer Learning for Large-Scale Inference: General Framework and Data-Driven Algorithms
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/18/2020
* T. Tony Cai,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 249,999.00

Transfer learning provides crucial techniques for utilizing data from related
studies that are conducted under different contexts or on diverse populations.
It is an important topic with a wide range of applications in integrative
genomics, neuroimaging, computer vision and signal processing. This research
work will provide new tools to scientific researchers who routinely collect and
analyze high dimensional and complex data across different sources and
platforms. This project aims to develop new analytical tools to improve
conventional methods by delivering more informative and interpretable scientific
findings. The developed transfer learning algorithms, which can reliably extract
and combine knowledge from diverse data types and across different studies, will
help address important issues from genomics applications. User-friendly software
packages will be developed and made publicly available. Scientific researchers
can use the tools to translate dispersed and heterogeneous data sources into new
knowledge and medical benefits. This will help improve the understanding of the
role of various genetic factors in complex diseases, and accelerate the
development of new medicines and treatments in a cost-effective way.

Transfer learning for large-scale inference aims to extract and transfer the
knowledge learned from related source domains to assist the simultaneous
inference of thousands or even millions of parameters in the target domain. We
aim to develop a general framework to gain understanding of the benefits and
caveats of transfer learning in a wide range of large-scale inference problems
including sparse estimation, false discovery rate analysis, sparse linear
discriminant analysis and high-dimensional regression. Our research addresses
two key issues in transfer learning: (a) What should be transferred? (b) How to
transfer and prevent negative learning? We aim to pursue three major research
goals. The first is to develop a class of computationally efficient and robust
transfer learning algorithms for high-dimensional sparse inference. The general
strategy is to first learning the local sparsity structure of the high-
dimensional object through auxiliary data and then apply the structural
knowledge to the target domain by adaptively placing differential weights or
setting varied thresholds on corresponding coordinates. The second is to
formalize a decision-theoretic framework for high-dimensional transfer learning
that is applicable across the sparse and non-sparse regimes. Along this
direction, we aim to develop a class of kernelized nonparametric empirical Bayes
methods for data-sharing shrinkage estimation and multiple testing. The third is
to address the urgent needs and new challenges arising from important genomics
applications using the newly developed methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
