
* 2015365
* Modeling and Inference for Dynamic Network Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/20/2020
* Harry Crane,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

The project will initiate a systematic study of statistical models for network
data and other complex data structures which commonly arise from interacting and
self-organizing processes such as protein folding, gene expression, neural
functioning, economic activity, and social behavior. A focus of the project is
to address novel challenges that cannot be handled by common approaches to
statistical modeling and inference, which often rely on assumptions of (i)
statistical regularity, (ii) short range dynamics driven by forces exogenous to
the data, and (iii) representability of the data as the aggregation of isolated
measurements taken on a representative sample of units. These assumptions are
often violated in complex data problems, which are characterized by (i) high
levels of interaction among different components of the data, (ii) dynamical
behaviors driven by endogenous feedback mechanisms, and (iii) partial or
complete irreducibility of the data structure. The project will produce new
methodologies, theoretical results, and conceptual insights for statistical
inference in these settings. Beyond substantive technical contributions, which
will have an impact across scientific domains, research from the project will be
widely disseminated to the general public through the PI's participation in
forums for communicating probability and statistics to interdisciplinary
audiences. The PI trains graduate students and runs a weekly seminar on the
Foundations of Probability and Statistics, with videos uploaded for open public
access at his website. In addition, the PI advocates strongly for peer review
reform and open source publication, and will publish all work from this project
for public peer review on Researchers.One, a non-profit publishing outlet aimed
at increasing the quality and accessibility of peer review across research
disciplines.

To achieve these aims the project will develop rigorous theory and robust
statistical methods for analyzing dynamic and complex network data structures.
Desired outcomes include new theory, models, methods, and concepts for network
analysis, a deeper understanding of the scope and limitations of statistical
tools for modern network analysis, and a general framework for modeling network
data that arises across scientific disciplines. Model development lies at the
core of the project, with a focus on extending recently proposed model classes
of edge and relationally exchangeable network models, rewiring models, and
graph-valued Levy process models to a flexible statistical framework for latent
space relational models and network-valued autoregressive and state space
models. From these models, the project will produce a theoretical framework as
well as a range of methodological tools for future developments in statistical
network analysis. The project will draw on concepts and techniques from a wide
range of topics including Bayesian nonparametrics, spatial statistics, time
series, probability theory, stochastic processes, and computing, as well as
mathematical concepts from graph theory, combinatorics, and algebra. The
research will, therefore, contribute substantially to disciplines across the
mathematical sciences, where network and complex data analysis have become
increasingly relevant for scientific research in proteomics, genomics,
economics, social science, finance, biology, computer science, and physics as
well as methodologically driven disciplines within statistics and related
fields, such as data science, artificial intelligence, and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
