
* 2015366
* Representation and Subspace Learning for Decentralized and Dependent Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Ziwei Zhu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,002.00

Learning concise and informative representations of high-dimensional data is a
precursor to the success of modern data analytics. However, recent years have
witnessed many non-standard data regimes that impose unprecedented challenges
for representation learning. The first scenario is that data are decentralized,
that is, they are scattered across different places across which the
communication is highly restricted. This is common for international companies
that collect data worldwide, but cannot aggregate them due to constraints on
network bandwidth or legal policies. The second scenario is that data exhibit
significant temporal dependence, as seen in stock prices, traffic flow, and
clinical trials. This project will develop novel statistical methods with
theoretical guarantees to handle these modern data regimes. It also aims to
train the next generation of data scientists under these important problem
setups.

The principal investigator (PI) will develop novel methods and theory for
subspace and representation learning for decentralized and dependent data. For
decentralized data, the PI plans to design and study a new methodological
framework for distributed estimation of a general latent variable model. This
framework requires only one round of communication of model parameters, adapts
to a wide range of complex latent variable models (including those based on deep
neural nets) and has been shown to yield superior numerical performance over
existing approaches. Another more specific setup that the PI will consider is
distributed estimation of singular spaces, with applications to spectral
clustering. For dependent data, the PI will focus on learning the top singular
space of a low-rank Markov transition kernel to perform state compression and
dimension reduction. The PI plans to solve the problem via maximizing the log-
likelihood with either nuclear-norm penalty or rank constraint. The statistical
rate of the resulting M-estimator will be explicitly derived, and new
optimization algorithms will be developed to compute these problems with
convergence guarantee.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
