
* 2015561
* Variational Inference for Complex Networks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/14/2020
* Yuguo Chen,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Large-scale complex networks are becoming increasingly common in a variety of
scientific disciplines, including social sciences, biological sciences, and
physical sciences. Such complex networks challenge the computational limit of
classical methods, making it infeasible to carry out statistical network
inference within a reasonable amount of time. This project will develop
efficient algorithms that are computationally feasible for large-scale complex
networks and have provable statistical guarantees on performance. The proposed
methods will be applied to social and biological network data, including brain
networks, and will be used for the study of disorders associated with hearing
loss, such as tinnitus. The proposed research is highly interdisciplinary and
provides an opportunity for involvement of graduate and undergraduate students
with a broad range of backgrounds and interests. The proposed methods will be
incorporated into relevant courses. Research results will be disseminated to the
scientific communities and all software developed in this research will be
freely distributed as open-source to the public.

The project will develop variational methods for complex networks, including
dynamic, multi-layer, and heterogeneous networks, and investigate theoretical
properties of the variational methods on these networks to provide provable
statistical guarantees on performance. The network models the PI studies include
latent space models for dynamic networks and dynamic multi-layer networks,
stochastic block models for multi-layer networks, various models for
heterogeneous networks, and other models for complex networks. The proposed
variational inference procedure makes it possible to handle large scale complex
network data. The theoretical properties the PI will investigate include
consistency of parameter estimation and community detection for variational
methods. The proposed methods will be applied to real network data from social
and natural sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
