
* 2015428
* Nonparametric Bayesian Methods for Joint Analysis of Recurrent Events and Survival Time
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2020,08/03/2020
* Ju Hee Lee,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 124,945.00

This research project will develop flexible statistical models for joint
analysis of recurrent events and survival time. In long-term, follow-up studies,
subjects may experience a recurrent event at multiple times, where the
observation of subject-specific recurrent events is terminated by end of the
study, or a terminal event such as death. Scientifically relevant problems
involving such data structures are prevalent in the biomedical sciences, as well
as in econometrics and engineering. A critical issue in analyzing such data is
that the history of the recurrent events and the risk of terminal event are
interrelated. It is thus important to jointly model the underlying stochastic
mechanisms, typically, in the presence of predictor variables that are expected
to affect the occurrence of recurrent events and the survival time. A key
objective of this project is to expand the inferential and predictive scope of
existing techniques for joint analysis of recurrent events and survival time by
developing novel statistical models that relax restrictive assumptions of state-
of-the-art methods. To facilitate use of the methods by researchers and
practitioners, publicly available software will be developed for implementing
several of the statistical models. The project will create educational and
research training opportunities for graduate students and seek to foster the
participation of women and underrepresented groups in the research.

This research project will develop general Bayesian modeling approaches for
joint analysis of recurrent events and survival time. The modeling framework
builds from Bayesian nonparametric mixtures of Erlang distributions for the
survival responses, with covariate effects accommodated more flexibly than
proportional hazard regression models. Different classes of joint models will be
formulated by combining the nonparametric survival regression modeling methods
with parametric models for the covariate-dependent recurrent event point process
intensities. The joint models will capture general dependence between the
recurrent event and survival processes, while allowing for heterogeneity between
subjects. The primary objective is to develop a comprehensive joint modeling
framework that significantly improves on model fit and predictive performance
relative to the state-of-the-art shared frailty modeling methods. In the context
of regression modeling for survival responses, the project will also expand the
methodology in the burgeoning field of Bayesian nonparametrics. The research
project has a substantial analytic component with regards to study of
theoretical properties for the various models, as well as a significant
computational component with regards to achieving computationally tractable
model fitting. The practical utility of the new methods will be investigated
with simulation studies and through applications involving analysis of data from
cancer patients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
