
* 2015195
* Learning from Hidden Signatures in High-Dimensional Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/20/2020
* Florentina Bunea,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Methods directly applicable to the determination of regulatory cell mechanisms
associated with vaccine responses will be developed as an integral part of this
project. Such mechanisms are not directly observable or measurable, but a wealth
of indirect measurements can be obtained, for instance on antibody titer-driven
effects. New methodology, that meets the challenge of extracting these hidden
signals from a very large volume of data, consisting of a diverse arrays of
indirect measurements, are developed and put to test immediately, for emerging
pandemics data sets. More broadly, techniques that allow for reliable,
mathematically grounded, inference and prediction from essential, but hidden,
signatures will be developed and applied to data sets arising from neuroscience
and high-throughput text data.

A foundational study of inference and prediction from high-dimensional data with
low-dimensional embeddings modeled by factor models are undertaken in this
project. Within new classes of identifiable factor regression models in which
the latent factors are interpretable, new scalable methods for estimating the
regression coefficients of the latent factors will be developed. Optimality of
estimation from a finite-sample, minimax perspective, as well as the derivation
of the asymptotic limit of the estimates, and especially of their efficient
asymptotic variance will be a cornerstone of research under this project.
Prediction from high-dimensional dependent features, with reduced-effective-rank
covariance matrix, will be analyzed under generic factor regression models. In
particular, interpolating predictors, popular in deep-learning, will be
contrasted with other contenders, with the aim of offering fundamental
understanding of model-free versus model-based prediction, when data arises from
a factor regression model. Sparse topic models, together with inference and
prediction from the hidden topics, will be studied as companion models for data
in which all the features are discrete. Applications of the newly developed,
scalable and theoretically founded methods will constitute a focal point of this
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
