
* 2015460
* New Directions in Bayesian Change-Point Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2020,07/01/2021
* Nilabja Guha,MA,University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 139,984.00

Almost all dynamic and random processes in nature go through sudden and
significant structural changes. Often the change is in the observable quantity,
e.g. fuel prices or stock indices or crime activities changing significantly in
response to a change in an unobservable, latent factor such as an economic
phenomenon or a public policy change, or a disease outbreak. Such ?change-
points? are routinely observed across all scientific disciplines and
applications, such as economics, epidemiology, social sciences, cybersecurity
and finance. Specific examples could be changing regression when the observed
variable depends on predictors through a mean structure that changes with time,
or change points in data with massive dimensions, such as high-resolution
imaging data or complex connected graphs. While there is a substantial
literature proposing elaborate methods for detecting change points in different
settings, there has been limited consideration of Bayesian methods for change-
points in hierarchical models with complex dependence or sparsity structures.
This research fills this gap with new statistical tools motivated by specific
real-life applications, by developing theoretical framework while retaining
efficiency and usefulness in current applications. The project integrates
graduate education and training with statistical research, and emphasizes
upholding societal and ethical considerations that create and foster an
inclusive and diverse community.

In higher dimensions, the problem of detecting change-points and the changing
structure is often rendered extremely difficult owing to a combinatorial
computational complexity. Through this research, the PIs outline a comprehensive
framework, both theoretical and methodological, in the context of change point
estimation encompassing problems that may arise in different field of
applications. In particular, the PIs build fundamentally new Bayesian methods
that can 1) perform sparse signal recovery in a changing linear regression with
consistency guarantees 2) detect change-points in dependence structure via
changes in a Gaussian graphical model, and 3) build an innovative method for
handling ?ultra-high?-dimensional objects via random projections to drastically
reduce the computational burden. Theoretical machinery will be developed to
provide probabilistic rigor and consistency guarantee. Computationally efficient
algorithms will be developed, and user-friendly software tools will be deployed
in R for the usage of the developed methods by the scientific community at
large.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
