
* 2015575
* The Shape of Data: Using Topology and Geometry in Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/16/2020
* Wolfgang Polonik,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

In our modern society, technical advances constantly give rise to new data
collection mechanisms that allow scientists to ask questions of ever-increasing
complexities. The field of statistics is pressed to develop methodologies that
can be used for answering such scientific challenges. Many of these scientific
challenges can be addressed by first attempting to decrease size and complexity
of the data through what is called feature extraction. In a second step these
features are used to devise sound statistical methodologies. This project
considers extracting information about the shape of the data, and is developing
and studying statistical and machine learning methodologies based on these
features. The outcomes of this project are expected to impact the fields of
statistics, machine learning and various fields of application. Existing
collaborations of the PI with biologists, animal scientists and material
scientists, will also facilitate dissemination to these fields. This project
will also provide training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students.

The contributions of this project will lie in the intersection of statistics and
machine learning. They will enhance toolboxes and advance knowledge through the
derivation of novel methodologies, through developing a deep understanding of
these methodologies by performing relevant theoretical analyses, and by
providing implementations of the methodologies that are useful for practical
purposes. More specifically, this project will (i) study the role of the Hodge
Laplacian in the context of analyzing higher-relational data, including its role
in clustering; (ii) derive theoretical results about stabilizing statistics such
as Betti-curves that allow the construction of asymptotically exact bootstrap
based confidence intervals for functionals of persistent Betti-curves; (iii)
develop a novel, statistically enhanced persistence diagram thought the use of
multiple testing, and (iv) Implementations will allow the exploration of finite
sample properties of the new methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
