
* 2015569
* Semiparametric Methods for Analysis of Complex Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2020,07/22/2020
* Meng Li,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,999.00

In the era of big data, complex data naturally arise in modern scientific
applications. For example, the advance in computation and technology has enabled
the routine collection of high-frequency functional data and high-resolution
images. Scientists are facing daunting challenges from the data, including the
massive scale, intricate dependence structures, and various shape constraints
that are vital for scientific interpretability. This project will develop new
flexible methods for shape-constrained regression and high-dimensional quantile
regression to comprehensively depict the dependence between variables, with a
focus on providing scalable implementation and theoretically guaranteed
inference. These tools will address pressing statistical and computational
challenges, leading to broad applications in medicine, neuroscience, cancer-
related studies, and industrial settings. The project will also develop and
distribute open-source software and provide research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.

The project will develop novel semiparametric methods for high-dimensional
quantile regression and shape-constrained regression. The PI will investigate a
paradigm shift in high-dimensional regression from a joint, iterative scheme to
a two-step, distributed scheme. This strategy allows the utilization of parallel
computation and is coupled with proper uncertainty propagation to ensure
statistical optimality and frequentist coverage of simultaneous confidence and
credible bands. Several regimes using functional and image data will be
considered, for example, mean regression, quantile regression, and variable
selection. The project will also develop new methods for nonparametric
regression under shape constraints, including local sparsity and stationary
points of unknown functions. The project will enrich the statistical toolbox to
cope with complex data by developing a suite of semiparametric methods that are
theoretically sound and computationally efficient.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
