
* 2015568
* Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Decision Making and Inference with Applications for Personalized Medicine
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2020,07/15/2022
* Zhaoran Wang,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

With the advent of data collection and storage technology, researchers can
obtain large-scale and high-dimensional datasets at a low price. Such datasets
offer exciting opportunities to make better decisions and reveal new discoveries
to improve decision making in various applications, and meanwhile, also raise
statistical challenges. Over the past decades, regularization methods such as
Lasso, SCAD, and MCP have been proposed to conduct model estimation in the
presence of high dimensional covariates. Various numerical algorithms have been
developed for these methods, and their theoretical properties are well studied.
However, questions of how to efficiently and effectively utilize high-
dimensional data to make optimal decisions and conduct inference are relatively
less studied, although such problems are of vital practical importance. This
project will develop new methods and theories for making optimal decisions and
conducting valid inference under high-dimensional settings. The methods have
wide applications, for instance, in personalized medicine where the goal is to
determine the optimal treatments for a patient based on predictor information,
including several thousand genetic markers. The principal investigators will
develop and distribute user-friendly open-source software to practitioners and
provide training opportunities to students at different levels.

The project has three research aims. The first aim is to study the high-
dimensional contextual bandit problem with binary actions, which is an online
decision-making problem that finds applications in personalized healthcare and
precision medicine. In this problem, the player sequentially chooses one action
and observes a reward, where the goal is to maximize the reward. The principal
investigators will develop a new algorithm to provide an optimal decision rule,
which achieves the minimax optimal regret. The second aim is to study general
inference problems that arise from high-dimensional stochastic convex
optimization, where the goal is to quantify the uncertainties of the optimal
objective value. The third goal is to consider the general stochastic linear
bandit problem with a finite and random action space. The principal
investigators will develop a new algorithm by using a best-subset-selection type
estimator, and the approach achieves a "dimension-free" regret and meets
existing lower-bound under the low-dimensional setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
