
* 2015552
* Robust Bayesian Semiparametric Inference of Heterogeneous Causal Effects in Observational Studies
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2020,06/09/2020
* Xinyi Xu,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

A scientific mission of critical importance is to transform massive data into
actionable knowledge, which largely centers on understanding causal
relationships. Causal inference has become one of three main tasks in data
science, in addition to descriptive and predictive analyses. This research
project aims to close existing gaps in estimation of heterogeneous causal
effects and will make more statistical tools available for analyzing massive
observational data. It will blend the conventional statistical approaches to
causal inference with the fast-growing machine learning techniques and provide
researchers and policy makers with powerful methodological tools to better
evaluate the impact of interventions and thus to optimize decision making.
Doctoral students in Statistics and Biostatistics will be involved in the
development and implementation of the methods.

This project concerns the development of a stream of innovative Bayesian
semiparametric methods for efficient and robust causal inference in the presence
of effect heterogeneity in large observational datasets. Conventional
statistical approaches have a strong tie to randomized experiments, which enjoy
easy causal interpretation but may suffer in terms of efficiency. Moreover,
recently developed nonparametric regression and machine learning methods focus
primarily on outcome modelling and prediction, which may encounter troubles from
confounding and are often more difficult to interpret. Furthermore, hidden bias
from unmeasured confounding is a major concern in observational studies. The
status quo sensitivity analysis for assessing hidden bias does not accommodate
complex data structures. The PIs will develop a robust Bayesian semiparametric
framework for incorporating the treatment assignment process into the outcome
modelling. The framework can easily accommodate complex heterogenous effects or
hierarchical structures in massive observational data, adequately take advantage
of experts? knowledge and existing causal theory on how the intervention might
work, and effectively assess the impact due to potential unmeasured confounders.
Propensity scores will be incorporated in potential outcome models via Gaussian
process priors and connections with the conventional matching estimators will be
established. Moreover, the impact of unmeasured confounding will be assessed
through Bayesian sensitivity analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
