
* 2015405
* Active Sequential Change-Point Analysis of Multi-Stream Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2020,06/20/2020
* Yajun Mei,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

This project aims to develop efficient methodologies and algorithms for actively
learning from high-dimensional streaming data under the sampling or resource
constraints. In many real-world applications, a system consists of many
processes that can generate many data streams. At some unknown time, an unusual
event could occur to the system, for example, a disease outbreak, a
manufacturing defect, or a fraud signal, yielding a set of anomalous processes.
Most systems however are operated under resource constraints that prevent the
simultaneous use of all resources all the time. Thus, the decision maker must be
responsible for actively choosing which processes are prioritized for
observation. This will enhance their existing knowledge about the occurring
event or anomalous processes while exploring new information and accounting for
the penalty of the wrong declaration. The research would have broader impacts in
a wide range of real-world applications such as biosurveillance, epidemiology,
engineering, homeland security, and finance. The project will integrate research
and education by infusing research findings into the curriculum and by training
graduate students.

This project seeks to make comprehensive progress on methodology, theory, and
application of active sequential change-point analysis of multi-stream data
under the sampling or resource constraints. The specific research aims are: (1)
design efficient active change-point detection algorithms with false alarm
guarantees, (2) develop an asymptotic theory to characterize statistical
performances of the developed methods, (3) post-hoc analysis to apply false
discovery rate methods to identify anomalous processes; and (4) applications in
sepsis screening with online monitoring data from medical sensors in intensive
care units to identify sepsis patients as quickly as possible while avoiding
alarm fatigue. Results of the project are expected to significantly advance the
state of the art in sequential analysis, change-point detection, multi-armed
bandit problems, streaming data analysis, and large-scale inference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
