
* 2016175
* Diversity Workshop and Mentoring Program
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2020,04/29/2020
* Donna LaLonde,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 49,900.00

This project supports the 2020 through 2022 offerings of the Joint Statistical
Meetings (JSM) Diversity Workshop and Mentoring Program / JSM Diversity
Mentoring Program. These annual programs serve statisticians from
underrepresented groups at early- to mid-career levels. Participants are
connected to mentors and a network through a four-day experience at the JSM.
Additionally, engagement and connections are encouraged beyond the structured
experience at the JSM.

Mentoring relationships are critically important for individuals at all career
stages. These relationships result in increased awareness of opportunities,
increased insight into organizational culture and politics, and increased access
to opportunities or leaders, among other benefits. Establishing such
relationships has the ability to impact other objectives of the program as well.
Mentors can help motivate students to pursue graduate study or careers in
statistics and encourage their proteges to become involved in the American
Statistical Association or other professional organizations and can often make
connections that increase the access of the workshop participants to these
opportunities. The net societal result is a diverse workforce of well-trained,
influential leaders in the field of statistics. The website for this project is
https://community.amstat.org/cmis/events/dwmp/dmp2020

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
