
* 2016307
* Statistical Methods for Intra-Tumor Heterogeneity Studies Using Sequencing Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2020,06/26/2020
* Mengjie Chen,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 146,298.00

Tumor heterogeneity refers to the observation that tumor cells can display
distinct phenotypic and morphological characteristics, such as gene expression,
metabolism, cellular morphology proliferation, motility, and metastatic
potential. This phenomenon occurs both between tumors (inter-tumor
heterogeneity) and within tumors (intra-tumor heterogeneity). Understanding
tumor heterogeneity is a prerequisite for personalized tumor diagnosis and
treatment. The objective of this project is to develop statistical methods to
study the intra-tumor heterogeneity using next generation sequencing data. These
methods will address important statistical, computational, and biological
challenges that arise from recent cancer genomics studies. The applications will
further our understanding of mechanisms underlying tumor heterogeneity as well
as its clinical consequences. The research will provide opportunities to attract
and nurture diverse future scientists to work at the frontiers of computational
cancer genomics. The project will also provide research training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students. User-friendly open-source software
implementing the research methods will be developed, distributed, and supported
to benefit the genomics and statistics community.

This project will develop clonality analysis methods with a firm statistical
footing and tailored for the characteristics of data from different sequencing
technologies. A new stochastic process will be developed to model clonal
expansion. Using likelihood-based approaches, the PI will construct clonal
history empowered by several novel strategies: 1) incorporating phase
information bridges cancer genomics studies with rich germline variant resources
profiled by consortium such as the 1000 Genome Project; (2) integrating single
cell RNA sequencing and bulk tissue DNA sequencing data; (3) adjusting for
characteristics of local sequences. These analyses can also potentially open up
new opportunities for joint analysis of tumor heterogeneity and a rich list of
epigenomic features such as DNA accessibility and methylation. Successful
achievement of all aims will dramatically increase the power of subclone
identification in cancer genomics studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
