
* 2020407
* International Indian Statistical Association 2020 Conference: Statistics in the Era of Evidence-Based Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2020,04/10/2020
* Sanjib Basu,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2023
* USD 34,997.00

IISA 2020: Statistics in the Era of Evidence Based Inference, a four-day
international conference, will take place at University of Illinois at Chicago
(UIC), Illinois, from July 16 to July 19, 2020. The main objective of the
conference is to bring together both well established and emerging young
researchers, as well as students, who are actively pursuing theoretical and
methodological research in statistics, biostatistics and data science and their
applications in various scientific fields. The format of the conference includes
student paper competitions and presentations, short courses, plenary talks,
special invited talks, invited sessions and contributed posters. The conference
strives to maintain a healthy presence of women and minority in all these
categories and of young researchers (within five years of their doctoral
degrees) in invited sessions. For students, the conference will provide numerous
opportunities including student paper competitions, speed sessions as well as
short courses. The scientific program will span a wide range of topics ranging
from the fundamentals of statistical theory to computationally-intensive methods
and scientific application oriented data modeling, through a number of sessions
classified as plenary, special invited, invited, student paper competition,
posters, and panel discussions. In the tradition of IISA conferences, IISA 2020
will host a vibrant multi-stage student paper competition. The scientific
program of IISA2020 will have plenary talks by three eminent speakers, special
invited talks by eight leading researchers and about 50 invited sessions, each
consisting of three presentations

The conference serves as the official annual meeting of the International Indian
Statistical Association (IISA), IISA membership is open to all. IISA?s
objectives are to promote education, research and application of statistics,
probability and data science, to foster the exchange of information and
scholarly activities, to serve the needs of young statisticians and data
scientists and to encourage cooperative efforts among members in education,
research, industry and business. IISA and University of Illinois at Chicago
(UIC) are the primary organizers of the conference. UIC is part of the
University of Illinois system and is the largest university in the Chicago area
with a strong focus on diversity. IISA 2020 will bring together leaders,
emerging researchers and students from diverse areas of statistics,
biostatistics, probability and data science in a collaborative setting to
discuss and foster the cutting-edge developments of statistical theory, methods
and tools for making evidence based statistical inference from complex, noisy,
tall and wide data sources. The conference will promote education, research and
application of statistics, probability and data science and will foster the
exchange of information and scholarly activities among scientific institutions
in Chicago area, Midwest and in institutions across the United States. The most
up to date information and announcements regarding the conference is made
available at the conference website
https://www.intindstat.org/iisaconference2020/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
