
* 2044823
* CAREER: Next-Generation Methods for Statistical Integration of High-Dimensional Disparate Data Sources
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Irina Gaynanova,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2026
* USD 157,338.00

Multi-view data (collected on the same samples from multiple sources) are
increasingly common with advances in multi-omics, neuroimaging and wearable
technologies. For example, wearable devices such as physical activity trackers,
continuous glucose monitors and ambulatory blood pressure monitors are worn
concurrently to provide measurements of distinct subjects? characteristics.
There is enormous potential in integrating that concurrent information from the
distinct vantages to better understand between-view associations and improve
prediction of health outcomes. Existing tools for data integration are sensitive
to outliers, and are not designed for mixed data types (e.g. continuous skewed
glucose measurements, zero-inflated activity counts, binary indicators of
sleep/wake). The PI will develop a more robust framework for multi-view data
integration that is better able to account for outliers, better match the mixed
types of data actually collected, and be more accurate in separating common from
view-specific signals. The new methods will be implemented in open-source
software accompanied by reproducible workflow examples, providing immediate and
easy access for other researchers. The educational component centers on the
development of structured research experiences (SRE) for students. SRE enhances
students written communication, software development and reproducible research
skills, all of which are lacking in traditional curriculum. This will improve
students? preparation for conducting research, and widen their STEM employment
opportunities. The involvement of students from traditionally underrepresented
groups will positively impact their retention rate and will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM.

Popular dimension reduction methods, such as principal component analysis and
discriminant analysis, are tailored for single-view data, and thus fail to
discover coordinated multi-view signals on a global level. On the other hand,
existing multi-view dimension reduction methods suffer from reliance on the
Gaussianity assumption, an inability to capture joint functional signals, and a
lack of theoretical guarantees. The PI will address these drawbacks by (i)
developing a joint dimension reduction framework for skewed continuous, binary
and zero-inflated view types; (ii) a joint dimension reduction framework for
mixed functional multi-view data and (iii) a new paradigm for simultaneous
extraction of signals across views based on hierarchical low-rank constraints.
This work will lead to critically needed new statistical methods for data
integration with direct relevance for researchers working with wearable
monitors, microbiome and multi-omics data through interdisciplinary
collaborations of the PI. The proposed structured research experiences will
center on the design and reproducibility of simulations studies, and align with
computational components of the proposed research, including direct students?
involvement in multiple simulation studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
