
* 2046393
* CAREER: Geometric and Combinatorial Methods for Distribution-Free Inference and Dependent Network Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,07/06/2022
* Bhaswar Bhattacharya,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 160,000.00

Modern statistical applications often involve multivariate data that violate the
convenient assumptions of independent sampling and tractable parametric forms.
For instance, parametric methods are often inadequate in the analysis of complex
high-dimensional data arising from genomics, epidemiology, and bioinformatics.
This necessitates the development of procedures that are agnostic to the
distribution of the data, computationally efficient, and yet statistically
powerful for large nonparametric classes. Similarly, the classical assumption of
independence is routinely violated in combinatorial datasets arising from social
networks, making it increasingly important to develop realistic and
mathematically tractable methods for modeling structure and dependence in high-
dimensional distributions. This project leverages ideas from recent developments
in optimal transport theory, random geometric graphs, and statistical physics to
gain a deeper understanding of (1) multivariate distribution-free inference and
(2) dependent network data. The educational and outreach component of this
project will aim to foster undergraduate research and prepare graduate students
in mentoring, through curriculum development, directed reading groups, and
summer programs. The first component of this project will study the efficiency
properties of nonparametric, distribution-free two-sample tests based on the
emerging theory of multivariate ranks, which include, among others, the rank
analogue of the celebrated energy distance test. The project will also explore
the asymptotic properties of tests based on optimal matchings and their
applications to detecting balance in observational studies. The second component
of this project will focus on modeling dependence in complex relational data,
using the Ising model and, more generally, higher-order (tensor) Markov random
fields. The goal here is to build a framework for simultaneously modeling the
network dependency (arising from neighborhood interactions) and the individual
node effects, and to develop a holistic theory of parameter estimation in these
models using recent advances on random tensors and tools from statistical
physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
