
* 2054173
* Collaborative Research: Development of New Statistical Methods for Genome-Wide Association Studies
* DMS,STATISTICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2020,10/03/2022
* Tieming Ji,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 157,024.00

Advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies now make possible cost-
effective analysis of whole genomes. The genomes of any two humans are 99.9%
identical, with differences in the remaining 0.1% determining the diversity of
human traits. For example, DNA sequence differences account for 80% of the
variability in human height. Current technology allows the identification of
these sequence polymorphisms between individuals, which can then be correlated
to differences in a given trait. When done on a genome wide level with a large
population of individuals, such genome wide association studies (GWASes) can be
a useful tool for the identification of key genes controlling specific traits.
However, a requirement for this approach is the availability of powerful and
accurate statistical and computational methods to search through a massive
amount of sequencing data to correctly identify DNA differences associated with
the phenotypic trait of interest. The outcome of the project will (1) provide
statistical methods to understand relationships between DNA sequence differences
and the full range of diversity observed in a population, and (2) provide
corresponding computational tools suitable for use by biologists and biomedical
specialists for their specific population studies. This research project will
produce intermediate methodological and theoretical results that lay the
foundation for the final output. This project will also apply the developed
methods to real, experimental data to demonstrate their utility. In addition to
these research outcomes, the project will support the training of students in
the field, including women and underrepresented minorities. GWAS estimates the
correlation between phenotypic traits and sequence polymorphisms to identify
genetic variants highly associated with specific traits. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most common type of genetic variant, and sequencing
technologies allow for large-scale collection of SNP information. The project
team will develop new GWAS models and methods to find trait-affecting variants
with more power and accuracy. Specifically, the new methods developed in this
research project will improve existing approaches by allowing modeling of
observed traits from any probabilistic distribution in the exponential family.
This extension ensures statistical models are biologically meaningful and
interpretable. Second, the new methods will exploit different Bayesian priors,
especially contemporary Bayesian priors for ultra-high dimensional model
selection, that will share information across the entire genome for stable
statistical inferences. Theoretical results of Bayesian priors in these new
methods will also be developed. Third, a stochastic search algorithm will be
developed to efficiently search through the massively large model space for
model selection. This ensures that new methods are practical and useful since
analysis can be done within a reasonably short time frame. Meanwhile, this also
eliminates the use of subjective thresholds of significance that are now
commonly used but an embarrassing practice in GWAS, having no theoretical
support. Methods will be implemented into software tools and will be freely
available for statisticians, biologists, and biomedical researchers. This
project is funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical
Biology Program and the Statistics Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
