
* 2112711
* Measure of Heterogeneity for Complex Data Objects
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,06/11/2021
* Heping Zhang,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,993.00

Technological advances have led to the routine collection of large and complex
data objects such as matrices, tensors, functions, and manifolds. Understanding
and drawing conclusions from large and complex data sources with a sound
scientific rationale is challenging. The level of difficulty generally increases
with the size and complexity of the data. Most existing statistical tools are
designed to deal with a number as the unit of information, and they become
inadequate, because a human face, for example, can be digitalized into many
numbers but must be analyzed as a whole, to retain the essential information.
The goal of this project is to develop proper statistical methods and software
for this need. The concept and methods to be developed will provide vital tools
for the analysis of complex data, which have broad applications in both science
and engineering. This project will not only advance statistical methodology and
disseminate computing software but also offer solutions to important and
challenging scientific and public health problems. Applications in understanding
and diagnosing Alzheimer's disease and breast cancer are two examples of major
public health significance. Furthermore, by engaging doctoral and postdoctoral
students, junior faculty members, and summer interns, the PI will take advantage
of this project in training new generations of statisticians and data
scientists.

To consider the complex data structures and to retain the essential information
during the statistical analysis, it is important to treat certain structures as
the observational point such as the functional resonance imaging (MRI) collected
from a person at a given time. Such high dimensional points are referred to as
tensors which may or may not fit in a traditionally defined Euclidean space.
This project aims to develop statistical methods to analyze tensors as data
objects, and classify such data objects in a possibly non-Euclidean space. In
particular, this project introduces the concept of ball impurity as a measure of
heterogeneity in the distribution of complex data objects and will investigate
its use in developing tree-based methods to classify data objects in non-
Euclidean spaces. The efforts will be made for an in-depth understanding of the
theoretical and empirical properties of the ball impurity, and software will be
developed and distributed simultaneously. The developed methods will be used to
analyze large-scale, public databases from UK Biobank and dbGaP such as Human
Connectome Project. The analyses of these important datasets can not only assess
the utility of the novel methods, but also lead to insightful and new scientific
discoveries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
