
* 2112907
* Novel Missing Data Approaches for Corrupted Longitudinal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2021,07/09/2021
* Yen-Chi Chen,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 147,253.00

Modern longitudinal databases, which can involve combined multiple datasets and
varying measurements, may not be complete and clean. Because of the
incompleteness, performing downstream statistical analysis is not
straightforward. This project aims to develop novel statistical methods to
handle incompleteness from missing data perspectives. The project will also deal
with the data linkage issue from cancer research, where researchers have linked
their clinical trial data to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid database. The
methods under development will be applied to the National Alzheimer?s
Coordinating Center database and Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial data in the
Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) Cancer Research Network. The methods will also
be used to resolve data collection problems caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and
other infectious diseases that corrupt data collection. The project offers
training for graduate students and research opportunities for undergraduate
students.

The project focuses on three research questions. First, the PI aims to develop
an inverse probability weighting (IPW) approach to handle linking of one
longitudinal database with another database. This IPW method reweights
observations based on the linking probability to account for the linking issue.
The project will apply the IPW method to the data linkage issue and develop a
new efficiency theory. The second part of the project considers the changing-
measurement problem in a longitudinal database, in which a measurement is
updated to a newer version during the collection of longitudinal data. The PI
intends to formulate this as a missing data problem and introduce a new approach
combining latent variable and quantile regression to create a conversion between
the new and the old versions of the measurement. In the third part of the
project, the PI plans to develop a "doubly" semi-parametric estimator for
handling missingness in both responses and covariates and to study the
efficiency theory. The PI will design a set of identifying assumptions on the
missingness of covariates to ensure identifiability. A method can then be
derived from the identifying assumptions to impute the missing covariates,
converting the situation to a standard one in which responses alone are missing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
