
* 2112988
* Statistical Investigations in Ranking from Pairwise and Multi-wise Comparisons
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,06/26/2022
* Ye Zhang,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 146,664.00

Ranking from comparisons is a central problem in a wide range of learning and
social contexts. Researchers in various disciplines including psychology,
economics, and computer science have made significant contributions to the
ranking problem. Despite much progress, many fundamentally important statistical
tasks remain unclear. One example arises in quantifying the uncertainty of
ranking procedures and in analyzing multi-wise comparison data, which appears
naturally in recommendation systems, web search, social choice, and many other
areas. This project aims to address these challenges by developing an in-depth
understanding of the ranking problem through a systematic statistical and
computational investigation. The wide range of important applications of the
ranking problem ensures that the progress we make towards our objectives will
have a great impact on a broad scientific community. The techniques and methods
developed will further advance the interplay between a wide range of areas
including statistics, optimization, and machine learning. New courses will be
developed incorporating results from the project and graduate students will also
be involved in the project through their research work supervised by the PI.

This project focuses on the following two directions. First, the PI will
quantify the uncertainty in ranking from pairwise comparisons. To achieve this
goal, the PI will carry out a thorough fine-grained and entrywise statistical
investigation. Second, the PI will deepen theoretical and methodological
understanding of the multi-wise comparisons by investigating various tasks
including developing optimal procedures, carrying out entrywise analysis, and
others. Advances along these directions will be made towards the goal of laying
out a firm theoretic foundation that feeds back into the development of
practical methodology and informed applications for ranking problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
