
* 2113079
* Computational Methods for Structured Data and Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2021,08/02/2021
* Maryclare Griffin,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,982.00

Scientists in many fields, including genetics, neuroscience, ecology, and
economics, are obtaining richer measurements of more complex processes than ever
before. This offers thrilling opportunities to answer scientific questions that
were previously out of reach. For instance, measurements of disease prevalence
collected at many locations over time provide the opportunity to estimate the
spread of disease. Latent variable models, which model the observed data as a
simple transformation of unobserved latent random variables, are a popular
approach to extracting answers to scientific questions from measurements of
complex processes. They are flexible, but they can also be computationally
prohibitive. As a result, scientists using latent variable models may have to
settle for approximations of unknown quality or ad-hoc simplifications that
provide poor estimates or fail to answer questions of interest. This project
aims to develop novel methods for fitting latent variable models that are more
computationally efficient, reliable, and accessible. Involvement in the project
will train statisticians at all levels, with a focus on statisticians from
populations that are underrepresented in statistics research. Specifically, the
investigator will supervise graduate student involvement in the research, guide
the development of engaging outreach materials by undergraduate students,
participate in outreach at local high schools, and lead writing groups for
early-career faculty.

A variety of computational challenges arise when fitting latent variable models.
It can be difficult to characterize and simulate from the conditional
distribution of the latent variables given observed data, even when the small
number of parameters characterizing the latent variable model are known.
Furthermore, it can be difficult to estimate the unknown parameters of a latent
variable model because the likelihood of the data corresponds to a high
dimensional integral for which a closed-form expression may be unavailable or
expensive to evaluate. Even when feasible methods are available, it can be
difficult for practitioners to implement latent variable models without access
to open-source software and detailed tutorials. Accordingly, this project aims
to contribute (i) novel methods for simulating from the conditional
distributions of high dimensional latent variables, (ii) improved methods for
maximum likelihood estimation of latent variable model parameters, and (iii)
versatile statistical software that allows practitioners to implement them.
Regarding (i), the PI plans to develop novel pathwise methods for simulating
from the conditional distributions of high dimensional latent variables given
data that leverage the relationship of the target conditional distribution to
related or approximate distributions. Regarding (ii), the PI will develop
improved methods for maximum likelihood estimation of latent variable model
parameters that leverage the pathwise simulation methods introduced in the first
aim. Regarding (iii), the PI will apply the new methods to disease mapping and
genome-wide association studies and develop R packages that allow other
practitioners to implement the methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
