
* 2113072
* Testing and Estimation for Multi-Modality Single Cell Genomics
* DMS,Genetic Mechanisms, STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2021,07/20/2021
* Eugene Katsevich,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 184,999.00

This project aims to develop new statistical analysis methodologies for data
produced by a new technology known as single cell CRISPR screens, which promise
to help unravel the molecular mechanisms of human disease and guide drug
development. This technology discovers the functions of crucial but poorly
understood genomic regions by knocking them out and then measuring the impact on
the cell. Given these possibilities, this technology has attracted enormous
interest in both academia and industry, leading to its rapidly growing adoption.
However, the statistical analysis of the data produced by CRISPR screens
presents a major challenge to realizing their promise. The PI will tackle
several of the most important statistical analysis challenges presented by this
technology and implement the resulting methodologies in software tools. These
tools will help scientists draw reliable conclusions from their single cell
CRISPR screen data and therefore accelerate progress in the prognosis,
diagnosis, and treatment of human disease. The project will provide training
opportunities to graduate students by involving them in the research.

The PI recently leveraged the distilled conditional randomization test (dCRT)
methodology to design SCEPTRE, a computationally efficient, well-calibrated, and
powerful analysis method for single cell CRISPR screens. In this project, the PI
will expand his recent work on association testing for single cell CRISPR
screens to more challenging problem settings (non-interventional screens) and
more challenging inferential tasks (estimation and interaction detection).
First, the PI will extend the ideas underlying SCEPTRE to address the problem of
association testing in multi-omics screens, the observational counterparts of
CRISPR screens. Second, the PI will develop a procedure to estimate the effect
of knocking out a regulatory element on the expression of a gene based on single
cell CRISPR screens. This will require more carefully accounting for the
indirect measurement mechanism of CRISPR perturbations. Third, the PI will
design a test of interaction between two regulatory elements, also based on
CRISPR screens. This problem is even harder but critical to capturing the
complexity of gene regulation. Finally, the resulting methods will be
implemented in an integrated software package designed for practical application
to real single cell data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
