
* 2113713
* Collaborative Research: Halfspace Depth for Object and Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,07/15/2022
* Xiongtao Dai,IA,Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 111,385.00

Complex data objects are increasingly being generated across science and
engineering. Non-Euclidean data such as wind directions, neural connectivity
networks, and phylogenetic trees draw practical interest, but are challenging to
analyze due to their intrinsic constraints. Functional data such as trajectories
and images also provide examples of another type of data of high complexity,
which are observed on a continuous domain in time or space. In general,
practitioners are interested in first exploring the data distributions before
any modeling analysis. For instance, given a sample of growth trajectories of
children, a first step is to identify typical versus extreme growth patterns,
where the latter can be non-trivial to uncover. Also, when analyzing brain
connectivity matrices, it is important to find unusual brain networks and
differences between healthy and diseased populations. Data-driven methods robust
to anomalies are essential in these settings since little is known about the
data generating process, and outliers can affect the analysis. Due to the lack
of a natural ordering in data objects, exploratory tools such as boxplot and
quantile are unavailable for these types of data. The project will address the
lack of techniques for exploring non-Euclidean and functional data. Principled
statistics and visualization methods will be developed based on a novel way of
ranking the observations. The project will also provide training for graduate
and undergraduate students.

The central research theme is to develop exploratory data analysis tools for
non-Euclidean and functional data objects. To overcome the absence of a
canonical ordering for object data, the PIs will develop suitable data depth
notions to quantify the centrality of data points with respect to the
distribution. This will provide a center-outward ranking of the data that will
be used as a building block for outlier detection methods, rank tests, and
robust classifiers. Analogous to Tukey's halfspace depth for the multivariate
Euclidean case, the new depth notions for object data are expected to be
intuitive and robust, and have desirable properties well-grounded in theory.
Specifically, the research project will investigate a depth notion for non-
Euclidean objects; a data visualization and an outlier detection procedure for
non-Euclidean data; halfspace depth notions for functional data, one based on
theory and another one from an algorithmic perspective; and a depth notion for
sparsely observed longitudinal data. Key challenges that will be addressed
include a lack of vector space structure when dealing with non-Euclidean
objects; the infinite dimensionality and degeneracy when defining depth notions
for functional data; detecting outlying trajectories and images in shape and not
just at any time point; and the sparsity and irregularity of observations in
longitudinal data. Method and theory development will draw from metric geometry,
functional data analysis, empirical process, and M-estimation. Software
implementing a suite of depth-based methods will be made available to the public
as an outcome of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
