
* 2113489
* Modelling Covariance Structure Randomly, with Applications in Bootstrapping, Robust Statistics, and Deep Learning
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Xiucai Ding,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 171,098.00

High dimensional data with random covariance structure arises naturally in many
fields, ranging from genetics and epidemiology to atmospheric and environmental
sciences, medical sciences, social sciences and artificial intelligence. A
thorough understanding of these large data matrices is in urgent demand in the
era of Big Data. However, the current literature has mostly focused on the case
when the population covariance matrix is deterministic. This project will change
this by establishing novel results for data matrices with random population
covariance structure. The research findings will demonstrate how the random
covariance structure can help to enhance the understanding of complex and
massive data sets. Moreover, this project will result in novel and better
modeling and tools for analyzing high dimensional noisy data sets, which can
provide more meaningful and interpretable information.

This project aims to study a general class of large dimensional matrices with
random population covariance structure and address several challenges in high
dimensional statistics and deep learning. It is the first time that the
intersection between random matrix theory and extreme value theory is studied in
full generality. The goals include: (1). Establishing novel theory and results
for the top eigenvalues and principal components of large dimensional sample or
separable covariance matrix with random covariance structure; (2). Answering the
question whether bootstrapping is suitable for high dimensional inference, and
how we can modify the standard bootstrapping procedure when it fails for massive
data; (3). Constructing new statistics for statistical inference problems
involving high dimensional elliptically distributed data in full generality,
including heavy tailed data sets; (4). Providing novel insights on the phase
transitions of fully connected two-layer neural networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
