
* 2113778
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Inference for High-dimensional Spatial-Temporal Process Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,06/10/2021
* Sudipto Banerjee,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,000.00

Spatial data science and other emerging technologies related to Geographic
Information Systems are increasingly conspicuous in scientific discoveries.
Scientists in a variety of disciplines today have unprecedented access to
massive spatial and temporal databases comprising high resolution remote sensed
measurements. Statistical modeling and analysis for such data need to account
for spatial associations and variations at multiple levels while attempting to
recognize underlying patterns and potentially complex relationships. Traditional
statistical hypothesis testing is no longer adequate for these scientific
problems and statisticians are increasingly turning to specialized methods for
analyzing complex spatial-temporal data. However, there continue to remain
substantial theoretical and methodological bottlenecks with regard to the
interpretation of statistical models. This project will address these problems
by developing probabilistic machine learning tools for spatial-temporal Big Data
that can have far-reaching public health, economic, environmental, and
scientific implications. Several innovations in statistical theory,
methodologies and computational algorithms are envisioned that will inform basic
science and policy questions arising in diverse disciplines using geographic
information sciences. Key educational components include dissemination of
technologies across the scientific communities including data scientists,
engineers, foresters, ecologists, and climate scientists. The Principal
Investigators will train the next generation of data scientists through
dissemination efforts for graduate students in STEM fields.

The PIs aim to blend innovative theory, methods and applications to advance
knowledge of spatial-temporal stochastic processes with an emphasis on their
properties for high-dimensional inference. This domain of spatial statistics has
witnessed a burgeoning of models and methods for Big Data analysis. New classes
of models have emerged from the judicious use of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
that are being applied to massive datasets comprising several millions of
spatiotemporal coordinates. Theoretical explorations envisioned in this project
will focus upon statistical inference on the process parameters and the
underlying spatial process. The PIs intend to perform rigorous investigations
into statistical inference for high-dimensional spatio-temporal processes to
derive micro-ergodic parameters for such models that will be consistently
estimable and, at the same time, yield consistent predictive inference. The PIs
will develop new methodologies that cast high-dimensional stochastic processes
into computationally practicable frameworks by embedding graphical Gaussian
processes within hierarchical frameworks for jointly modeling highly
multivariate spatial data. Innovative statistical theory and methods will be
developed and used to construct sparsity-inducing graphical spatio-temporal
models to accommodate massive numbers of outcomes and capture complex
dependencies among variables across massive numbers of locations. The planned
theoretical explorations into the inferential properties of newly emerging
scalable spatio-temporal processes will produce novel statistical contributions.
The PIs will provide probability-based uncertainty quantification and will
substantially enhance the understanding of physical and natural processes
underlying various problems in the physical, environmental and biomedical
sciences and in public health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
