
* 2113771
* Distance-Based Analysis for Complex High-Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,06/23/2021
* Debashis Mondal,OR,Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 02/28/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Throughout the course of the twentieth century, distances have played a
significant role in important areas of statistics, which include classification,
clustering, discriminant analysis, multidimensional scaling, sampling, spatial
statistics, scoring rules, and kernel methods in machine learning. Distances are
also central to the definition of divergence measures, relative entropy and
information gain, some of which are fundamental to the concept of C.R. Rao's
quadratic entropy and the analysis of diversity in ecology and other areas of
science. Yet, at present there are significant gaps in our knowledge and in the
emerging statistical literature on the use of distance-based tests and analyses
for complex high dimensional data. One example is analysis of similarity which
is among the most cited and most widely used distance-based statistical methods
but is limited by an absence of relevant mathematical knowledge. This research
will derive new mathematical knowledge on various distance-based statistical
methods, and apply this for providing answers to important scientific questions
arising in a number of disciplines in forestry, ecology and marine science, such
as: (1) how biodiversity changes in tropical forests? (2) how taxonomic and
functional profiles of bacterial communities change with environmental
conditions in different oceanic regions? The project establishes collaborations
among several disciplines and between two US academic institutions and provides
research and training to graduate and undergraduate students. The project
develops a new body of knowledge on distance-based statistical methods and
computation for analyzing complex, high dimensional data that arise in the form
of compositions, trees, graphs, or networks. The distances considered here are
all non-Euclidean -- either non-metric dissimilarities that do not satisfy any
triangular inequalities or just discrete numbers -- but they all arise from
conditionally positive definite kernels. Examples of distances include the
squared Euclidean distance, the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, the Jensen-Shannon
distance, Unifrac or the Kantorovich-Rubinstein metric, the Aitchison distance,
the edit distance, various graph kernel and spectral distances, and other
distances based on optimal transport problems. Specifically, the project
advances the mathematical theory and computation of exact distribution-free two
and multi-sample runs tests, change points, and other related problems by
counting runs along the shortest Hamiltonian path (or loop) of the pooled sample
of data points. The project also considers analysis of similarity and related
distance-based rank tests and derives new mathematical results that allow us to
pursue more advanced statistical analyses. The project contributes to: (i) a
deeper analysis of biodiversity in tropical forest; (ii) an investigation of how
taxonomic and functional profiles of prokaryotic communities change with
environmental conditions in different oceanic regions; (iii) a study of the
variability of composition of rare earth elements in deep-sea muds of the
Pacific Ocean; and (iv) an understanding of the relationship of intertidal
communities in the Oregon coast with respect to upwelling and nutrient delivery.
The project integrates mathematics research, science and education and will
provide opportunities for dissertation work for graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
