
* 2113674
* Sparse and Efficient Estimation with Semiparametric Models in Meta-Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Sunyoung Shin,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 102,072.00

In many scientific fields, such as genomics, epidemiology, and economics,
combining large-scale datasets of multiple studies is a valuable approach to
fully utilizing the collected data. However, such studies often have privacy
policies that prevent individual-level data sharing. In biomedical research, for
example, while data integration can boost the power of evaluating risk factors
of a disease, study protocols typically prohibit sharing participant-level
genomic and clinical data among the studies. This project will investigate meta-
analysis that combines studies using compressed information in summary
statistics without requiring individual-level data. The PI plans to establish a
broad framework with semiparametric regression models and to develop concrete
and computationally efficient methods with theoretical guarantees. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will receive training through involvement in
the research project.

The PI will study the general likelihood theory for meta-analysis with
semiparametric regression. The theoretical framework to be established will
embrace meta-analysis of studies with different observation schemes that
generate various data types. The project will deal with both homogeneous and
heterogeneous structures of meta-analysis. The PI will develop semiparametric
methods based on summary statistics with the aim of efficient estimation and
sparse structure recovery. In developing the methods, the research will focus on
using and extending techniques such as least-squares approximation and
regularization. Statistical properties and optimization algorithms of these
methods will be studied under both structure types of meta-analysis. The
resulting methods will be applicable to various studies such as large-scale
public health studies, prognostic signature studies, and genome-wide association
studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
