
* 2113637
* Offline Statistical Reinforcement Learning with Applications in Precision Health
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2021,09/20/2022
* Wenbin Lu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Precision medicine seeks to tailor medical treatment to the individual
characteristics of each patient to achieve the goal of better patient outcomes.
As a broader conceptualization that includes precision medicine, precision
health involves approaches that everyone can do on their own to protect their
health as well as steps that public health can take. Reinforcement Learning (RL)
is a powerful technique that allows an agent to learn and take actions in a
given environment in order to maximize the cumulative reward that the agent
receives. The interest in developing new statistical RL methods for precision
health is emerging. The potential impacts of this work can be summarized in the
following four goals. First, the project contributes to both the fields of
semiparametric inference and RL. The theoretical results include non-asymptotic
distribution, risk bounds with novel empirical process technical tools. These
results will be fundamentally important and generally applicable for studying
semiparametric inference empowered by RL. Second, the clinical findings based on
analyzing the electronic medical record (EMR) data will lead to major progress
in addressing important clinical questions on the treatment recommendations for
patients. Third, although EMR and mobile health (mHealth) data are the main
applications of this project, the developed methods are general enough to apply
to a variety of data sources including clinical data and economic data. The
developed methods are expected to greatly enhance the acquisition and analysis
of large-scale data with population heterogeneity for medical, scientific and
engineering communities. Fourth, the integration of research and education is a
key aspect of this project. The PI will develop new courses and improve existing
courses on RL and semiparametric inference, will train graduate students, and
will reach out to the K-12 education levels by training high school teachers and
students.

Despite the tremendous impacts that RL has achieved in areas such as games and
robots, a direct deployment of RL algorithms in precision health can be costly,
risky or even infeasible, due to significant real-world challenges. The main
objective of this proposal is to develop new statistical offline RL methods to
handle real-world challenges by developing flexible and efficient off-policy
learning and robust and efficient off-policy evaluation methods. The off-policy
learning in RL refers to the problem of finding the best target policy that
maximizes the value, given samples collected from a possibly different policy.
In Aim 1, we will develop an efficient advantage learning framework in order to
efficiently use pre-collected data for policy optimization. In Aim 2, we
consider the problem of off-policy evaluation where the objective is to learn
the value under a target policy with data collected under a possibly different
policy. There is a growing literature on estimating the value under a given
policy in off-policy settings. However, very limited work have been considered
regarding statistical inference such as hypothesis testing and confidence
intervals (CIs) of the value, which is the focus of this aim. In Aim 3, we will
discuss the plan of analyzing EMR and mHealth data with policy learning and
policy evaluation based on the proposed methods in Aims 1 and 2.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
