
* 2113564
* Homogeneity Pursuit in Regression Analysis: Statistical Theory, Integer Optimization, and Algorithms
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/2021,06/08/2021
* Peter Song,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 349,978.00

The research project lies in a cross-disciplinary field that intersects
statistics, operations research, and machine learning with a motivation to study
unknown quantities and associated structures of the unknowns, referred to as
homogeneity pursuit. The novelty of the statistical paradigm of homogeneity
pursuit pertains to its capacity for simultaneous operation of parameter
clustering and estimation in association analyses. The project expects to
deliver new statistical tools to the hands of practitioners to generate new
knowledge from data. The principal investigator will apply the developed
methodology for the derivation of environmental exposure mixtures of toxic
agents, DNA methylation integration in epigenetics, and survey questionnaire
summarization in social sciences. The project also includes substantial
educational initiatives involving graduate students and exposing trainees to
state-of-the-art research in the topics related to the research activities.

The project develops a new statistical framework for association analyses in
which similar model parameters are fused into subgroups while being estimated.
The developed methodology harnesses mixed integer programming (MIO) to extend
the best-subset regularization to perform a simultaneous operation of parameter
clustering and estimation in regression analysis. It also provides both analytic
and algorithmic tools to improve the existing statistical solutions. First, the
project builds a new MIO formulation of simultaneous clustering and estimation
for high-dimensional model parameters. The framework is flexible and efficient
to fit a wide range of important statistical models, including generalized
linear models (GLMs) for cross-sectional data, varying coefficient index models
for nonlinear interactions, and mixed-effects models for longitudinal data.
Second, to solve MIO problems, the project develops and implements a new fast
and reliable algorithm, termed as Alternating Penalized Operator for L-zero Loss
Optimization (APOLLO). Third, the project plans to establish both finite and
large sample properties of the MIO estimator for group memberships and group
parameters in GLMs and semiparametric models and investigate the theory of
integer optimization to justify the MIO solver, APOLLO.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
