
* 2113570
* New Techniques to Combine Measures of Statistical Significance from Heterogeneous Data Sources with Application to Analysis of Genomic Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2021,07/19/2021
* Zheyang Wu,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project is motivated by integrative analysis of large-scale genomic data,
where an important question is how to effectively combine statistical
significances, or p-values, from heterogeneous data sources. Despite recent
advances in theoretical and applied studies, statistical and computational
challenges remain in addressing critical data features, such as complex
correlations, discreteness of data, and availability of prior knowledge that
could have been utilized to boost signal detection. This project will develop
novel statistical methods to address the challenges and increase the statistical
power for detecting valid signals. The research will facilitate innovations in
statistical theory and methodology as well as in broad applications. The
research activities will leverage project-oriented education, promote multi-
disciplinary interactions, and benefit STEM education for the next generation of
engineers and scientists, especially members of minorities underrepresented in
the statistics field.

Specifically, the project will develop efficient and powerful p-value
combination tests by following a new strategy different from common literature.
Instead of designing and studying tests individually, the project will
strategically resolve problems based on general families of tests. The project
has three specific research aims. The first aim is to tackle the computational
challenges in applying the p-value combination approach into analyzing complex
heterogeneous data. The PI will develop fast and accurate algorithms to control
the error rates of general families of tests under general correlations and the
discreteness of the p-values. The second aim is to increase the power of p-value
combination for integrative analysis of complex data through utilizing the
correlation information, incorporating prior knowledge, automatically adapting
to complementary procedures, and revealing asymptotic optimality properties.
Finally, the PI will apply the developed methods into the integrative analysis
of large-scale genomic data of neurodegenerative diseases. Results of the
project are expected to advance global hypothesis testing methods for high-
dimensional complex data analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
