
* 2113342
* Reusing Data Efficiently for Iterative and Integrative Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2021,07/27/2022
* Snigdha Panigrahi,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 98,022.00

Drawing knowledge and reproducible results from complex data drives a broad
range of scientific disciplines. From a statistical viewpoint, model selection
and inference are the two fundamental tasks, the latter often pursued only after
models are chosen through data-driven procedures. Naively using the same data
for both tasks creates complicated correlations between the selected models and
their inferential properties, which inevitably affects the reproducibility of
findings from these models. The investigator develops methods for reusing data
from selection to compensate for these correlations while not squandering away
information from the full data. Finding immediate use in biomedical problems,
observational studies in the behavioral sciences, and engineering applications,
the methods will aid discoveries even when analyses rely on scarce samples. This
research has a broader outreach component in creating opportunities for
interdisciplinary engagement, training statisticians, and contributing to a new
graduate curriculum.

The project is geared towards efficient and reproducible inference through a
reuse of data from the model selection steps. Combining ideas from convex
optimization, probability theory, and statistical learning, the project seeks
solutions for two main thrusts. In the first thrust, the investigator develops
methods to integrate fresh samples available at a later point in time with
information from selection. This workflow is realized in modern applications
such as online streaming of data, which demand iterative inference on the fly.
In the second thrust, the investigator explores integrative inference by
combining selected models from different batches or splits or sources of data.
Aggregating inference from multiple sources through a reuse of samples will have
the potential for new discoveries that any single dataset may fail to report due
to a lack of power.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
