
* 2143844
* CAREER: Detecting Structured Anomalies in Large-Scale Sequential Decision Problems and Latent Variable Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,03/09/2022
* Xiaoou Li,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 77,446.00

This research project will develop new statistical methods and theory for
anomaly detection, which is a topic with a long history and wide-ranging
applications. Examples include fault detection in manufacturing, disease
outbreak detection in public health, spectrum sensing in signal processing, item
change detection in educational testing, and fraud detection in e-commerce.
While traditional methods mainly focus on identifying data points deviating from
their normal states independently, new challenges arise in the big-data era as
the anomalies often involve massive data with complex structures. This project
will develop novel statistical methods and theoretical results along with
computational tools to systematically deal with the detection of structured
anomalies in large-scale data. In addition to the technical contribution, the
methods developed in this project will positively impact research in other
disciplines. For instance, the change detection method developed in this project
will aid the monitoring of item pool quality in educational testing to improve
the validity and reliability of the tests. This project will also implement an
educational plan which includes engaging graduate and undergraduate students in
research activities, creating a new curriculum, and outreach to educational
institutes. The outcome of the project will be broadly disseminated through
journal publications and conferences, and publicly available statistical
software will be developed.

Specifically, this project will focus on two classes of problems in large-scale
sequential decision-making and latent variable models. The first class of
problems involves large-scale streaming data, which have become common in recent
years, owing to the rapid development in data acquisition technologies. The
project will establish a general compound sequential decision theory framework
to quantify the performance of procedures for large-scale online change
detection problems and develop efficient sequential decisions under this
framework. The second class of problems is on high-dimensional generalized
latent factor models with structured outliers. The project will develop
efficient model estimation and statistical inference methods and provide
theoretical guarantees on their accuracy and reliability. Fundamental issues
such as identifiability and estimability of the model will be addressed.
Moreover, novel technical tools will be developed to address theoretical and
methodological challenges in the above problems. For example, a monotone
coupling technique for stochastic processes living on a non-Euclidean space will
be developed to enhance the understanding of sequential decisions for multi-
stream problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
