
* 2150112
* Symposium on Statistical Innovation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/2022,05/02/2022
* Samuel Wu,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 17,000.00

This award supports the participation of graduate students, early-career
researchers, and members of groups underrepresented in statistics in the ICSA
2022 Applied Statistics Symposium: Statistical Innovations in the Era of
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, held at the University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, from June 19 ? June 22, 2022. The event serves as the
official annual meeting of the International Chinese Statistical Association
(ICSA) and provides the broader statistical community a unique opportunity to
meet and exchange ideas. The main objective of the conference is to bring
together both well established and junior researchers from around the nation and
the world who are actively pursuing theoretical and methodological research in
statistics, biostatistics, and data science as well as their applications. The
conference will provide a forum for discussion of cutting-edge developments in
statistical theory, methods, and tools for making accurate inference from
complex and noisy data sources.

The format of the conference includes multiple plenary talks, special invited
talks, invited sessions, and contributed posters. The organizers strive to
enhance diversity of speakers and maintain a healthy inclusive atmosphere. In
addition, a special panel discussion will be organized on mentoring and career
development, especially geared toward women and researchers from groups
underrepresented in STEM. For students, the conference will provide
opportunities such as a student paper competition and contributed poster
sessions. The website with details on the symposium is
https://symposium2022.icsa.org/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
