
* 2152780
* Randomized quasi-Monte Carlo sampling for scientific computing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2022,08/09/2022
* Art Owen,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project will improve methods of handling enormous numbers of variables that
one must account for in scientific, engineering and commercial computation. In
graphical rendering for scientific visualization or for computer games one has
to account for many different paths that light could take to form an image. In
financial forecasting it is necessary to model future prices changes of one or
more asset prices over many future time steps. Models for the flow of pollutants
must account for varying permeability of soil in many places. All of these
problems yield high dimensional problems where the dimension is the number of
underlying variables that have to be accounted for. The standard problem is to
average a quantity of interest with respect to random values of all those
unknowns. Related problems involve identifying which of those unknowns is most
important. This project will develop more computationally efficient ways to
solve these problems. The broader impacts include uses in graphics, finance and
other scientific and engineering computations. They also include training of
doctoral students to solve these methods and presentation of the work to other
researchers.

The specific methods under study are known as randomized quasi-Monte Carlo
(RQMC) sampling. These methods are much more efficient than the more familiar
Monte Carlo (MC) sampling which makes random choices of the inputs. Quasi-Monte
Carlo (QMC) makes deterministic and very balanced input choices. For smooth
enough problems QMC improves the convergence rate of MC sampling. RQMC
randomizes the QMC points to retain their balance but allow statistical error
estimates by replication. For smooth enough problems RQMC improves the rate
attained by QMC. One part of the project develops a median of means strategy to
combine independent RQMC replicates. This method is much more accurate than the
usual mean of means because it excludes outliers which can then provide yet more
improvements in the convergence rate. It requires new theoretical inputs to
QMC/RQMC coming from analytic combinatorics including a famous theorem of Hardy
and Ramanujan. The project also includes active subspace methods for reducing
the effective dimension of high dimensional integrands. Active subspaces are a
newly evolving method from the uncertainty quantification (UQ) literature that
this project will merge with RQMC. UQ methods are becoming more prominent in
engineering where users want better ways to judge the accuracy of their
numerical methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
