
* 2152999
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Residual Learning and Random Recursive Partitioning Methods for Gaussian Process Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, CDS&E-MSS
* 08/01/2022,07/13/2022
* Li Ma,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 119,999.00

Rare natural hazards (for example, storm surge and hurricanes) can cause loss of
lives and devastating damage to society and the environment. For instance,
Hurricane Katrina (2005) caused over 1,500 deaths and total estimated damages of
$75 billion in the New Orleans area and along the Mississippi coast as a result
of storm surge. Uncertainty quantification (UQ) has been used widely to
understand, monitor, and predict these rare natural hazards. The Gaussian
process (GP) modeling framework is one of the most widely used tools to address
such UQ applications and has been studied across several areas, including
spatial statistics, design and analysis of computer experiments, and machine
learning. With the advance of measurement technology and increasing computing
power, large numbers of measurements and large-scale numerical simulations at
increasing resolutions are routinely collected in modern applications and have
given rise to several critical challenges in predicting real-world processes
with associated uncertainty. While GP presents a promising route to carrying out
UQ tasks for modern emerging applications such as coastal flood hazard studies,
existing GP methods are inadequate in addressing several notable issues such as
computational bottleneck due to big datasets and spatial heterogeneity due to
complex structures in multi-dimensional domains. This project will develop new
Bayesian GP methods to allow scalable computation and to capture spatial
heterogeneity. The new methods, algorithms, theory, and software are expected to
improve GP modeling for addressing data analytical issues across a wide range of
fields, including physical science, engineering, medical science, public health,
and business science. The project will develop and distribute user-friendly
open-source software and provide interdisciplinary research training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

This project aims to develop a new Bayesian multi-scale residual learning
framework with strong theoretical support that allows scalable computation and
spatial nonstationarity for GP modeling. This framework integrates and extends
several powerful techniques respectively arising in the literature on GP and
that on multi-scale modeling, including predictive process approximation,
blockwise shrinkage, and random recursive partitioning on the domain. This
framework decomposes the GP into a cascade of residual processes that
characterize the underlying covariance structures at different resolutions and
that can be spatially heterogeneous in a variety of ways. The new framework
allows for adoption of blockwise shrinkage to infer the covariance of the
residual processes and incorporates random partition priors to enable adaptivity
to various spatial structures in multi-dimensional domains. New recursive
algorithms inspired by wavelet shrinkage and state-space models will be
developed to achieve linear computational complexity and linear storage
complexity in terms of the number of observations. The resulting GP method will
guarantee linear computational complexity in a serial computing environment and
also be easily parallelizable. This Bayesian multi-scale residual learning
method provides a new approach to addressing GP modeling issues among spatial
statistics, design and analysis of computer experiments, machine learning, and
nonparametric regression.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
