
* 2202327
* International Conference on Design of Experiments 2022
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/16/2022
* Manohar Aggarwal,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 9,900.00

This award supports participation of junior researchers in the 6th International
Conference on the Design of Experiments (ICODOE 2022) held at the University of
Memphis during May 8-11, 2022. The principles of design and analysis of
experiments form a fundamental part of research and development in areas as
diverse as medical trials, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing, engineering, market
research, agriculture, and many other fields. The conference will enable vital
interaction between outstanding researchers in academia and industry who are
advancing experimental design methodology with a view to improving systems for
everyday life, from food delivery to cancer treatment. In addition, the
conference will have a significant impact on the education of the next
generation of researchers in experimental design, both junior researchers and
those from underrepresented groups, by introducing them to innovative new
methodology and new application areas, and by providing ample opportunity for
these new researchers to interact with established researchers.

In the 21st century, the uses of experimental design have multiplied
considerably. For example, the Design of Experiments (DOE), the science of
pursuing knowledge through the process of efficient data collection, can enable
progress in the search for more efficient and speedy artificial intelligence
(AI) learning, which underpins the so-called "fourth industrial revolution." The
techniques and principles that are fundamental to DOE have already found use in
testing new algorithms. Sessions on reinforcement learning and machine learning
at the ICODOE conference will introduce these topic areas to the DOE community
and help to bridge knowledge between these communities. Other new developments
in experimental design include its use in on-line experiments within networks,
where lack of independence between treated and control groups is being tackled.
Important advances on the design of experiments in the pharmaceutical industry
have been made; conference sessions will present recent research dealing with
COVID trial recruitment, oncology dose finding, and adaptive designs for use in
clinical trials. In industry, the design of computer experiments and model
calibration remain of high importance. Related to this is screening to determine
the factors that most affect a response, and the use of sampling to analyze
enormous data sets. In addition, traditional areas such as optimal design are
being adapted to practitioner needs without losing efficiency. With sessions
devoted to all these topics, the ICODOE conference will provide multiple unique
interdisciplinary opportunities for early career researchers to form networks
for future collaboration and will also actively bolster participation of
underrepresented groups in mathematical and data sciences. Details on ICODOE
2022 can be found at https://www.memphis.edu/msci/icodoe22.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
