
* 2209974
* RUI: A Family of Versatile Mixture Models for Analyzing Mixed-Type Data with Asymmetry, Outliers, and Missing Values
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2022,07/15/2022
* Cristina Tortora,CA,San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Cluster analysis aims to discover patterns and homogeneity in the data. It
reveals subgroups in a population of study, and it has applications in many
fields. For example, in psychology, the clusters can be groups of patients that
can benefit from a specific set of treatments. To apply cluster analysis to a
data set, the data need to have some characteristics; for example, some
techniques require the data to be continuous, and oftentimes they need pre-
treatments. This project will develop a series of new clustering techniques that
are suitable for challenging data sets without pre-treatments, such as those
with high dimension, missing values, non-continuous variables, or with outliers.
Novel statistical approaches and software packages will be produced and made
available to general users. Undergraduate students will be directly involved in
the research project, and together with graduate students, they will be trained
to conduct research in data analysis. Many more students will be involved
through class projects and the research outcomes will enrich the content of some
of the offered courses.

A widely used approach for cluster analysis is model-based clustering. It
assumes that a population is a mixture of subpopulations, each of which can be
represented by a density function. A variety of clustering methods and
algorithms exist; however, they still have a series of limitations. Outliers and
missing data can impact the clustering results, the high number of parameters
makes the techniques not usable on high-dimensional data sets. Moreover, many
algorithms assume continuous data; and they are not readily adaptable to handle
discrete, binary, categorical, or a mixture of continuous and categorical data
types. This is a major limitation because, in many fields such as medicine,
biology, marketing, and many others, the data have all those characteristics. In
this project, new clustering techniques based on non-Gaussian model-based
clustering will be developed that will circumvent existing limitations on
cluster shape, outliers, missing data, dimension, and data type of current
methods. The novel methods will improve the flexibility in detecting skewed
clusters and in obtaining robustness when dealing with outliers and missing
data. Implicit and explicit dimension reduction techniques will be used for
dimension reduction and latent class models will be adopted to deal with mixed-
type data. The project will include a study on the indices to select the number
of clusters and a thorough comparison with existing methods on real and
simulated data will be undertaken, giving the users a guideline on which model
to use based on the goal and challenges in their data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
