
* 2209685
* Unsupervised and Semisupervised Heterogeneity Analysis Based on Gaussian Graphical Models
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2022,06/06/2022
* Shuangge Ma,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 199,661.00

Many complex diseases such as cancer are heterogeneous, with seemingly similar
patients having different clinical behaviors and varying responses to treatment.
To better understand disease biology and more effectively describe and treat
diseases, it is of essential importance to accurately model disease
heterogeneity, which has been made possible by the fast accumulation of omics
data. The existing studies are limited by analyzing simple data distributional
properties. This project will advance the paradigm of disease heterogeneity
analysis by accommodating how omics measurements are connected. Additionally,
the investigator will comprehensively study multiple data scenarios, including
when disease outcome (for example, survival) is completely unknown or known for
some patients, and when additional data (for instance, on demographics and
clinical history) is also available. The investigator will develop a set of
leading-edge statistical methods and conduct rigorous theoretical and numerical
investigations to compare with existing approaches. This project will
fundamentally advance multiple subfields of statistics, including heterogeneity
analysis, analysis of high-dimensional data, model selection, and optimization
with high-dimensional data. Equally importantly, applications of the developed
methods will lead to more accurate identification of heterogeneous patient
groups and their omics characteristics for multiple cancer types. This will
facilitate the identification of disease subtypes, treatment selection, and
prediction of disease paths, having a direct and profound impact on clinical
decision-making. Taking advantage of TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) data, the
investigator will deliver important heterogeneity models for lung and skin
cancer, valuable to basic science and clinical researchers. Additionally, this
project will benefit the education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students at Yale University, and foster additional collaborations.

Heterogeneity analysis plays an important role in statistics and biomedicine.
The development of high-throughput profiling has made it possible to conduct
more informative analysis but has also brought numerous statistical challenges.
Many commonly used methods are limited to marginal measures especially mean and
variance. In this project, building on a recent successful GGM (Gaussian
Graphical Model)-based heterogeneity analysis, the investigator will
systematically develop GGM-based unsupervised and semisupervised heterogeneity
analysis. In particular, the investigator will examine the complicated scenarios
with the presence of latent effects and regulating effects as well as
heterogeneity analysis under a hierarchy. A series of leading-edge methods built
on the penalized fusion technique will be developed. The consistency properties
of developed methods will be established under ultrahigh-dimensional settings.
The project will also develop efficient computational algorithms and conduct
extensive simulations and comparisons. The investigator plans to analyze the
TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) data on lung and skin cancer and deliver
heterogeneity models along with variable selection and model estimation results.
Statistical investigations under this project will broadly shed insight into
high-dimensional statistics, heterogeneity modeling, penalization, and network-
based analysis. Data analysis will significantly move the field of cancer omics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
