
* 2210726
* Collaborative Research: Learning Graphical Models for Nonstationary Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/08/2022
* Suhasini Subba Rao,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 150,000.00

In the biological and social sciences, many central questions require one to
understand how interactions within a complex system evolve over time. For
example, in neurosciences, monitoring time-varying connections among different
brain regions is important for studying the progression of neurodegenerative
diseases. As another example, risk management and monitoring in interconnected
financial markets often require learning how the linkages among different firms
evolve over time. These examples demonstrate the need to develop rigorous and
scalable statistical methods that are able to learn the evolution of
connectivity from large-scale complex time series data. Such methods can help
offer insights into the working of a complex system and guide data-driven policy
making.

While graphical models (GM) offer a powerful framework for data-driven discovery
of network architecture, existing statistical research in this area has focused
primarily on modeling time-invariant connections from stationary time series.
This project will develop estimation and inference methods for a nonstationary
graphical model framework called NonStGM. This framework captures nonstationary
dynamics in a multivariate system in the form of a sparse operator in the
Fourier domain, whose structure can in turn be estimated from data using
regularized regression methods. Key emphasis will be given on two classes of
structured nonstationarity which are prevalent in many applications: (a) local
stationarity that allows both abrupt changes and smooth evolution of the
temporal dynamics, and (b) periodic stationarity. NonStGM structures learned
from large-scale time series data will be used to build directed graphs with
time-varying vector autoregressive (VAR) models. Algorithms developed in this
project will be validated with extensive numerical experiments and real
electroencephalogram (EEG) data sets. All products will be made publicly
available in the form of open-source software packages. These products are
expected to aid clinical researchers, amongst others, in their understanding of
connectome abnormalities in the brains of patients suffering from neurological
disorders. Research outcomes will be integrated into educational modules of
graduate level courses. The project will provide numerous opportunities to train
graduate students in a topical research area of large-scale time series modeling
and will actively focus on enhancing diversity and inclusion in statistical
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
