
* 2210891
* Testing and Deep Learning for Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2022,05/20/2022
* Jane-Ling Wang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,997.00

The proposed research involves two distinctive fields, functional data analysis
(FDA) and deep learning. Functional data are random functions, which have become
increasingly common due to technological advances to handle massive data.
Examples include climate or air pollution data collected over a period of time.
The field has emerged as a mainstream research area, but the literature is
mainly focused on estimation problems and has not yet leveraged the advantages
of deep learning methods. This project aims to fill these gaps. It includes
several new tests for functional data and employs deep learning, instead of the
conventional nonparametric smoothing methods, to handle functional data. The
proposed approaches will be applied to various functional data, including
evaluating the effect of pollutants on lung cancer mortality and explaining the
effects of physical activity on health. A major emphasis is the development of
new theory and algorithms. Computer code associated with the research will be
publicly disseminated as R- or Python packages. The research findings will be
incorporated in graduate curricula, undergraduate research projects, and short
courses at workshops. They will also be presented at professional meetings.
Student researchers will receive training in research, computing and
communication skills.



Although functional data are intrinsically infinite dimensional, measurements
are only available at discrete locations, which may vary from subject to
subject. The number of measurement locations per subject can be small (sparse
functional data) or grow with the sample size (intensely sampled functional
data). The proposed research covers all types of sampling plans and employs,
whenever feasible, a single platform that is universally applicable. Such an
approach is important as it is not trivial to judge whether the sampling plan
for a particular dataset is intense or sparse. It also has the merit that the
theory is unified and automatically reveals the phase transitions of the
convergence rates of the corresponding estimators. Project 1 (Hypothesis Testing
for Functional Linear Models) aims at developing a general framework for
hypothesis testing under the setting of functional linear models. Existing
methods focus on testing a specific null hypothesis using a tailored test and
are not well suited for testing the temporal duration of the effect of a
functional covariate, such as the impact of PM2.5 on lung cancer. None of them
has been shown to be optimal for a composite null hypothesis. We propose a
single platform to test the null hypothesis that the regression coefficient of a
functional covariate resides in a closed subspace of all possible coefficient
functions. The proposed test, which resembles the classical F-test, is simple
and includes tests for global nullity, partial nullity and domain of the
coefficient function as special cases. Project 2 (Testing Homogeneity and
Independence for Functional Data) addresses the challenges of two fundamental
tasks, testing the homogeneity (equal distributions) and independence of
functional data. Such tests are infeasible when the functional process can only
be sampled at a few discrete locations, a situation that is ubiquitous in
longitudinal studies. For each task, we propose a customized version, marginal
homogeneity or marginal independence, that has practical implications and is
feasible for theory and implementation. Project 3 (Deep learning for Functional
Data) aims at bringing the success of deep learning to bear with functional
data. Surprisingly, the application of deep neural networks to functional data
has been scarce and remains an open problem. A recent approach, developed by a
team led by the PI, uses neural networks to search for the optimal basis
functions to represent a functional input that automatically adapts to the
prediction task in hand. We propose to expand the reach and theoretical
understanding of this adaptive basis approach. Another objective is to design
new methodology to impute partially observed functional data that uses
Transformers, a deep neural network that transforms a given sequence of
elements, such as the sequence of words in a sentence, into another sequence.
The project will offer a broad range of new opportunities for interdisciplinary
training of a future generation of statisticians and will contribute to
enhancing a more inclusive atmosphere in statistical sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
