
* 2210282
* Collaborative Research: Novel modeling and Bayesian analysis of high-dimensional time series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2022,07/27/2022
* Anindya Roy,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2025
* USD 109,999.00

Every aspect of modern life including economy and finance, communication, and
medical records, is associated with large amounts of data on several
measurements, often evolving over time. Understanding the progress over time,
finding an intrinsic relationship among different variables, and predicting
future observations are essential components of decision and policy-making.
However, apparent relations between two variables can appear in data caused by
their shared association with other components. The principal investigators
(PIs) will develop a model to re-express the multi-dimensional time series in
independent, one-dimensional, latent time series. The representation will
explain the evolution of the data over time and the intrinsic relations present
in the component variables. It can also help find a more accurate, efficiently
computable prediction formula for future observations by pulling information
across different components and time. The approach's simplicity and generality
will make it widely applicable and adaptable to diverse fields in economics,
finance, social sciences, communications, networks, neuroimaging, and others.
The PIs plan to develop free software packages to disseminate the results. They
are committed to supporting young researchers and promoting diversity through
graduate student training and involvement in the REU program.

The developed framework is based on representing an observed multi-dimensional
time series as a linear combination of several independent stationary latent
processes. The individual latent time series are modeled flexibly with
unspecified spectral densities. The PIs will study the conditional independence
structure among component time series and the causality of the time series over
the temporal domain using a Bayesian approach. They will put independent priors
on individual spectral densities through a finite random series prior, and on
the matrix of the linear transformation decomposed as a product of a sparse
matrix and an orthogonal matrix, the former of which induces a graphical
structure for conditional independence among component series. Through this
representation, desirable stationarity and causality structures can be imposed.
Decoupling through the Whittle likelihood approximation and Hamiltonian Monte-
Carlo methods will allow efficient posterior sampling. The causality over nodal
time series will be addressed by a Direct Acyclic Graph modeling of the residual
process. The formulation seamlessly addresses a mixed frequency sampling
situation, difficult to incorporate into competing methods. The developed
framework efficiently addresses both temporal and nodal causality respectively
by characterization in terms of the Schur-complementation and using a directed
acyclic graph, allowing a natural interpretation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
