
* 2210557
* Discriminant Analysis in High-Dimensional Latent Factor Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2022,07/20/2022
* Marten Wegkamp,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

This research project concerns classification of high-dimensional features, an
important part of statistical learning theory. The project will formulate high-
dimensional latent factor models that have a low-dimensional, hidden structure
to guarantee successful statistical classification performance based on suitable
projections of the high-dimensional data. Results of this research are expected
to advance understanding on how to achieve optimal classification. This project
has important applications to recent advances in immunology and cancer studies,
which revealed that hidden mechanisms can be directly connected to health
outcomes. This project offers a principled way to analyze such high-dimensional
datasets and will provide computationally efficient classification rules. The
project will involve collaboration with computational biologists to validate the
new models and methodology.

Specifically, this project constructs novel classifiers based on principal
component analysis with a necessary debiasing part followed by linear
discriminant analysis and develops their statistical and computational
properties. This project focuses on study of the important subclass of tuning-
free classifiers that interpolate the data, but still possess good predictive
power. In addition, this research aims to develop minimax adaptive bounds for
the excess misclassification error under general latent factor model
specifications and to prove that the new methods achieve these bounds, thereby
establishing their rate optimality. Finally, the usefulness of the new
techniques will be demonstrated via applications to data from immunology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
