
* 2210007
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Inference for Multivariate and Functional Time Series via Sample Splitting
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/13/2022
* Runmin Wang,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 110,000.00

Multivariate and functional time series are prevalent and routinely collected in
many fields. Statistical inference of such time series is a fundamental problem
in modern time series analysis and has broad applications in many scientific
areas, including bioinformatics, business, climate science, economics, finance,
genetics, and signal processing. Compared with existing methodologies, this
research project will provide nonparametric inference procedures that can
accommodate a wide range of dimensionality and require weak assumptions on the
data generating processes. The methodology ensuing from the project will be
disseminated to the relevant scientific communities via publications, conference
and seminar presentations, and the development of open-source software. The
project will involve multiple research mentoring initiatives, including efforts
on broadening participation, and will offer advanced topic courses to introduce
the state-of-the-art techniques in time series analysis. The project will
provide a broad range of interdisciplinary training opportunities at all
educational levels and will contribute to the future workforce professional
development.

The project will develop a systematic body of methods and theory on inference
for both multivariate (including high-dimensional) time series and functional
time series based on sample splitting (SS) and self-normalization (SN).
Recently, the SN technique has been advanced to the inference of high-
dimensional time series, but it requires the use of a trimming parameter. Also,
its scope of applicability is limited to high-dimensional time series with weak
panel dependence which might be unrealistic in many modern time series
applications. In turn, the existing SN for functional time series relies on
dimension reduction by functional principal component analysis and, hence, the
resulting procedure may be powerless when the alternative is orthogonal to the
space spanned by the top principal components used in the procedure. To address
these major limitations, this project will develop a new unified framework based
on SS-SN, in conjunction with inference for multivariate and functional time
series, and investigate its utility in application to analysis of time series of
low, medium, high or infinite dimensions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
