
* 2210658
* Collaborative Research: Semiparametric and Reinforcement Learning for Precision Medicine
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Xinyi Li,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 133,850.00

Precision medicine seeks to optimize the medical treatments tailored to
individual characteristics, including genetic features, demographic information,
environmental factors, etc. Individualized treatment rule formalizes the process
of decision making that translates the patients? information into the
recommended treatment, and a dynamic treatment regime consists of the sequence
of individualized treatment decisions for one or more treatment decision times.
Meanwhile, recent developments in medical imaging technologies dramatically
affect disease and health studies. Biomedical imaging and imaging-guided
interventions are key in the infrastructure for precision medicine. It is of
great importance to developing an approach for incorporating imaging data along
with other abundant information in precision medicine research. However, the
current exploration for these aforementioned abundant features in precision
medicine study is far from sufficient. Motivated by this, the project targets to
build the statistical analysis framework in precision medicine incorporating
abundant features and provide the support of data-driven decision making, which
will not enrich statistical methodological studies but provide an integrated
early diagnosis tool and an informative tool to guide treatment and lifestyle
intervention in health science. In addition, the project will provide training
and support for graduate students, as well as instructions in both
undergraduate- and graduate-level courses.

The PIs will adapt the Q-learning, semiparametric learning, functional data
analysis, and reinforcement learning frameworks to precision medicine with
abundant features, including medical images, genetic features, demographic
information, environmental factors, etc. Focusing on different scenarios, this
research program consists of three components: (i) functional individualized
treatment regime study incorporating abundant features, along with the
development of a novel basis expansion tool to handle the multi-dimensional
image feature; (ii) generalized functional individualized treatment regime study
incorporating abundant features, which allows the response variable discrete;
and (iii) functional Q-learning with abundant features, which extends the
methodology to the multi-stage decision setting. The investigators will conduct
the theoretical developments, develop efficient algorithms, and implement and
apply the tools to real-world data for all these components in this project.
From the statistical point of view, the theoretical explorations will yield more
insights into semiparametric and reinforcement learning in precision medicine
with abundant features. From the computational point of view, efficient and
scalable algorithms will be developed and implemented in a form of publicly
available software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
