
* 2210561
* Nonparametric Estimation and Inference with Network Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2022,08/11/2022
* Matias Cattaneo,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Network data is ubiquitous in the statistical, social, behavioral, and
biomedical sciences. This type of dependent data captures interactions between
the units of study, such as output between firms, trade between countries, or
fundraising between politicians. Network-based information is widely used
nowadays for both testing domain-specific hypotheses and policy-making decisions
in data and decision sciences. However, the remarkable proliferation of network
data in empirical work has not been accompanied by a complete development of
statistical methods guiding its correct use and providing valid estimation and
inference procedures. Current practice employing network data is limited by the
few results available in the literature, and many estimation and inference
problems of practical importance remain unresolved. In this project, the
investigators seek to undertake a comprehensive study of non-parametric and
semi-parametric statistical methods employing dyadic data, data indexed by pairs
of units such as trade between two countries. The established methods and theory
will serve as a building block for the analysis of more general network data.
The investigators plan to develop general-purpose software to implement the main
theoretical and methodological results. The project will provide training
opportunities for graduate students.

The research will focus on non-parametric and semi-parametric estimation and
inference methods employing dyadic network data, which poses specific technical
challenges due to its inherent lack of statistical independence. The project's
ultimate goal is to develop comprehensive large-sample approximations leading to
optimal and/or robust point estimation and statistical inference procedures for
functional estimation, covering density and regression functions as special
cases. To this end, the investigators will develop novel strong approximation
results for stochastic processes, which will then be deployed to approximate the
distribution of functional statistics based on dyadic network data. Minimax
optimal uniform convergence rates for different non-/semi-parametric estimators
using network data will also be established. The main theoretical results will
then be applied to semiparametric estimation relying on network data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
