
* 2210849
* Scalable Algorithm Design for Unbiased Estimation via Couplings of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/13/2022
* Guanyang Wang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 23,291.00

Markov chain Monte Carlo methods have revolutionized statistics and data science
in the past several decades. These methods are routinely used for simulation and
numerical integration in nearly all scientific areas. In practice, however,
parallel implementation is a long-standing bottleneck for Markov chain Monte
Carlo methods. Existing Monte Carlo estimators generally suffer from bias, which
precludes their direct use of modern parallel computing devices. This project
aims to design a new framework to construct unbiased estimators based on Markov
chain Monte Carlo outputs. Results of the project will advance the development
of unbiased estimators and efficient algorithms that can scale up for massive
datasets. The new method will empower practitioners in scientific fields such as
chemistry, biology, and computer science that face high-dimensional simulation
problems. This project will provide training opportunities to undergraduate and
graduate students.

The technical goals of this project include two interconnected aspects. The
first focus is on unbiased estimators for general simulation-based inference
problems by combining the idea of the existing unbiased Markov chain Monte Carlo
and Multilevel Monte Carlo methods. The second aspect focuses on designing fast
algorithms for unbiased estimation. The efficiency of the developed method
relies on the underlying Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm and the design of a
coupling strategy between the two Markov chains. This project will theoretically
investigate the convergence speed of different existing algorithms and develop
practical, implementable algorithms. The new method will be applied to solve
problems arising from diverse areas such as operation research, optimization,
and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
