
* 2210790
* Low-Rank Functional Data Analysis for Time-Resolved Spectroscopy and the Search for Earth-Like Exoplanets
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2022,08/09/2022
* Thomas Loredo,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 304,670.00

Spectroscopy is essential in many scientific fields, including astronomy, where
comparisons of lab-based spectra to stellar spectra reveal the chemical
compositions of stars. Time-resolved spectroscopy?measuring spectra changing
over time?has emerged as a powerful tool for probing the dynamics of many
systems. It is used to study the variability of stars, the molecular dynamics of
complex compounds, and time-dependent chemical processes in biological systems.
This project aims to develop a framework for analyzing time-resolved
spectroscopic data in settings where incomplete measurements are made across
related objects, or repeatedly for one system, with random variations seen
across the replications. Careful pooling and analysis of data across the
replications can identify signatures of the processes producing spectral
variability. The main application will be modeling time-resolved spectroscopy of
stars as candidate hosts of extrasolar planetary systems, particularly data from
searches for Earth-like planets orbiting Sun-like stars (exo-Earths). Small
extrasolar planets are not directly visible, but their presence can be
discerned: the tug of a planet on its star produces a small wobbling motion,
which can be detected by measuring extremely small, time-varying Doppler shifts
of spectral lines. Currently, the main obstacle to observing small planets is
the spectral activity of the host star?the comings and goings of dark sunspots,
bright plages, and flares can mask or mimic a planet's time-dependent signal.
The project will develop new algorithms to disentangle stellar activity signals
from planet signals in time-resolved spectral data. The project will also
support training of a diverse population of astronomy students and postdoctoral
researchers in advanced statistics, many of whom will go on to pursue non-
academic STEM careers involving data science.

A time-resolved (dynamic) spectrum can be described with a bivariate function of
wavelength and time representing the (relative) intensity of light measured by a
spectrograph versus wavelength and time. The goal of this project is to develop
a framework to model data measuring a single dynamic spectrum, or many related
dynamic spectra, with incomplete sampling and noise, for example, from
observations of many candidate exoplanet systems with similar host stars. The
framework will integrate techniques from approximation theory, and from
functional data analysis (FDA), the branch of statistics concerned with
analyzing data comprising measurements of ensembles of functions. A core
component of the framework will be use of separable expansions, writing the
dynamic spectrum as a sum of products of paired univariate functions of
wavelength ("speclets") and time ("modulators"). When the bivariate function of
wavelength and time is given, approximation theory identifies optimal speclets
and modulators, using the asymmetric Hilbert-Schmidt decomposition, a procedure
resembling singular value decomposition (SVD). Real data do not provide precise,
dense sampling of the bivariate function of wavelength and time. The project
will build on FDA approaches, including functional principal components analysis
(FPCA) and hierarchical Bayesian stochastic process models, to enable speclet
and modulator basis discovery that accounts for noise and incomplete, irregular
sampling. The framework will be applied to simulated spectra of populations of
stars to build a model for stochastic stellar variability that will enable
discovery of exo-Earths in Doppler radial velocity searches for exoplanets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
