
* 2210563
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Optimal Transport in High Dimensional Mixtures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/16/2022
* Florentina Bunea,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,999.00

This project studies high-dimensional mixture models, a class of statistical
models that can be used to analyze data arising in linguistics, computational
biology, and particle physics. This research project aims to define a new
measure of distance between distributions that measures their similarity with
respect to a mixture model and offers a principled way to compare, transform,
and analyze high-dimensional data sets. As part of this project, the
investigators will develop fast algorithms for estimating this distance and
theoretical guarantees allowing this distance to be used for statistical
inference.

Specifically, this project defines a sketched Wasserstein distance (SWD) and
will develop its computational and statistical properties. The primary aims are
to establish duality relations for this distance, develop computationally
feasible estimators for SWD using both primal and dual formulations, and to
study the rates of convergence of the new estimators. In addition, the research
aims to develop lower bounds to establish the rate optimality of these
estimators and establish distributional limits to allow for the construction of
asymptotically valid confidence intervals. These tools will be applied to data
in text analysis, systems biology, and high-energy physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
