
* 2210504
* Nonparametric Estimation via Mixed Derivatives
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/14/2022
* Adityanand Guntuboyina,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Understanding the precise relationship between a specific variable of interest
and a related set of covariables is a fundamental problem arising in many areas
of science and engineering. It is usually necessary to combine two different
sources of information to solve this problem. The first source of information is
domain knowledge or theory, which often suggests certain basic forms for the
relationship between the variables. The second source of information is observed
data on the values of the variables for a set of experimental conditions or
subjects. Effective solutions to the problem can only be obtained by efficiently
combining both sources of information. The development of such a methodology is
the primary goal of this project. Assuming the function governing the
relationship between the variables is smooth in a certain sense, the observed
data is then brought in to find the function satisfying the assumed smoothness
that best explains the observed data. This project will explore different ways
of carrying out this scheme and develop novel methods and computational
algorithms useful to practitioners in broad scientific areas. Most existing
methods for studying these problems either make strong prior assumptions that
are unrealistic and lead to wrong conclusions on the relationship between the
variables, or weak prior assumptions that lead to requiring unrealistically
enormous sizes of datasets for reliable conclusions. The developed approach
based on "mixed partial derivative smoothness constraints" effectively
compromises these two extreme approaches and will lead to methods of great
practical value. The material emanating from this research will be disseminated
through seminars and undergraduate as well as graduate teaching. The methods
from this project will be made available to the wider statistics and scientific
community through the development of software packages.

This project focuses on nonparametric function estimation problems under
smoothness constraints involving mixed partial derivatives. The investigator
plans to expand recently developed methodology for nonparametric regression
under mixed partial derivatives of first and second orders to allow for
restricted interaction orders, design faster algorithms for computation, and
prove theoretical accuracy results under more general design assumptions. The
possibility of near parametric rates under strong sparsity settings will be
explored in a more general setting involving tensor product bases (including
complex exponentials and radial basis functions). Uncertainty quantification
will be systematically explored using Bayesian approaches with a main focus on
Cauchy priors. New mixed derivative approaches will be explored in shape-
constrained regression, including those based on Entire Monotonicity with
restricted interactions and total Popoviciu convexity. Mixed derivative
approaches for spectral density estimation of time series and density estimation
will also be studied.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
