
* 2210929
* Nonparametric Total Variation Regression for Multivariate Process Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/2022,06/03/2022
* Michael Pokojovy,TX,University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 119,853.00

Process data of interest frequently occur in engineering, manufacturing,
commerce, environmental science and other arenas. For example, water or air
contamination levels, configuration of a drilled metal part, chemical
composition of a pharmaceutical product, and operational characteristics of
computer network, all changing over time, are routinely monitored in real time.
Upsets or shifts away from a stable, consistent flow of process data are
indicative of special cause intrusion(s). These special causes can be
significantly detrimental to decision making and process understanding in the
context of a particular application. Development of reference-free statistical
control charts for monitoring multivariate processes for both gradual and abrupt
changes in the mean vector has been significantly hampered by a lack of suitable
nonparametric regression methodology. In response to this challenge, this
project will address the acute need for nonparametric estimators for
multivariate process data and will develop new reference-free methods for
statistical process monitoring. The outcomes of this project will benefit
society through enhanced statistical quality assurance in industrial
manufacturing, business, commerce, healthcare, and other domains of societal
importance. The results of this project will be implemented in a form of
publicly available software. Furthermore, the project will involve multiple
research training and career mentoring initiatives at various educational levels
and will offer multiple opportunities for interdisciplinary training, with a
particular focus on broadening participation in statistical sciences.

The project will advance the frontiers of nonparametric multivariate regression
by developing new theory and methodology of statistical process control for
individuals multivariate process data. In the context of nonparametric
estimation for independent sub-Gaussian processes, the goal is to investigate
nonparametric total variation (TV) and taut string (TS) estimators for
multivariate process data with piecewise smooth process mean, establish well-
posedness for associated optimization problems, prove their equivalence, and
investigate asymptotic consistency/convergence rates for TV/TS estimators in
various practically relevant topologies. These theoretical results will be
applied to develop computationally efficient algorithmic implementations of the
TV/TS estimator, investigate convergence and complexity of these algorithms, and
showcase their performance based on synthetic and real data. Subsequently,
algorithmic implementations of the TV/TS estimator will be used to design a new
class of reference-free statistical control charts for nonparametric monitoring
of multivariate process mean and compare them to state-of-the-art competitors
under a variety of practically relevant scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
