
* 2210468
* Best Subset Selection: Statistics Meets Quantum Computing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2022,07/27/2022
* Yuan Ke,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 127,176.00

Recent developments in quantum computing have shown that quantum computers can
outperform classic computers in specific problems. However, these problems are
highly physics-oriented and are not appealing to the statistics and data science
community. Natural questions arise, such as whether quantum computers will
benefit the statistics community and what kind of statistical problems can be
sped-up by quantum computers? There are significant challenges in developing
quantum algorithms to solve statistical problems. First, a quantum computer does
not provide deterministic results but gives a random result due to its intrinsic
mechanism. Second, in general, existing quantum search algorithms depend on a
function that can tell us if the solution is correct or not. For example, we can
define a function to check if a Sudoku solution is correct or not, although such
a function cannot help us directly solve the Sudoku problem. Unfortunately, we
are not able to define this type of function for most statistics problems due to
the randomness in observations. Third, the development of public available
quantum computers is still prototypical. The capacity of the state-of-the-art
quantum computer is far from enough to conduct big data applications. This
project aims at developing a set of transformative quantum algorithms to bridge
the gap between quantum computing and statistical learning. The principal
investigator (PI) will investigate a series of well-defined research problems,
including methodological validity, algorithm complexity, theoretically rigorous,
and empirical versatility. Completing the project can invigorate statistical
learning with powerful quantum computers and provide key insights into the new
research area of quantum statistical learning. The PI plans to develop efficient
quantum computing software packages to disseminate the results. The project will
offer undergraduate and graduate students opportunities to participate in
cutting-edge and interdisciplinary research.

Best subset selection has been a statistically attractive but computationally
challenging problem. Solving it involves a combinatorial search over all subsets
and hence is an NP-hard problem. In this project, the PI will establish a
quantum statistical learning framework for the best subset selection problems by
investigating three closely related research aims: (i) explore a novel non-
oracular quantum search algorithm that achieves near-optimal computational
complexity without requiring any oracle information of the true solution; (ii)
develop an efficient quantum linear prediction algorithm through the compact
singular value decomposition and estimates the inverse singular values by
utilizing a recently developed quantum tomography technique; (iii) design a
hybrid quantum-classical network structure to advance complementary advantages
of quantum and classical computing by implementing computational demanding steps
on quantum nodes and running capacity demanding steps on classical nodes. This
project will benefit the subsequent studies in quantum algorithm development for
solving statistical problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
