
* 2210368
* New Challenges in Statistical Inference with Regularized Optimal Transport
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2022,06/14/2022
* Kengo Kato,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 270,000.00

Driven by the abundance of data and computational advances, the application
domain of statistical inference is ever-growing. Human-facing technologies, such
as autonomous vehicles or robotic-assisted surgery, demand principled inference
methods subject to rigorous performance guarantees. As many inference tasks
reduce to comparing probability distributions, optimal transport theory ? which
provides a powerful framework for doing so ? has emerged as a tool of choice for
designing and analyzing inference methods. However, statistical optimal
transport is bottlenecked by the curse of dimensionality, whereby quantitative
results either deteriorate exponentially with dimension (for example, estimation
rates) or are largely unavailable (for example, limit distributions, resampling,
and more). To overcome this impasse, this project will explore modern
regularization techniques for optimal transport distances and develop a
comprehensive statistical theory to facilitate principled inference in high
dimensions. This innovation is expected to have a strong impact on the broad
application domain of statistical inference in industry, commerce, science, and
society, by promoting principled implementations at scale backed by theoretical
assurances. In conjunction, the educational component will provide rigorous
training and diverse recruitment opportunities for students, along with a
deliberate plan to promote collaborations between statistics and engineering
communities working on optimal transport and related fields.

This project will explore three prominent optimal transport regularization
methods: (1) smoothing via convolution with a chosen kernel; (2) slicing via
lower-dimensional projections; and (3) convexification via an entropic penalty.
These techniques preserve the virtuous structure of classic optimal transport
but reduce its complexity, which opens the door to a scalable statistical
theory. The research agenda will tackle key theoretical challenges concerning
statistical inference with regularized optimal transport distances, encompassing
empirical error rates, limit distributions, semiparametric efficiency,
resampling methods, Berry-Esseen type bounds, and computational-statistical
gaps. The developed theory will be leveraged to address various inference
applications, including generative modeling, testing, vector quantile
regression, and intrinsic dimension estimation. The project will result in the
theoretical underpinnings of inference methods at scale based on optimal
transport theory, providing guidance and insight for practical implementations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
