
* 2210392
* Scientific Findings across Multiple Environments: Replication, Robustness, and Equity in Genetic Association Studies
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2022,07/21/2022
* Chiara Sabatti,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This project is motivated by the need to explore scientific questions of
interest in multiple environments/populations and the challenges that this task
presents both in terms of methods and communication of results. On the one hand,
replicability is the cornerstone of science, and no finding can be considered
part of the established corpus of knowledge unless the experiment/observation
that led to it has been repeated under at least slightly different
circumstances. On the other hand, overly substantial changes in environment
might influence the very mechanism behind the original finding, so that, rather
than invalidating it, variation of a result simply underscores the need to
account for heterogeneity. Determining when the evidence accumulated in favor of
a finding is enough to consider it corroborated and determining the variability
of a pattern across different environments are challenging tasks. This research
project aims to advance both the methods used to address these questions and the
tools employed to communicate findings to the larger community of scientists and
the public. The project includes outreach and communication activities, as well
as training of graduate students through their involvement in the research.

The investigator and collaborators aim to develop new statistical methods to
measure the replicability of a finding across multiple studies and to evaluate
the uncertainty associated with it in different environments. They will leverage
recent methodological developments, such as the notion of e-values, conformal
prediction intervals, and knockoffs inference. Exploiting the links that have
been established between robustness of findings and causal mechanisms, this
project intends to provide users with predictive models for outcomes of interest
that are interpretable, have been validated across variable conditions, and have
appreciable out-of-sample performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
