
* 2210358
* Change Point Detection for Data with Network Structure
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2022,07/07/2022
* George Michailidis,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Detecting breaks and anomalies in a mechanism that drives the generation of data
represents a critical task, due to numerous applications in high-impact areas
including health, social, and engineering sciences. This project aims to advance
the state of the art of change point analysis for big and complex data, by
developing a simple to implement, yet powerful, scalable algorithmic framework,
thus providing new tools to examine high-dimensional, long streams for events of
interest. The potential application domains of this project include but not
limited to occurrence of seizure in brain connectivity data sets, coordinated
market and other systemic failures in economic and finance data, and
identification of orchestrated malicious activities in computer network streams.
The developed algorithms and methodology will be implemented in open-source
software, while curated data sets will be made available to the community for
use in change point analysis investigations. The project will offer multiple
unique opportunities for interdisciplinary research training of the future
generation of statisticians and for further enhancement of diversity in
mathematical sciences.

To achieve the stated goals, the project (i) develops a unified detection
framework for change points in complex statistical models for network and high
dimensional time streams and (ii) provides a rigorous theoretical analysis of
their accuracy in the form of consistency, finite sample bounds, and asymptotic
distributions for the change points and other model parameters. The framework
leverages a simple, easy to implement two-step strategy, wherein the first step
one selects windows of the time series of appropriate length and using a
standard exhaustive search strategy identifies at most a single change point in
each of them. In the second step, a second search based on a global information
criterion is employed to eliminate spurious change points. The strategy exhibits
linear complexity in time (and thus matches the fastest available in the
literature), yet is simple to implement and theoretically analyze, in particular
for complex statistical models that exhibit network and low rank structure.
Further, the following issues are rigorously addressed: (i) conditions of
identifiability of the model parameters and the change points and (ii)
probabilistic guarantees and uncertainty quantification for them in the presence
of high dimensionality, network structure, temporal dependence, as well as
dependence across data streams.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
