
* 2210913
* Innovations in Statistical Methodology and Applications to Economics, Engineering, Health, and Medicine
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2022,08/01/2022
* Tze Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The new millennium has witnessed the Big Data and Multi-cloud era which poses
new challenges and opens up new opportunities for the mathematical (including
statistical, computational, and data) sciences and their interactions with
engineering, economics, finance, health and medicine. A long-term objective of
this project is to develop innovative statistical methodologies and combine them
with technological advances for resolving fundamental problems in these fields.
Results of the project will have importance and relevance in personalized
medicine, health and recommender systems, optimal dose-finding designs,
reproducibility of scientific results under complex experiments, and on the
foundations of machine and deep learning.

The project is broadly divided into four areas. The first is the theory on
implementation of nonparametric contextual bandits, with novel applications to
personalized medicine and health and recommender systems. The second is nature-
inspired metaheuristic optimization in artificial (machine) intelligence,
particularly the solution of the long-standing open problem concerning on-line
optimization of the tuning parameters of the metaheuristic algorithm in complex
high-dimensional settings. One of its applications is optimal design of dose-
finding trials in master protocols, which are studied in the third area of the
project. The third area covers valid and efficient post-selection multiple
testing in biomedicine and information technology in the big data era, for which
some machine learning/feature engineering/variable selection algorithm is
typically used to extract features/variables for subsequent hypothesis
generation and statistical testing. The project will address the reproducibility
issues and ?replication crisis? with this data-dependent choice of features and
hypotheses for statistical inference data by resolving foundational issues
concerning valid post-selection inference. It also covers precision-guided drug
and vaccine development and master protocols for early-phase and confirmatory
clinical trials. Also covered are innovative study designs and analyses of
point-of-care trials and observational studies, and development of mobile health
platforms and wearable devices to improve and facilitate evidence-based
management of chronic diseases. The fourth area is the statistical foundation of
deep learning and provides the mathematical theory of convolutional neural
networks and gradient descent, and applications to medical imaging and
neuroscience. It also develops a novel Markov chain Monte Carlo method and
closely related efficient adaptive particle filters in nonlinear state space
models that have far-ranging applications in engineering and economics. The
broader impacts of the project includes (i) direct applications in engineering,
finance, insurance, risk management and surveillance, and (ii) developing new
advanced courses and revising the curriculum in financial and risk modeling,
statistics and data science, and clinical trials and biostatistics, which could
positively impact the training of graduate and undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
