
* 2210637
* Dependable Predictive Inference with Uncertainty-Aware Machine Learning
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Matteo Sesia,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 54,805.00

Complex statistical and machine learning models, including deep neural networks,
are widely applied in many fields and they are becoming increasingly central to
data-driven science, despite serious concerns about their reliability. These
models cannot always be trusted, especially in sensitive and high-noise
applications such as those found in genomics, as well as in all of those
contexts in which machine learning predictions will affect people?s health or
welfare. A crucial current limitation of machine learning models is that they
may not adequately capture uncertainty and their predictions often tend to be
overconfident. Further, machine learning models are known to sometimes reinforce
latent biases hidden in the data, and thus they may lead to predictions that are
systematically biased against certain groups of individuals. Finally, many
statistical and machine learning models may perform well within the specific
data set in which they are trained, but their predictions are not robust to
changing data environments, such as those corresponding to the genetic analysis
of individuals from populations with different ancestries. To address the above
limitations, this research project will develop general methods for accurate,
fair, and robust uncertainty estimation in machine learning. In the specific
contexts of genomics, this work will lead to improved genetic risk prediction
across human populations, facilitating further developments in personalized
medicine, bridging health disparities across populations, and helping deepen our
scientific knowledge of heritable diseases. This project will support education
in statistical and machine learning research by providing training opportunities
for graduate students. This project will also help promote diversity in
statistical and machine learning research by helping support the investigator?s
involvement with the Diversity, Inclusion, Access JumpStart initiative of the
University of Southern California. In particular, the investigator will offer
summer research opportunities focusing for undergraduate students on the topics
of this project.

This research consists of three distinct but closely connected parts. The first
part will develop novel conformal inference methods to train and calibrate
uncertainty-aware machine learning models that are both accurate and reliable.
This research will involve the development of novel loss functions and
innovative stochastic optimization algorithms. The second part of this project
will develop methods for training and calibrating uncertainty-aware machine
learning models that treat individuals belonging to different groups fairly,
carefully using hold-out observations to correct for possible algorithmic or
data biases. The third part of this project will develop methods based on data
holdout and conformal inference to construct predictive models that are more
robust to possible shifts in the covariate distribution. These models will be
able to leverage possible interactions among the available predictive variables
and ultimately lead to powerful multivariate models of genetic risk for
heritable diseases that may be relied on across different populations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
