
* 2210672
* Collaborative Research: Use of Random Compression Matrices For Scalable Inference in High Dimensional Structured Regressions
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 06/15/2022,06/14/2022
* Rajarshi Guhaniyogi,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 05/31/2025
* USD 179,988.00

As the scientific community moves into a data-driven era, there is an
unprecedented opportunity to leverage large scale imaging, genetic and EHR data
to better characterize and understand human disease to improve treatment and
prognosis. Consequently, analysis of such datasets with flexible statistical
models has become an enormously active area of research over the last decade. To
this end, this project plans to develop a completely new class of methods, which
are based on the idea of fitting statistical models on datasets obtained by
compressing big data using a well designed mechanism. The development enables
efficient modeling of massive data on an unprecedented scale. While the
motivation of the investigators comes primarily from complex modeling and
uncertainty quantification of massive biomedical data, the statistical methods
are general enough to set important footprints in the related literature of
machine learning and environmental sciences. The overarching goal also includes
the development of software toolkits to better serve practitioners in related
disciplines. Further, the projects will provide first hand training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, including female and
students from minority communities, in state-of-the-art statistical
methodologies and imaging/genetic/EHR data. By disseminating the outcome of the
project among high school students in terminology that they can understand, the
project can have far reaching effects to enhance public scientific literacy
about statistics.

Two crucial aspects of modern statistical learning approaches in the era of
complex and high dimensional data are accuracy and scale in inference. Modern
data are increasingly complex and high dimensional, involving a large number of
variables and large sample size, with complex relationships between different
variables. Developing practically efficient (in terms of storage and analysis)
and theoretically ?optimal? Bayesian high dimensional parametric or
nonparametric regression methods to draw accurate inference with valid
uncertainties from such complex datasets is an extremely important problem. To
offer a general solution for this problem, the investigators will develop
approaches based on data compression using a small number of random linear
transformations. The approach either reduces a large number of records
corresponding to each variable using compression, in which case it maintains
feature interpretation for adequate inference, or, reduces the dimension of the
covariate vector for each sample using compression, in which case the focus is
only on prediction of the response. In either case, data compression facilitates
drawing storage efficient, scalable and accurate Bayesian inference/prediction
in presence of high dimensional data with sufficiently rich parametric and
nonparametric regression models. An important goal is to establish precise
theoretical results on the convergence behavior of the fitted models with
compressed data as a function of the number of predictors, sample size,
properties of random linear transformations and features of these models. The
approaches will be used to study neurological disorders by combining brain
imaging data, genetic data and electronic health records (EHR) data from the UK
Biobank database. The project will also contribute on a broader front to
advancing the interdisciplinary research training and broadening participation
in statistical sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
