
* 2210796
* Latent Dependence and Identifiable, Graphical, Deep Modeling of Discrete Latent Variables
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2022,07/27/2022
* Yuqi Gu,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 50,000.00

In the data science era, complex dependent and heterogeneous data emerge in
various subject areas, from education to psychology to medicine. Latent variable
models are powerful statistical approaches to tackle such complex data. However,
existing statistical methods for analysis of latent variables are mostly limited
to relatively simple settings and cannot meet the need for modern high
dimensional applications. For example, one critical motivating example for this
project is personalized learning, for which educators aim to diagnose individual
students? latent strengths and weaknesses across many skills based on
educational assessment data. In this scenario, it is highly desirable to make
discrete statistical diagnoses about student?s fine-grained skills, to
understand the relationships between various latent skills and the underlying
cognitive processes, and to develop targeted remedial instructions. To achieve
these goals, this project aims to develop a suite of new statistical tools for
discrete latent variable modeling. The new statistical methodology is intended
to apply not only to educational data, but also to data from psychology,
medicine, genetics, and health sciences. The tools will be implemented in
publicly available software. These research tools are expected to help
practitioners to uncover hidden information about students, patients, and
biological systems in a statistically principled manner. In addition, this
project will provide multiple training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, introducing them to the important area of latent
variable models in modern statistics. This project aims to advance the
statistical theory and methodology of discrete latent variable modeling and
providing novel statistical algorithms applicable to education and other
applications. The project has three objectives. The first is to develop new
mathematical machinery to study identifiability in general discrete models with
latent and graphical components. These techniques will be used to derive sharp
identifiability conditions for models motivated by education sciences. The
second objective is to elaborate two new families of generative models with
discrete latent variables: deep generative models with multilayer latent
structures, and probabilistic graphical models encoding hard hierarchical latent
constraints. Identifiability of these models will be established, which would
guarantee the validity of statistical inference. The resulting models are
expected to shed light on latent dependencies in several applications,
particularly, in conjunction with educational diagnoses and personalized
learning. The third objective is to develop novel hypothesis testing of
identifiability, flexible Bayesian methods to simultaneously infer latent
dimensions and other parameters, and efficient structure learning procedures to
estimate the latent graphical constraints. The project will offer opportunities
for professional development of trainees at the interface of statistics, data
science, psychology, and educational sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
