
* 2210657
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Heterogeneous Learning for Intensive Complex Longitudinal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2022,07/26/2022
* Ruoqing Zhu,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 120,000.00

This project addresses several fundamental statistical questions related to
biomedical information. These questions arise in complex biomedical studies when
the data present high heterogeneity and the number of decision stages is large.
The investigators aim to develop new statistical methods and efficient
computational tools to address practical applications such as treatment of post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and the use of mobile health data in management
of diabetes. The research is expected to be useful in health care and stimulate
interdisciplinary research in neuroscience, mental health, nursing, infectious
diseases, epigenetics, biology, and computer science. The software to be
developed will be widely disseminated for use by industry partners. The project
provides training through research involvement for graduate students.

The investigators will study three research topics. The first is motivated by
identifying heterogeneous epigenetic effects of PTSD patients. This research
will push the current boundaries by developing a new model to identify high-
dimensional DNA methylation mediators. The second topic is motivated by recent
advances in mobile health technology, which effectively monitors individuals'
health statuses and delivers personalized treatment. The concept of "value
enhancement" is used to select the optimal treatment. The investigators will
study a novel estimator when the number of decision stages can diverge to
infinity. The optimal regime could be sparse and adaptive, making it more
advantageous if there are many treatment options. It will also be robust to
unexpected situations such as temporary medication shortages or budget
constraints. In the third topic, the investigators plan to develop a double
encoders approach to estimate the optimal omni-channel individualized treatment
rule by incorporating interaction effects such as synergistic or antagonistic
effects due to combination treatments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
