
* 2224121
* ENVR 2022 Workshop: Environmental and Ecological Statistical Research and Applications with Societal Impacts
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/15/2022,07/05/2022
* Matthew Heaton,UT,Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 24,000.00

The "ENVR 2022 Workshop: Environmental and Ecological Statistical Research and
Applications with Societal Impacts" will be held in Provo, Utah, on October 6-8,
2022. Environmental Statistics and Data Science (ESDS) is quickly emerging as an
integral field for conducting interdisciplinary research in the environmental
sciences. Environmental statisticians are charged with processing, summarizing,
and analyzing a massive inflow of environmental data from climate models, in
situ observations, and remote sensing measurements, to name a few, to understand
and mitigate environmental degradation and foster human and ecological well-
being. To manage and facilitate growth in ESDS and foster new interdisciplinary
research teams, this project will support the above workshop by providing travel
support for junior ESDS researchers to attend the workshop. The goals of the
workshop are to (i) facilitate interdisciplinary research, (ii) present state-
of-the-art methods, and (iii) develop new talent in ESDS. The workshop will
include various activities, including panel discussions on the current and
future state of ESDS, invited scientific presentations on interdisciplinary
topics in ESDS, short courses, a poster session, and team building and
brainstorming exercises to establish new research directions and groups.

Modern complex questions in the environmental sciences are increasingly turning
to more complex datasets from a wide variety of sources for answers. Examples of
such complex datasets include, but are not limited to, massive correlated
datasets generated from climate models and remote sensing, data collected on
non-Euclidean spaces such as river networks, rare-event data on meteorological
extremes, and multivariate spatio-temporal data such as pollution compositions.
Scientific answers derived from such complex datasets require specialized skills
from statisticians and data scientists trained to converse and work with
environmental scientists. This project will provide funding to support the
participation of junior environmental data science researchers. Speakers from
statistics and applied environmental sciences will present their state-of-the-
art scientific methods for dealing with data arising in the environmental
sciences. Methods discussed will include deep learning for environmental data,
computation for massive spatially correlated data, exploiting network
information in data collected on river networks, and modern techniques for
dealing with point pattern (location) data. These presentations, along with
panel discussions, will outline future interdisciplinary research in
environmental statistics and data science. More details about the workshop can
be found at:
https://community.amstat.org/envr/events/workshops/envr2022workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
