
* 2231896
* Interdisciplinary Workshop on Weather and Climate Extremes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2022,08/03/2022
* Whitney Huang,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 33,147.00

This project is for the purpose of organizing and holding a workshop titled
"Interdisciplinary Workshop on Weather and Climate Extremes" which will be held
in Clemson, South Carolina on May 16-18, 2023. Recent years have seen an
increase in economic losses due to climate and weather extremes, such as
wildfires, heat waves, storm surges. Extreme value theory (EVT) provides a
framework for studying weather and climate extremes. Compared to more
traditional statistical methods, EVT is less well known to many geoscientists
and statisticians. It is therefore critical that statisticians with specialized
knowledge of EVT interact with geoscientists and applied statisticians working
at the interface of statistics, atmospheric and hydrological sciences. This
workshop have the following major aims: (i) to facilitate collaborations among
statisticians, atmospheric and hydrological scientists; (ii) to present state-
of-the-art methods; and (iii) to develop new talent in studying weather and
climate extremes. The workshop will include several organized activities,
including short courses, panel discussions, invited scientific presentations, a
poster session, and team building and brainstorming exercises to establish new
research directions and groups.

The program of the forthcoming Workshop on Weather and Climate Extremes features
the following topics: i) Models for Spatial and Spatio-Temporal Extremes; ii)
Using Climate Models to Project Future Extremes; iii) Detection and Attribution
of Extremes; iv) Coastal Risk and Tropical Cyclones; v) Machine/Deep Learning
and Extremes; vi) Linking Large-Scale Conditions and Extreme Events. This
project will encourage the participation of graduate students, early-career
researchers, and members of groups under-represented in statistics and
geosciences. More details about the workshop can be found at:
https://whitneyhuang83.github.io/WCE2023.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
