
* 2232547
* Conference: Advances in Statistical and Computational Methods for Analysis of Biomedical, Genetic, and Omics Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2023,08/08/2022
* Swati Biswas,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 12/31/2023
* USD 31,650.00

A three-day international conference titled "Advances in Statistical and
Computational Methods for Analysis of Biomedical, Genetic, and Omics Data" will
be held at the University of Texas at Dallas from March 17-19, 2023. The
conference will bring together diverse groups of students, junior researchers,
and leading researchers from academia, industry, and government in a
collaborative setting to discuss cutting-edge statistical and computational
methods for health-related research. The scientific program will include plenary
and invited talks, and a poster session. In addition to its core mission of
contributing towards the advancement of science, this conference will provide
opportunities for students and young researchers to engage in robust interaction
and networking with senior researchers. Thus, the conference will also
contribute toward building a diverse human capital skilled in statistics and
data science for health-related research.

The theme of the conference is timely, especially in today's era of big data.
Massive amounts of a variety of biological and medical data are now available
and continue to be collected. Information gleaned from them can power
breakthroughs leading to advances in not only personalized medicine but also
innovative drug designs and evidence-based medical decision support systems that
can potentially revolutionize healthcare. However, a key challenge is the
development of new statistical and computational methods that will allow
researchers to dive deep into such data and derive actionable information from
them. The conference will contribute toward fostering the development of newer
and better tools for filtering useful information from large, complex, and noisy
datasets, helping pave the way for future advances leading to improved
healthcare. More details about the conference can be found at
https://sites.google.com/view/abgod2023/home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
