
* 2304767
* Collaborative Research: Design-Based Optimal Subdata Selection Using Mixture-of-Experts Models to Account for Big Data Heterogeneity
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 11/01/2022,12/08/2022
* John Stufken,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 149,961.00

With technological advances, it has become easy to collect massive amounts of
data for most areas of research. But with the size of datasets measured in
terabytes or even petabytes, analyzing such datasets can become an expensive
computational challenge and may be impossible on a typical desktop or laptop
computer. However, for making impactful discoveries, it may be unnecessary to
analyze an entire dataset. Consequently, there is great interest in developing
and studying methods for selecting a subset from a massive dataset and for
drawing conclusions based on the much smaller selected dataset. Such methods are
known as subdata selection or subsampling methods. One obvious subsampling
method consists of randomly selecting data from the entire dataset. While this
is often the simplest and fastest option, it has been established that better
options are often available. In this project, the principal investigators (PIs)
aim to develop and study a rigorous framework and new methods for optimal
subdata selection by using models that account for heterogeneity in the data,
which is often present in large datasets. Research findings will be incorporated
in topical courses to train graduate students in large-scale data analysis. The
work will also be disseminated via the PIs? collaborations in public health,
biomedical science, and business.

Rather than assuming a multiple regression model, the PIs plan to develop and
study subdata selection methods based on mixture-of-experts (ME) models, which
can account for heterogeneity in the data. The PIs will initially develop and
study subdata selection methods for a subclass of the ME models, known as
clusterwise linear regression models, for which the gate functions are constant.
This will be followed by studying logistic-normal mixture models, in which the
gate functions depend on the regression variables. For both cases, the
investigators plan to develop information-based optimal subdata selection
methods, first for continuous response variables and then for binary response
variables, study their statistical properties, and develop efficient algorithms
for the methods that will be made available in an R package.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
