
* 2310950
* The Data Institute Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 02/01/2023,01/30/2023
* James Wilson,CA,University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

From March 12-14, 2023, the Data Institute at the University of San Francisco
(USF) will host its third biennial Data Institute Conference at the downtown
campus in San Francisco. The recent explosion of available data has
fundamentally changed the way researchers across disciplines approach problems.
Industry is experiencing a similar disruption as data driven decision-making is
driving innovation toward new skills and roles in data science. While academic
researchers have traditionally been the center of innovation and research,
industry is pouring significant resources into developing solutions to many of
these same problems. The Data Institute Conference will draw leaders from
industry and academia to explore the latest theoretical advances and
technological applications in data science. The conference aims to promote the
next generation of cross-disciplinary research and offers educational and
professional development opportunities to early-career data scientists from
diverse backgrounds. The conference is designed to launch new research
collaborations among academics and to build bridges between academia and
advanced research groups from Bay Area industry and beyond. This conference will
make an equally important impact to the greater scientific community with a
focus on recruiting and increasing diversity in data science, with attendees who
are not traditionally represented in STEM fields. Data science is a rapidly
developing field with fluid boundaries but largely contains research areas from
the statistical, mathematical, and computational sciences. This conference will
bring together both junior and senior researchers from industry and academia to
exchange ideas from recent advances to data science. There will be several
invited and contributed talk tracks, including one in network analysis at which
speakers will address many important questions on the estimation of graphical
models, inference related to graphs, and applications of networks to
neuroscience. Other tracks include practical issues and advances in
experimentation and A/B testing; applications of machine learning to sports
analytics; and precision healthcare. There will also be tracks devoted to the
discussion of the societal impact of data science, including tracks on data
privacy and artificial intelligence, the application of data science to public
policy, and a panel discussion on data and algorithmic ethics. Most conferences
in this space have attendees numbering in the thousands and are either very
broad with dozens of parallel sessions or focused on a single topic in data
science. Addressing the clear need of such a conference, the Data Institute
conference will be of moderate size (250), with up to three parallel sessions at
any given time to maximize interchanges between participants. For more
information about the Data Institute Conference, please visit the following
website: https://dsco.usfdatainstitute.org

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
