
* 8702980
* Mathematical Sciences: Inference Problems in Multivariate Statistical Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1987,02/19/1988
* Robb Muirhead,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 12/31/1989
* USD 83,476.00

This research is concerned with problems of inference in classical multivariate
procedures such as multivariate analysis of variance, discriminant analysis ,
principal components analysis, and canonical correlations analysis. The problems
posed are of two main types. One involves problems in estimating canonical
correlations and the eigenstructures of parameter matrices arising in
multivariate analysis of variance. The investigators propose to apply decision-
theoretic concepts and to evaluate the properties and behavior of estimates
based on these concepts. The second type of problem to be investigated involves
hypothesis testing. Widely used tests in multivariate analysis are ones which
hypothesize the equality of a subset of the characteristic roots of a parameter
matrix. No small sample properties (unbiasedness, monotonicity of the power
functions, admissibility, etc.) are known for common tests, including the
likelihood ratio test. The usefulness of the bootstrapping technique in problems
of inference in multivariate analysis will be investigated. Classical
multivariate statistical procedures are characterized by assumptions of
linearity, independence and normality. These procedures are widely used
throughout the sciences to analyze experimental and observational data. The
statistical procedures for making some of the estimates used in these
multivariate analyses are crude and, therefore, improving them may have a
significant impact on the conclusions scientists draw about relationships
between measurements. Also in this setting, our current knowledge about the
performance of statistical decision making procedures applies strictly to
experiments that are repeated a very large number of times. Since replicating
experiments is usually expensive, it is typically done with low frequency. The
research into the performance of statistical decision making procedures when the
number of replicates is small is expected to provide valuable information and
insight to a broad spectrum of the scientific community.
