
* 8715756
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Smoothing Splines forInference and Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/1988,04/27/1989
* Douglas Nychka,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 04/30/1991
* USD 65,990.00

The first part of this research develops valid confidence sets for functionals
of a spline estimate and the estimated smoothing parameter. Two approaches to
confidence intervals are to treat the bias of the estimate as a random variable
or to replace the bias by an upper bound. The first method yields short
intervals that are accurate only in an average sense while the second method
gives longer conservative intervals. Confidence intervals for the smoothing
spline are derived from the distribution of the cross-validation function. The
second part of this research applies spline methods to two ill-posed problems
that arise in microscopy and soil science. Both of these topcs are related to
solving an integral equation with discrete and noisy data. In this context,
partial spline models can compensate for boundary effects while certain
experimental designs may imporve the resolution of the estimate. This
statistical research project addresses the general problem in data analysis of
estimating a smooth function f, from functionals of f that are observed with
error. Often a parametric form of f is unknown and it is important to consider
nonparametric estimators of f. This project focuses on one nonparametric
estimator that has been successful over a diverse range of applications, a
cross-validated smoothing spline.
