
* 8814094
* Mathematical Sciences: Assessment of Sequential Probabilistic Forecasting Procedures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/1989,11/16/1988
* Francoise Seillier-Moiseiwitsch,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Alan Izenman
* 12/31/1990
* USD 17,650.00

The investigator considers the problem of predicting the next member of a
sequence of random variables by using previous values of the sequence and
possibly other information. The forecast takes the form of a probability
distribution on the possible values of the random variable. (The true
distribution of the random variable is unknown.) Assessment criteria or "scoring
rules" which judge the "calibration" or accuracy of the forecast are to be
examined. The scoring rules will be examined under the assumption that the
forecast distribution is correct as well as under the assumption that it is
incorrect in certain aspects. The investigator will also consider these problems
for a forecast region or "prediction region" rather than a complete forecast
probability distribution. (By a prediction region we mean the interval from 65
to 73 in a forecast such as : "There is a 90% chance that the temperature will
be between 65 degrees and 73 degrees.") The problems involve using distance
measures between distributions. Continguity arguments and direct martingale
arguments will be needed. The investigator's work involves assessing sequential
forecasting procedures that use probabilty. Such procedures occur in the
following examples: a meteorologist gives a probability that it will rain the
next day; medical clinicians (or expert systems) give subjective probabilities
that particular patients are suffering from specific diseases; a computer
specialist predicts the distribution of future failure times of software or
hardware based on past experience. Sequential feedback is essential in the
process in the sense that as the outcome for previous forecasts becomes known to
the forecaster this and other information is incorporated into the next
forecast. The long term behavior of the forecasting procedure will also be
examined.
