
* 8900613
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inference for Some Dynamic Phenomena
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/1989,04/03/1991
* David Brillinger,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Alan Izenman
* 11/30/1992
* USD 163,572.00

The principal investigator will develop stochastic models and statistical
methods for handling data recorded on phenomena evolving in time and/or
distributed in space. Because of the complexity of the data, the subject matter
of the substantive field will play a crucial role in modelling and analysis;
however it is anticipated that the techniques developed will be broadly
applicable. Variants of techniques for ordinary random variables will be
developed for complex random functions. Some of the particular problems to be
studied are: 1) parameter estimation and input signal design for the bilinear
system basic to nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 2) technique
development for modelling and discerning the structure of collections of
interacting point processes as applicable to networks of firing nerve cells. The
investigator will obtain both theoretical and applied results for the problems
studied. The principal investigator will develop stochastic model and
statistical methods for handling data recorded on phenomena evolving in time
and/or distributed in space. Because of the complexity of the data, the subject
matter of the substantive field will play a crucial role in modelling and
analysis; however it is anticipated that the techniques developed will be
broadly applicable. Variants of techniques for ordinary random variables will be
developed for complex random functions. Some of the particular problems to be
studied are: 1) parameter estimation and input signal design for the bilinear
system basic to nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 2) technique
development for modelling and discerning the structure of collections of
interacting point processes as applicable to networks of firing nerve cells. The
investigator will obtain both theoretical and applied results for the problems
studied.
