
* 8902576
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Nonparametric Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/1989,12/15/1988
* Randall Eubank,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 05/31/1992
* USD 42,350.00

Eubank proposes to examine a number of problems in nonparametric regression.
One of the most interesting is the problem of robust spline smoothing. The
typical spline estimator of a regression function is found by minimizing a sum
of squared errors plus a penalty function. However the sum of squared errors is
highly sensitive to outliers. By substituting absolute error for squared error
(or another appropriate function of the error) one can make the estimator more
robust to outliers. Eubanks will examine the effect of incorporating and
estimating a scale factor for the error terms in these more appropriate and
general functions of the errors. He will also examine jackknife confidence
intervals for the underlying regression function. These nonparametric regression
models will also be applied to the traditional analysis of variance, analysis of
covariance and intra-class regression models. Another problem he will address is
the incorporation of the covariance structure of order statistics in the
estimation of quantile functions and their densities. The problem of relating
two variables (such as height and weight) for pairs of observations on
individuals is addressed by nonparametric regression. Finding a functional
relationship between the two variables is made considerably harder if some
information is miscoded or extremely unusual individuals are included in the
data. Eubank will investigate methods of finding functional relationships that
will be less sensitive to outliers in the sample and more representative of the
whole population.
