
* 9123166
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Methods for Incomplete and Biased Data with New Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1992,04/12/1994
* Yehuda Vardi,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 01/31/1996
* USD 110,014.00

The problem of recovering an input signal from a blurred output, in an input-
output system with linear distortion, is ubiquitous in science and technology.
When the blurred output is not corrupted by statistical noise, the problem is
entirely deterministic and amounts to a mathematical inversion of a linear
system with positive parameters, subject to positivity con- straints on the
solution. By showing that all such linear inverse problems with positivity
constraints can be interpreted as statistical estimation problems, extremely
simple algorithms can be developed for finding the problems' maximum likelihood
solutions. Extensions to specific problems like noise degrada- tion, estimation
of blurring parameters (parameters of the point spread function) and
regularization techniques will follow. The methodology will be applied to new
problems including restoration of images blurred by relative motion between the
subject and the camera lens. The blurring of a signal (sound, image, etc.) is
common in science and technology, for example the systematic distort observed
signal becomes what mathematicians call linear inverse problems with positivity
constraints. This research will develop methods of solution which are broadly
applicable to such problems. The basis for this approach is to draw on
statistical principles and exploit the connection between such linear inverse
problems and statistical estimation problems for incomplete data where methods
already exist.
