
* 9217866
* Mathematical Sciences: Estimation and Inference for Noisy Nonlinear Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1993,06/05/1995
* Douglas Nychka,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 119,876.00

One important property of a system that changes over time, such as an economy or
an ecosystem, is the extent to which its future behavior can be predicted. This
work will develop statistical methods for quantifying predictability, and apply
these methods to address some open questions in ecology, epidemiology and
macroeconomics. The result of this work will be an understanding of how a
complex system's dynamics can be divided in two parts: a part that is a possibly
complex function of the previous history of the system and a random component
that is unrelated to the system's past behavior. The ability to make predictions
depends on both of these components; moreover, knowing the relative
contributions of the components is necessary for understanding how the system
responds to external shocks. In the past 20 years there has been much interest
in the use of nonlinear models to explain seemingly unpredictable or random
phenomena. Most techniques for analyzing data from a nonlinear dynamic system
have been based on large data sets and properties of deterministic models. Such
methods are not useful for biological and economic systems that are subject to
random perturbations and observed over a limited amount of time. Statistical
methods will be developed that address these situations by combining techniques
of nonparametric regression and time series analysis. These statistical
techniques will enable researchers to reliably estimate the rules governing a
system's evolution over time (law of motion) and the average response of the
system to small perturbations (Lyapunov exponent). Also, at a more theoretical
level, the properties of artificial neural networks for approximating systems of
many variables will be studied. The methods will be applied to empirical,
substantive time series in ecology and epidemiology in order to quantify the
predictability of the systems from past history and to identify the system's
response to exogenous (e.g. environmental) shocks. These methods, coupled with
general equilibrium economic models, will provide new evidence for resolving a
longstanding controversy in macroeconomics: Are extreme fluctuations in
financial markets natural phenomena or are they aberrations requiring government
regulation?
