
* 9224798
* Mathematical Sciences: Inference for Nonlinear Time Series and Spatial Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/1993,05/26/1993
* Ishwarasa Basawa,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

This proposal is concerned with problems related to statistical inference in
nonlinear time series, state-space models, random fields and spatial point
processes. The emphasis will be on nonlinear and non-Gaussian models. A unified
approach will be used to study the asymptotic efficiency properties of the
estimators and tests. The local asymptotic normality will be investigated for
the likelihood-based models. the quasi- likelihood framework will be used for
the cases where the likelihood function is unavailable. Empirical Bayes methods
will also be investigated. The statistical analysis and the models to be studied
in this proposal will have an impact on a large number of diverse applications
in Basic Sciences, Engineering, Health Sciences, Economic and Social Planning,
among other. Statistical data such as the unemployment figures, various economic
indicators, stock market fluctuations, opinion polls, currency exchange rates
and the like are all subject to inherent random variations, and possibly trends.
These aspects involving uncertainty can usefully be represented by appropriate
probability models such as the ones proposed here. Various methods of
forecasting and assessing the precision of the forecasts will also be studied.
Techniques of statistical estimation and methods of testing the validity of the
models proposed will be investigated.
