
* 9224868
* Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Theory for Computationally Intensive Statistical Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/1993,05/08/1995
* Pressley Millar,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1997
* USD 594,095.00

The advent of modern computing power has greatly enlarged the notion of a
practical statistical procedure. On the other hand, important advances in
statistical theory over the past decade (e.g. modern semiparametrics, empirical
processes, bootstrap theory) offer extraordinary opportunity for creativity in
the invention of effective statistical methods. This proposal is based upon the
fact that a strong theoretical approach, combined with creative use of
computing, can be an effective dual attack on a number of substantive problems.
Specific problems proposed here include: regression with random coefficients
(Beran, Millar), random sets arising in statistics (Millar, Nolan), adaptation
and model selection (Beran, Nolan), probability forecasting via martingale
methods (Nolan), the local stochastic search method (Millar), directional data
(Beran). Collaboration is intended when more than one investigator is listed.
Other topics are discussed in the individual proposals. Our apparently disparate
statistical topics are related in part by means of the methods with which we
intend to solve them. These methods include: iterated bootstraps, applied
empirical process theory, semiparametrics, minimum distance methods, Hajek-LeCam
asymptotics, and the theory of stochastic procedures. The team of investigators
intends to provide useful statistical tools for several substantive fields. For
example, our proposed estimation procedures in the random coefficient regression
model are intended for use in econometrics, the studies of directional data are
intended for use in geophysics, several of our proposed procedures in stochastic
distance statistics will be used in the reliability analysis of electrical
systems. Our proposed non-linear variants of the random coefficient regression
model apply to the analysis of patient response curves to new pharmaceuticals.
Our statistical applications of random set theory were motivated by problems in
optics. Several of our graduate students will participate in the project;
indeed, two of them will incorporate their work on the last two subjects in
their forthcoming PhD theses. The approach taken in this proposal involves both
a relatively abstract analysis and a computer-intensive implementation;
consequently, these graduate students will receive a broad and sound training as
young statistical scientists.
