
* 9301193
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Time Series Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/1993,04/30/1993
* Rong Chen,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

This project is concerned with nonlinear time series analysis. It has four main
objectives. The first objective is to develop new methods for modeling nonlinear
time series via nonparametric smoothing techniques. This research is a
continuation of the work on functional coefficient AR models and nonlinear
additive AR models by the PI and Tsay over the last several years. See Chen and
Tsay (1993a, 1993b). The results obtained under this research will increase the
applicability of nonlinear time series models. The second objective of the
proposed research is to investigate binary-process driven switching regression
models. A unified treatment is proposed for the general switching structures and
a testing procedure is introduced for discriminating a random (independent)
switching regression model from a Markov-chain driven model. The third objective
is to study new approaches in finding the indicator variable for an open-loop
threshold AR model. Several approaches are suggested to overcome the
difficulties encountered in using the open-loop threshold AR models. In
particular, two algorithms and some graphical tools are proposed to identify an
appropriate indicator variable. The final objective is to investigate the
ergodicity conditions of some nonlinear time series models. The results obtained
will provide a better understanding of the nonlinear models as well as a
foundation on which asymptotic properties of various nonparametric statistics
for nonlinear time series analysis can be established.
