
* 9303705
* Mathematical Sciences: Inference and Curve-Fitting in Generalizations of Isotonic Regression Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1993,04/14/1995
* Thomas Hettmansperger,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 01/31/1997
* USD 135,000.00

In many scientific hypotheses the researcher can specify a directional effect: a
treatment is believed to improve health, a new teaching method is believed to
improve learning, an increase in dosage is believed to have an increasing effect
up to a certain (possibly unknown) toxicity point and then a decreasing effect.
Many statistical methods ignore this directional information, which results in a
loss of statistical power and efficiency. Our major goal in this research is to
develop very general approaches to the computation of estimates and tests along
with assessments of the standard errors of the estimates and the error rates of
the tests. The research has three main thrusts: First, the analysis of general
algorithms such as Dykstra's generalization of von Neumann's alternating
projections method. Second, the development and implementation of smoothing and
fitting algorithms to use on data that arise in experiments with order
restrictions on the parameters. And third, the construction of statistical
estimation and testing methods with attendant error rates for research
hypotheses that entail directional effects. Often in scientific investigations
the researcher expects a directional effect, but cannot justify a specific
mathematical function as a relationship. For example, the yield of a crop can
reasonably be expected to increase if the amount of fertilizer applied is
increased (at least within a certain range). The fact that there is a
directional relationship is obvious here, but the exact nature of the
relationship is far from obvious. Our goal is to develop methods that make use
of directional effects so that more efficient use may be made of experimental
data. We will develop computer algorithms to fit data in ways that obey
directional effects, and use statistical and mathematical theory to study the
properties of our fitting methods.
