
* 9305877
* Mathematical Sciences: Adaptive Sampling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/1993,05/27/1993
* Steven Thompson,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 10/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Adaptive sampling designs are designs in which the procedure for selecting the
units to include in the sample may depend on observed values of the variable of
interest. In previous research supported by NSF grants DMS-8705812 and
DMS-9016708, the methodology of adaptive sampling was advanced to the point
where now there are a number of practical adaptive designs, giving remarkably
high efficiencies for sampling rare, clumped, or aggregated populations compared
to conventional designs of equivalent sample size. Theoretical results suggest,
however, that greater potential still exists. It is proposed to further develop
the basic theory of adaptive sampling and look for new classes of adaptive
sampling designs. Adaptive sampling designs are designs in which the procedure
for selecting the units or sites to include in the sample depends on
observations made during the survey. For example, in a survey to estimate the
abundance of a rare animal species, additional observations may be made in the
vicinity of sites with high observed abundance. In a survey of an environmental
pollutant, additional observations may be made in the vicinity of discovered
``hot spots.'' For such surveys, adaptive sampling designs can provide estimates
of far greater precision than can be obtained with conventional designs of
equivalent sampling effort. Research is proposed to develop the theory and
methods of adaptive sampling. The proposed research has immediate, important
applications to many fields, including environmental, ecological, and natural
resource studies.
