
* 9305588
* Mathematical Sciences: New Methodology for Predictive Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1993,08/09/1993
* Francoise Seillier-Moiseiwitsch,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 57,000.00

A non-parametric approach is developed to select models for categorical and
survival data, with a view to helping the elicitation of predictors and
prognostic factors. The tests put forward take the form of central limit
theorems for normalized scoring functions. The sequential aspect of the data
collection is taken into account. The goal of the research is to establish sound
theoretical foundations for these diagnostics and to demonstrate their
practicality. For survival models, the distributional properties of residuals
from the probability integral transform conditional on sufficient statistics
will also be studied. In the event that these properties are easily
characterized, conditions, under which a sequential application of the
transformation leads to a test of predictive validity of the model, will be
sought. The construction of empirical Bayes confidence intervals based on
structured priors is set in a predictive framework and will be addressed via
both analytical methods and bootstrap samples. Comparison with respect to
several validation criteria will discriminate between existing and proposed
techniques. Focussing on observables, the characteristics of prediction
intervals based on empirical Bayes distributions will be looked into. A novel
approach for the selection models for categorical and survival data, is
developed. This methodology will help in the elicitation of predictors and
prognostic factors. The sequential aspect of the data collection is taken into
account. The goal of the research is to establish sound theoretical foundations
for these diagnostics and to demonstrate their practicality. The construction of
empirical Bayes confidence intervals based on structured priors in a predictive
framework. The construction of these intervals will be addressed via both
analytical methods and bootstrap samples. Comparison with respect to several
validation criteria will discriminate between existing and proposed techniques.
Focussing on observables, t he characteristics of prediction intervals based on
empirical Bayes distributions will be looked into.
