
* 9305573
* Mathematical Sciences: Maximum Likelihood Methods in Complex Sample Surveys
* DMS,STATISTICS, METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
* 07/15/1993,09/03/1993
* Abba Krieger,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 07/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

9305573 The proposed research is to study efficient ways of applying maximum
likelihood (ML) inference to complex survey data. The methodology we intend to
apply is based on the ideas of weighted distributions. It consists of expressing
the joint probability density functions (pdf) for units in the sample as
products of the sample inclusion probabilities, expressed as functions of the
observed data, and the marginal pdf holding in the population. These products
are normalized. ML estimators are obtained by maximazing the resulting weighted
pdf with respect to the unknown model parameters. Survey data are often used in
the social sciences and by government agencies to estimate parameters of
interest (e.g. cell frequencies; relationships among variables). Often the
survey is complex in the sense that the chance that an individual is in the
sample depends on many factors. As illustrated in the statistical and
econometric literature, failure to account for the features of the sampling
design in the inference process may yield misleading results. The significance
of the proposed research is that it will hopefully provide a unified approach
for drawing inferences from complex survey data that will account for the known
features of the sampling design.
