
* 9306738
* Mathematical Sciences: Likelihood Functions for Estimating Equations
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/15/1993,05/26/1993
* Bing Li,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 10/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

My research focuses on the construction of likelihood functions for estimating
equations. The need for such functions arises when the estimating equations do
not integrate to potential functions. The likelihood functions can be either
obtained from the projection of the true score function onto a class of
conservative estimating equations or from the projection of a pair of centered
likelihood ratios. The projections are developed for the quasi-likelihood
method, and for the generalized estimating equations, as well as some other
classes of estimating equations. They can be applied to both independent and
dependent situations. These functions will be used to construct invariant
confidence intervals, to distinguish between consistent and inconsistent
solutions to estimating equations, and to test statistical hypotheses. I also
have introduced a notion of the information contained in a testing function, and
will use it to study some commonly used testing functions. In relation to this,
a property of the first order ancillarity is obtained. The key issue in
statistics is to establish a relation between the truth and the data, and to use
the relation to make inference about the truth based on the data. This is often
achieved by what we call the likelihood methods. Sometimes the traditional
likelihood method faces difficulties: it may need to make assumptions that are
difficult to satisfy; it may be computationally difficult to realize; it may not
be rich enough to accommodate certain applications. Meeting these challenges,
the theories and methods of quasi-likelihood and estimating equations have been
developed and widely used during recent years. Extending and enriching the
likelihood method, the new methods can be applied under more realistic
assumptions, more conveniently, and in wider situations. My research is on
certain aspects of quasi-likelihood and estimating equations, and in particular
the construction of likelihood functions for estimating equations and their use
in statistical inference.
