
* 9307727
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Bayesian Inference Design and Bayes - Classical Synthesis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1993,04/10/1995
* Anirban Dasgupta,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

In this project, we propose to consider problems in Bayesian asymptotics,
design, inference, and the question of synthesis with classical procedures. In
asymptotics, we propose to consider the limiting behavior of the posterior in
nonregular problems. Design of experiments will be considered in nonlinear
models, when prior information is available about parameters of the model. Such
nonlinear models typically are hard to deal with because of dependence of the
design on the parameters themselves. In particular, we will try to use the rich
linear theory by approximating nonlinear response functions by linear functions,
such as polynomials. We also will derive designs that give a preexperimental
guarantee of pos data accuracy, uniformly in the data whenever possible.
Finally, in canonical Exponential family problems, we will derive priors for
which the implied Bayes procedure has classically satisfactory property. Much of
existing statistical methodology has evolved from methods of so called classical
statistics. In comparison, the alternative methods known as Bayesian methods are
still growing. Nevertheless, it is now recognized by the community as a whole
that Bayesian methods can be very useful as tools for statistical data analysis.
In this project, our goal is two fold: first, to study alternative Bayesian
methods in important classes of statistical problems, such as designing
statistical surveys, and second, to bridge the two methods of statistical
analysis together by studying Bayesian methods which are also acceptable
according to classical criteria.
