
* 9310322
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Image Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1993,08/31/1993
* Chuanshu Ji,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

The proposed research focuses on statistical aspects of two classes of image
models: Gibbs random fields (GRFs) on discrete lattices (Part I) and deformable
templates on continuous domains (Part II). For the first class, the purpose is
to fit a GRF which generates images with analytical and visual characteristics
similar to those of natural textures. This includes parameter estimation and
model selection: the former is an inference problem of estimating the unknown
parameter (maybe high dimensional) contained in the energy function that induces
the GRF; the latter is a multiple decision problem of choosing an energy
function from a finite set of candidates. Some complicated issues, such as
possible long-range dependence and indirect observations, will also be
considered. The second class is studied in the context of object detection from
laser radar sensors. The particular objects considered are human faces in an
unconstrained environment. The face detection is formulated as a Bayesian
inference problem, which consists of the prior (shape models), the likelihood
(data models) and the algorithms (simulation from the posterior and inference
based on the posterior). In particular, the simulation will be carried out by
jump-diffusion processes and the inference is to identify the number of
object(s) corresponding to the maximal posterior probability. Texture is a
dominant feature in representation of various kinds of images. The first part of
the proposed research attempts to render textures from statistical point of
view. For instance, wood grain shows strong directional tendency but sand
patterns appear isotropic and random. Such a difference can be represented in
images created by computer graphics using different parameters for the same
model. The second part of the proposed research will try to answer the questions
"Is there any specific object in the picture?" "If yes, how many?" Here a model-
based approach is taken which not only provides an swers to those questions
based on the observed images but also quantifies the chance associated with each
answer. Therefore, we should seek answers that are more likely (with greater
chance) to be correct.
