
* 9316624
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Ocean Modeling and Estimation for Climate Forecasting
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
* 03/01/1994,03/28/1994
* Alan Willsky,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1996
* USD 80,000.00

9316624 Willsky A new prognostic model of the global ocean circulation is being
developed based on the Navier-Stokes equations, using state-of-the-art parallel
computers and languages with an ultimate goal of creating a global ocean
modeling/estimation tool that can be used for climate research. A key element of
this endeavor is the development of statistical estimation algorithms for the
assimilation of data into the forward model. The combined forward/estimation
model could be used to estimate the state of the ocean form observations
constrained by dynamics. The data of concern is sparse, heterogeneous and
multiresolution and the associated global ocean circulation models are of
gargantuan size, having upwards of 10 ~ 10 degrees of freedom. The resulting
estimation problem is of such a large size that standard computational
procedures become prohibitive. Novel approaches to statistical modeling and the
circulation models are needed. We proposed the first steps in this direction
through the establishment of a collaboration involving physical oceanographers
and probabilistic modeling and statistical inference specialists. The short term
focal point of this collaboration is the definition and solution of a series of
subproblems designed to foster understanding insight, and mutual communication
and in the process advance the state of the art in both data assimilation for
global ocean modeling and statistical modeling and estimation of random fields.
***
