
* 9400476
* Mathematical Sciences: Investigations in Order Restricted Inference and Improved Inference Procedures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,03/28/1996
* Arthur Cohen,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1997
* USD 216,000.00

9400476 Cohen Inference in order restricted models and improved inferences
procedures will be pursued. A summary is as follows: We will pursue the study of
"one sided" confidence regions and simultaneous confidence intervals for
parameters that lie in a subset of k dimensional space. This problem is
meaningful to the statistical practitioner. We will introduce and study the
notion of cone order association. Ordinary association is linked to the cone
which is the first quadrant of k dimensional space. Important applications exist
where ordinary association is not good enough to obtain meaningful results but
cone order association would help. We study 2 and 3 dimensional contingency
tables and seek optimal tests for a wide variety of hypothesis testing problems.
A list of problems concerning a wide variety of extensions of results in order
restricted testing problems is also discussed. Professor Strawderman will study
problems related to hierarchical Bayes models, adaptive minimax estimators,
estimators which improve on truncated estimators such as the positive-part
James-Stein estimator or the MLE of a positive normal mean, and minimax
estimation for spherically symmetric distributions. He is also writing a
monograph on multiparameter estimation with James Berger. This proposal is
concerned with improved statistical inference methodology. Statistical inference
typically is concerned with estimating unknown characteristics of populations or
testing hypotheses about these unknown characteristics. Statistical methodology
has progressed greatly over the past 60 years. Yet there is considerable room
for improving procedures that will be more efficient and provide substantial
savings to users of the improved procedures. This proposal is primarily devoted
to developing such new and better procedures.
