
* 9402904
* Mathematical Sciences: Optimal Inference in Non-Linear Regression Models with Long Range Dependent Errors and in Non-Linear Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/1994,06/02/1994
* Hira Koul,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 105,000.00

A discrete time stationary stochastic process is said to be long range dependent
if its correlations decrease to zero like a power of the lag, as the lag tends
to infinity, but their sum diverges. Part I of the proposal proposes to
investigate the large sample behavior of three classes of robust estimators and
to develop asymptotically efficient and adaptive estimators in non-linear
regression models when the errors are long range dependent with possibly unknown
joint distributions. The Part II of the proposal is concerned with studying the
asymptotic behavior of several classes of robust estimators and devloping
asymptoticlaly optimal inference procedures in non-linear time series in the
presence of regression component, in a semi-parametric setup. In particular, the
P.I. plans to develop asymptotically efficient and adaptive estimators in random
coefficient and threshold autoregression models when there may be a regression
variable present in these models, in a llinear or non-linear fashion, and when
the distributions of the random coefficient and the error variable are unknown.
The optimal estimators would be developed a l a Hajek - Le Cam theory. A data
set where an association between distant observations is slowly decaying but
persistent, as distance between observations increases, is called long range
dependent. Such data arise often in astronomy, economics, geophysics, hydrology,
meteorology, and many other disciplines. An example worth mentioning is the data
of 289 high-precision measurements on the 1-kg check standard weight made
between 1963 to 1975 by the U.S. National Bureau of Standards. In spite of ideal
conditions for preserving independence, the observations turned out to be long
range dependent. The first part of the proposal is concerned with developing
some optimal statistical procedures for analyzing the long range dependent data
in the presence of a covariate. The second part of the proposal is concerned
with developing efficient inferential procedures in some complicated time series
models that often arise in econometrics. It is anticipated that these procedures
will be broadly applicable and not very sensitive to model departures.
