
* 9403804
* Mathematical Sciences: Adaptive Spatial Regression and Classification
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,05/16/1994
* Jerome Friedman,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9403804 Friedman Prediction is one of the most widely applied statistical
procedures. The purpose is to predict (estimate) the value(s) of one or more
attributes {y(1),...,y(q)} ("response" variables) associated with an object
(observation), given the simultaneous values of another set of attributes
{x(1),...,x(n)} ("predictor" variables) associated with the same object. The
prediction rule is derived from a set of "training" observations for which the
values of all attributes (predictor and response) have been measured. When the
response variables assume real (orderable) values the prediction problem is
referred to as "regression". When a (single) response takes on K unorderable
categorical values the problem is called "classification". In this case the
response values can be viewed as a label that assigns the observation to one of
K groups or classes, each class associated with one of the label values. The
research under this proposal addresses an important subclass of prediction
problems in which the predictor variables {x(t)} are labeled by an index t that
takes on real values in a d - dimensional Eucludean space, and it is not
unnatural to associate a distance between such variables with the distance
between their corresponding index values. In these applications all of the
predictor variables are generally measurements of the same quanity for different
values of the index t. When t is one - dimensional, {x(t)} for varying values of
t is call a "signal" or "spectrum". Similarly, a two-dimensional index gives
rise to a "pattern", whereas dimensionalities of three or higher give rise to
more general "spatial patterns". The goal of this research is to derive methods
that exploit the spatial nature of the predictor variable index in more general
(and more powerful) ways than have been done (with linear methods) in the past.
These new methods will be based on adaptive (regression) splines, which have
been among the most promising extensions of linear smoot hing to nonlinear
flexible modeling, especially in higher dimensions. If successful, the result
will be a more general class of spatial prediction procedures that will achieve
higher accuracy in many situations than present day linear methods. The purpose
of the research proposed under this grant is to develop new, more powerful,
methods for computer automated pattern recognition. Patterns such as signals,
spectra, or images are received, and the purpose is to predict the identity of
the particular (unknown) system that produced the pattern, or some property of
that system. Examples are disease diagnosis form EKG or EEG measurements,
recognition of specific words (or speakers) from digitized electronic patterns
of spoken speech, recognition of printed or handwritten characters from their
digitized images, or identification of objects on the ground from satellite
images. The methods to be developed are based on learning through experience
from past successfully solved cases. The method is presented with a series of
patterns, along with the corresponding correct answer for each one, obtained
from past experience. Using this data, the method attempts to automatically
learn rules for predicting future patterns for which the correct answer is
unknown. This research focuses on developing pattern recognition learning
methods that have greater flexibility and adaptibility than those presently in
use. If successful, this research should produce new procedures that provide
higher prediction accuracy for many applications than has been achieveable in
the past.
