
* 9403560
* Mathematical Sciences: General Linear Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,04/10/1996
* Peter McCullagh,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 190,000.00

Peter McCullagh will investigate a number of issues, all bearing directly or
indirectly on generalized linear models. Apart from specialized models such as
those arising in the analysis of ranked data, the most pressing need has been
for satisfactory methods for dealing with non-linear models having several
components of variation. Examples of experiments where such models are
appropriate are not hard to find. The salamander data (McCullagh and Nelder,
1989, p. 440-444) has been widely studied as an archetypal example involving
purely binary data. Linear models having several variance components were
developed early by Yates and Fisher, but in the pre-computer era only balanced
designs could be tackled. For the estimation of variance components in
unbalanced designs the residual likelihood, i.e. the likelihood based on the
residuals, has come to play a key role in recent work. A major aim of the
present proposal is to extend this work to models of the generalized linear
type. A second and related aim is to develop new methodologies for longitudinal
data, particularly where this occurs in an epidemiological context. An important
difference between linear and non-linear models is the distinction between
subject-specific and population-averaged parameters, the latter being more
relevant in epidemiological contexts. The final part of the proposal, a sort of
counterpoint to the exponential-family, is the study of transformation models
with particular emphasis on Mobius transformation and Cauchy models. The results
obtained thus far are helpful for the light they shed on conditional inference
and asymptotics. This proposal aims to develop statistical methods that enable a
scientist to draw reliable conclusions from data where the model is non-linear
and the design is such that there is more than one source of variation in the
experiment. Such experimental designs are rather common in biological and
agricultural research, where methods of analysis for linear mo dels are fairly
well developed. For non-linear models, likelihood calculations are generally
difficult and time-consuming. I propose to develop useful analytical
approximations as an alternative to numerical Monte-Carlo simulation techniques.
