
* 9403800
* Mathematical Sciences: Polynomial Spline Modeling in Survival Analysis and Stationary Stochastic Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,05/27/1994
* Kinh Truong,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 54,000.00

The proposal has four projects that involve the application of logspline
methodology to survival analysis and stationary stochastic processes. The
primary objective of the first project is to systematically extend survival
analysis in all of its various aspects to handle multivariate data involving
censored responses and covariates and to do so in a manner that will efficiently
balance model bias and variance in the estimates. The second project considers
the problem of estimating survival and hazard functions for bivariate censored
failure times. Since this is a new and important research area in survival
analysis, the project is further divided into two subprojects. The first
considers the estimation of the bivariate survival function without covariates,
and the second considers regression analysis involving covariates. The goal is
to provide a consistent and unified nonparametric framework for bivariate
survival analysis. In particular, asymptotic properties of the proposed
procedures will be established. The third project considers the estimation of a
possibly mixed spectral distribution of a stationary process. The objective is
to establish asymptotic properties for the joint estimator of continuous and
discrete spectra. Extensions to other stationary processes such as spatial and
point processes will also be emphasized. The fourth project considers
nonparametric time series regression. Its objective is to study the asymptotic
properties of regression function estimates subject to having the form of a
specified sum of functions of at most d variables. The first project in this
proposal involves the development of several statistical procedures for
identifying and evaluating important risk factors that are related to the
occurrence and recurrence of various diseases such as coronary heart disease,
breast, lung, prostate and colon cancers. The second project studies the effects
of these risk factors on the relationship between causes of several diseases.
Specifically, the method will be appl ied to study (1) the laser
photocoagulation eye treatment for diabetic patients, (2) survival probabilities
of nonfatal myocardial infarction and heart failures, (3) the relationship of
recurrence and survival times of colon or breast cancer patients. The third
project develops statistical procedures for studying elements of the nervous
system and to understand how they function and work together. Through this
developments, we hope to explain things such as memory, emotion, learning, sleep
and expectation. The fourth project develops efficient prediction procedures for
applications in environmental studies such as temperature effect on riverflow,
ozone concentration.
