
* 9404479
* Data Analysis Using Finite Mixture Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,01/17/1997
* Donald Rubin,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 116,000.00

Finite mixture models are increasingly popular in the social and medical
sciences for analyzing data thought to arise from a population consisting of
categorical types. This research project considers Bayesian methods for
analyzing data using finite mixture models. The application of classical methods
to such models is difficult because the likelihoods for such models are
nonstandard: they are inherently multimodal due to symmetries in the labeling of
the mixture components, may be multimodal even for a single fixed labeling of
the components, and fail to satisfy the regularity conditions required for
classical likelihood ratio tests. The principal scientific questions of interest
concern drawing inferences about model parameters, determining the number of
mixture components, and stochastically classifying sampling units into the
mixture components. Modern advances in statistical computing, such as the EM and
ECM algorithms, data augmentation, and Gibbs sampling, are used to obtain
inferences about the posterior distribution of model parameters; however special
care is needed in applying these methods because of the difficulties mentioned
above. This research describes methods for distinguishing between the two types
of modes described above, and for carrying out the data analysis given the
existence of multiple modes. Draws from the posterior distribution of the model
parameters can be used to obtain draws from the posterior predictive
distribution of replicate experiments similar to the current experiment. The
posterior predictive distribution of test statistics, or of other discrepancy
measures, can be used to evaluate the fit of a model, e.g., comparing two
component and three component mixture models even though the problem is
irregular. Additionally, averaging over a prior distribution on plausible
alternatives to the existing model can be used to estimate the sample size
required to assess the appropriateness of the existing model against such
alternatives and therefore can be used to inform design decisions. It is not
uncommon to consider a particular class of statistical models, called mixture
models, that assume the population of interest consists of a number of
relatively homogeneous subpopulations. Mixture models are useful when a
relatively complex model would be required to describe the pattern of data that
is observed within the entire population, whereas a relatively simple model
applies within each subpopulation. Classical approaches are of limited use in
such cases, e.g., classical methods do not apply to the crucial question of
determining whether and how many subpopulations are in evidence. This research
proposal aims to develop new methods for analyzing data using mixture models and
for assessing the adequacy of such models. These new methods take advantage of
recent theoretical and computational advances to draw accurate inferences about
the important features of the mixture models. The basic approach is to average
over all descriptions of the population that are supported by the data and
thereby provide an accurate assessment of the variation and patterns to be
expected in the population.
