
* 9404130
* Mathematical Sciences: Sampling Plans, Asymptotic Results, Resampling Algorithms, & Applications to Random Processes on the 3-dimensional Sphere
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1994,07/12/1994
* Jason Brown,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

To: "Alan J. Izenman" <aizenman@nsf.gov> From: aizenman@nsf.gov (Alan J.
Izenman) Subject: Brown Abstract Cc: Bcc: X-Attachments: 9404130 Brown Research
on an isotropic random field on the sphere has mainly focused on the
representation of the random field, although, there has been some research on
proving a central limit theorem (CLT) for a continuously indexed random field on
the sphere. From a practical point of view, however, it is impossible to sample
continuously throughout the sphere and a finite global sampling plan needs to be
found in order to investigate statistical relations associated with global data,
in particular a CLT and resampling algorithms. Work by Brown 1993 lays the
groundwork for future research in this area and he has applied his research to
global land-area and coastline data. His work addresses the above statistical
issues in a nonparametric setting using weak general conditions as the radius of
the sphere grows without bound with the sample size. More recently, in the
parametric setting there has been work done on modeling the entire random
process on the sphere. This research will consider both nonparametric and
parametric cases and asymptotic results for situations where the radius of the
sphere remains fixed while the sampling plan gets more dense on the sphere and
where the radius of the sphere grows without bound along with the sample size.
Specifically, this research will study the following areas: finite global
sampling plans, asymptotic results for different sampling plans and general
statistics, resampling mechanisms of the data for various sampling plans, and
applications to this new research. Typically, we only have an opportunity to
sample data at a finite number of points on the globe, comprising a global
sampling plan. Once a sampling plan is established, data is gathered at the
points and quantities of interest are calculated. In order to make decisions
about the quantity of interest, some of its characteristics need to be known or
estimated. Since gathering data via the sampling process is expensive, some
methods for reusing (resampling) the original data need to be developed as well.
This research will study the following areas: global sampling plans,
characteristics for various quantities of interest, resampling mechanisms for
global data, and applications to this new research.
