
* 9404343
* The Spectral Envelope
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,07/07/1994
* David Stoffer,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 06/30/1997
* USD 59,000.00

The spectral envelope was recently introduced as a method for analyzing
categorical time series in the spectral domain and has been successfully applied
in analyzing DNA sequences. In developing the theory and methodology of the
spectral envelope for categorical time series, it was discovered that there are
many interesting extensions to the concept. Although there are numerous
directions in which to pursue this idea, this research will focus, at least, on
extending the concept of the spectral envelope to the analysis of real-valued
time series. Here, the main goals will be to obtain optimal transformations of
real-valued (univariate and multivariate) time series that may be nonlinear,
non-Gaussian, or have some unsuspected dependence structure, and to envelop (or
blanket) the spectrum of any such transformation of the time series. The
spectral envelope was recently introduced as a method for analyzing qualitative
data observed sequentially in time or space (time series) and has been
successfully applied in analyzing DNA sequences. In developing the theory and
methodology of the spectral envelope for such data, it was discovered that there
are many interesting extensions to the concept. Although there are numerous
directions in which to pursue this idea, this research will focus, at least, on
extending the concept of the spectral envelope to the analysis of quantitative
time series data. Here, the main goals will be to obtain optimal transformations
of time series that may be nonlinear, non-Normal, or have some unsuspected
dependence structure, and to discover any interesting cyclic (repetitive)
properties of these data.
