
* 9404300
* Design & Analysis of Experiments, and Inference in Reliability Studies
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1994,05/06/1996
* C. F. Jeff Wu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 279,000.00

The first part of the proposal (sections 1-6) is concerned with several
important aspects of the design and analysis of experiments. In section 1 we
study a fundamental problem on the maximum number of factors an orthogonal array
can accommodate. In section 2 we examine three problems of design selection: (i)
determination and construction of mixed 2- and 4-level designs with minimum
aberration, (ii) study of a new design criterion, (iii) a theory for choosing
``optimum'' blocking schemes for full and fractional factorial designs. In
section 3 we propose some optimal design algorithms for constructing efficient
supersaturated designs. In section 4 we study analysis strategies that allow us
to entertain and estimate interactions from designs with complex aliasing. In
section 5, we study the properties of M-estimators in the context of factorial
experiments. Section 6 deals with joint modeling and efficient estimation of
location and dispersion effects in robust parameter design. The second part of
the proposal is concerned with estimation problems that arise in some
reliability studies. Section 7.1 considers situations where there are size-
biases inherent in the analysis of ``discovery'' or observational data. Section
7.2 deals with inference in regression models with both time and covariate
censoring. Finally, in Section 7.3 we consider reliability inference under an
acceleration transform model, allowing the study of non-linear transformations.
An important method of scientific inquiry is to run experiments by purposely
changing the conditions of the variables of interest. It has been successfully
employed in many industrial,and agricultural investigation. Two major issues in
experimental investigation are how to properly choose the experimental
conditions(i.e., design), and to analyze the experimental data(i.e., analysis).
Our proposed research strives to find novel designs that achieve higher
efficiencies and economy, and wider applications, and to develop novel analysis
strategies that can extract more information from the data for better decision
making. The second part of the proposal is on product reliability. We propose to
develop methods of statistical inference for a wider class of models that can
better describe the actual reliability of industrial and commercial products.
These statistical methods can also be used to study other interesting problems
like medical follow-up, software reliability and depletion of petroleum
reserves.
