
* 9423706
* Mathematical Sciences: Measurement Error and Statistical Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1995,06/20/1995
* Leonard Stefanski,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

This research develops new methods of statistical inference for data measured
with error. The methods exploit the availability of high-speed computing to
simulate the effects of measurement error on a data set. The results of such
simulation experiments form the basis of a method of inference called simulation
extrapolation. The first component of the research adapts the method of
simulation extrapolation estimation to situations in which replicate
measurements are made on the variables measured with error. The second component
of the research uses the complex-variable formulation of simulation
extrapolation to bypass the extrapolation step. This is accomplished by
performing a simulation experiment using complex pseudo random variables to
compute unbiased estimating equations for the parameters of interest. The third
component of the research focuses on two-sample hypothesis testing problems,
developing tests that are asymptotically valid when data from one sample are
measured with error. The presence of measurement error in data can affect the
validity of conclusions drawn from statistical analyses of such data. For
example, measurement error in risk factors such as blood pressure or cholesterol
level affects statistical determination of the relationship of heart disease to
such risk factors, usually resulting in underestimation of the beneficial
effects of controlling these risk factors. Similarly, statistical determination
of the relationship of ecosystem health to ecosystem stressers (pollutants, for
example) can be obscured by the inability to accurately measure stresser levels.
This research develops statistical theory and methods for making valid
inferences from data that are measured with error. The fact that errors of
measurement occur in many areas of science (survey methodology, environmental
studies, epidemiology, medicine for example) means that the research is widely
applicable. The research uses novel computer simulation methods to simulate the
effects of measurement error on a data set and on the conclusions drawn from
such data. The information obtained from the simulation studies is then used to
make valid inferences from the data that are free from the biasing effects of
measurement error.
