
* 9500831
* Mathematical Sciences: Application of Interval Analysis in Statistical Computing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,05/25/1995
* William Kennedy,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9500831 Kennedy Abstract The IEEE proposed standard for binary floating-point
computer arithmetic has been adopted by most computer manufacturers. Included
among the features of this floating-point number system is programmer selectable
rounding mode. Two rounding modes, round to plus or minus infinity, give
hardware support for implementations of interval analysis computations.
Substantive areas outside statistics are employing interval analysis and
interval computations to good advantage in research. Research workers in
statistical computing have been slow to recognize or evaluate the potential
utility of interval analysis. The overall objective of this research is to
identify areas in statistical computing where interval analysis can be used to
good advantage, and to develop needed methods and algorithms in these areas.
Specifically, a library of routines for self- validating approximation of cdf
and inverse cdf for most of the usual univariate continuous probability
distributions, and selected multivariate distributions will be developed.
Accuracy essentially to machine precision over very broad areas of the
variable/parameter space will be the goal. Self-validating computational methods
for certain kinds of global optimization problems will also be developed.
Scientific computations are usually done using a digital computer. Computers are
not, however, capable of expressing exactly most numbers that constitute
intermediate and final results for a computing problem. A part of the
inexactness inherent in computer arithmetic is due to the need to round to a
specific number of numeric digits after each arithmetic operation. Therefore
answers produced by a computer for difficult computing tasks are often only
rough approximations to the unknown true answers which would be obtained if
exact computations could be performed. The objective of this research project is
to develop alternative computational methods that yield more accurate answers in
difficult statistical computing ap plications. The price of increased accuracy
is that substantially more computer resources are consumed to produce answers.
However, today there are enough computer resources available to support this
very computationally intensive approach. The main motivation for the research is
that it is best to spend extra time and effort to insure good answers, instead
of settling for poor answers that are obtained quickly.
