
* 9501893
* Mathematical Sciences: Smoothed Nonparametric Hazard Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,06/18/1997
* Birgit Grund,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 72,000.00

9501893 Grund Abstract The main objective of the project is to develop smoothing
methods for nonparametric hazard regression with time-dependent regression
coefficients, in the framework of an additive hazard regression model (Aalen
model). The Aalen model incorporates the possibility that both value and
contribution of covariates may change over time. Most important, no particular
parametric shape of this time-dependence is assumed. In the current project,
kernel smoothing will be used to estimate the regression coefficient curves. A
major objective is to develop data-driven bandwidth selectors, and to
investigate their properties. It is expected that the resulting methods will
improve upon currently used empirical estimates. Moreover, kernel methods allow
one to estimate the regression coefficient curves themselves, as opposed to
cumulative coefficients. This is particularly important for graphical data
analysis. The new smoothing methods will be implemented in XLISP-STAT, an
object- oriented programming language; a user-friendly interface will be
provided. Dynamic graphics will be used to support visual data exploration. As
part of the project, the developed smoothing procedures will be used to analyze
epidemiological data. On the side of education, the development of a new lecture
course on ``Smoothing Methods in Curve Estimation'' for statistics majors at the
M.S. or Ph.D. level is proposed. Research results of the current proposal will
be included. Dynamic graphics software will be used to demonstrate smoothing
techniques in class, thus giving students access to cutting edge technology An
important problem in medicine is to predict the survival of patients, given
their current condition and treatment. The condition of a patient is described
by "covariate values", such as blood cholesterol, blood pressure, number of
antibodies, etc. A central problem in analyzing survival data is to assess the
influence of covariates; for example, to quantify by how much an elevated level
of blood cholesterol increases the risk of stroke. Often the influence of
covariates is known to change with time. In this case standard methods tend to
fail. The proposed project develops risk estimates based on the Aalen model.
This model is extremely flexible. The influence of covariates is allowed to
change over time, without assuming any particular shape of this time-dependence
beforehand. In this project, modern smoothing techniques will be adapted to
estimate the influence of covariates. Smoothing methods are extremely useful for
descriptive data analysis, and widely used in statistics. In the context of
survival data, however, the use of corresponding methods is a very recent
development, with many open problems. Part of the project is the user-friendly
computational implementation of the newly developed estimation procedures.
Interactive graphics will be used extensively to support visual data
exploration. With the provided software, smoothing methods in Aalen hazard
regression will be available for practitioners for the first time. The new
smoothing procedures will be used to analyze epidemiological data. On the side
of education, the development of a new lecture course on ``Smoothing Methods in
Curve Estimation'' for statistics majors at the M.S. or Ph.D. level is proposed.
Research results of the current proposal will be included. Dynamic graphics
software will be used to demonstrate smoothing techniques in class, thus giving
students access to cutting edge technology.
