
* 9501926
* Mathematical Sciences: Greedy Growing and its Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,04/24/1997
* Andrew Nobel,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 72,000.00

9501926 Nobel Binary trees play an important role in the methodology of
statistics and engineering. Classification trees have been applied to variety of
statistical problems, ranging from mortality studies to the recognition of
functional groups in gene sequences. Quantization trees have been applied to the
compression of medical images and sampled speech. The problem of designing good
classification and quantization trees from finite data sets is usually addressed
through the use of greedy growing algorithms. While the empirical behavior of
these algorithms is well understood, there has been little theory to support
their use, or to examine their behavior on large data sets. The proposed
research will undertake a systematic study of greedy growing algorithms. It has
three broad objectives: To develop theoretical tools that will provide a means
of rigorously analyzing such algorithms; To apply these tools to the analysis
and comparison of existing algorithms; To use these tools, in conjunction with
computer simulations, in the design of new algorithms for specific applications.
A key feature of the proposed research is that it addresses classification and
quantization in the same framework. Educational activities will be one of the
key responsibilities of the principal investigator during the duration of the
grant. The Statistics Department at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill has a strong tradition of graduate and undergraduate education. Maintaining
the tradition entails a strong commitment to teaching, as well as interaction
with students, both inside and outside of the classroom. We hope to further the
tradition through the development of new courses, which will introduce students
to the basic ideas behind the proposed research. Subject to departmental
approval, graduate level courses in Statistical Pattern Recognition and
Complexity-based Statistical Methods will be developed. A reading course will be
designed to encourage advanced graduate students to undertake superviqed
research in the proposed area of study. Tree-structured methods of data analysis
play an important role in statistics and engineering, because they are easy to
implement and lend themselves to ready interpretation. Tree-structured
procedures have been applied to statistical problems ranging from the study of
housing prices to the prediction of heart attacks. Related procedures have been
applied by engineers to the compression of medical images and human speech. In
each application, a suitable tree must be constructed from experimental data
sets that are typical of the behavior under study. In practice, trees are
frequently designed by greedy growing algorithms, which build a tree
iteratively, from the ground up. While these algorithms are well understood from
an experimental standpoint, there has been little theory to support their use,
or to examine their behavior on very large data sets. The proposed research will
undertake a systematic study of greedy growing algorithms. It has three broad
objectives: To develop theoretical tools that will provide a means of rigorously
analyzing such algorithms; To apply these tools to the analysis and comparison
of existing algorithms; To use these tools, in conjunction with computer
simulations, in the design of new algorithms for specific applications. A key
feature of the proposed research is that it addresses statistical and
engineering applications within the same framework. Educational activities will
be one of the key responsibilities of the principal investigator during the
duration of the grant. The Statistics Department at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill has a strong tradition of graduate and undergraduate
education. Maintaining the tradition entails a strong commitment to teaching, as
well as interaction with students, both inside and outside of the classroom. We
hope to further the tradition through the development of new courses, which will
introduce graduate students to the basic ideas behind the proposed research. In
addition, a reading course will be designed to encourage advanced graduate
students to undertake supervised research in the proposed area of study.
