
* 9502157
* Mathematical Sciences: Second International Workshop on Bayesian Robustness; May, 1995; Rimini, Italy
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/1995,03/29/1995
* Larry Wasserman,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 03/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

The purpose of this conference is to bring together experts in the area of
robust Bayesian inference to discuss applications, recent methodological
developments and theory. Of particular interest are practical methods for
implementing the theory such as those that exploit recent advances in
statistical computing. Among the topics to be discussed at the workshop are:
robust Bayesian methods in biostatistics, local sensitivity, hierarchical
models, dynamic graphics, Bayes factros, density estimation and time series. The
term ``Bayesian statistics'' refers to a class of data analysis techniques based
on probability theory . These techniques are very general and have been
successfully used in such diverse areas as quality control, engineering,
psychology, medicine, environmental sciences and astrophysics. But applications
of Bayesian methods to science and technology have been hindered since Bayesian
analysis often requires the use of certain simplifying assumptions. ``Bayesian
robustness'' is concerned with developing techniques for understanding how
scientific conclusions depend on the assumptions that are used by statisticians
when analyzing the data. Bayesian robustness is crucial for the successful
development of practical Bayesian data analysis methods. It is a relatively new,
quickly growing area and hence it difficult for researchers -- especially young
researchers -- to meet and stay in touch with the latest ideas. The objective of
the workshop is to draw together researchers to discuss the latest advances in
this field. LEVEL OF EFFORT STATEMENT The recommended level of support for this
conference, though slightly lower than what we had hoped for, is still
substantial and, together with the funds provided by the Italian government, we
expect to produce a high quality workshop. Indeed, preparations for the
conference are in progress and many top researchers have already indicated their
intention to participate. Furthermore, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics
has indicated that it is likely they will publish the proceedings in their
Lecture Note series. We will make every effort to ensure a successful
conference.
