
* 9504515
* Mathematical Sciences: Biased Sampling, Bump Hunting and Confidence
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,07/03/1995
* Michael Woodroofe,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 59,999.00

Proposal: DMS 9504515 PI(s): Jiayang Sun and Michael Woodroofe Institution:
Univ. of Michigan Title: Biased Sampling, Bump Hunting, and Confidence Abstract:
The research will include the development of confidence bands for the expected
response, viewed as a function of the design variables. This will be
accomplished through combination of higher order asymptotic analysis, numerical
calculation, and simulation. The asymptotic analysis requires finding
approximations to the distributions of maxima of random fields, and even the
asymptotic formulas require some numerical calculation. The investigators will
also study maximum likelihood estimation for biased sampling models, including
models in which subjects self-select, and tests for unimodality versus
multimodality. They will seek efficient algorithms, conditions for consistency,
and asymptotic distributions for estimation error and test statistics. Higher
order approximations to confidence levels for parametric models which exhibit
dependence are another major objective of the research. Such models include
Markov chains, semi-Markov processes, and time sequential models in sequential
analysis. A promising approach is to use Stein's Identity on the signed root
transformation. In addition, the investigators will study non-parametric
estimation for semi-Markov processes and expected sample sizes and operating
characteristics for time sequential models. Determining the amount of confidence
that may be attached to an estimate or projection is a primary objective of the
research. To do this the investigators will place probabilistic bounds on the
unobservable estimation error. They will focus their attention on two novel
contexts both of which involve measurements which are not independent but,
rather, are related in a complicated way. For example, in studies of air
pollution, measurements at nearby locations may be related. The research also
includes the study of inference from observational studies, studies in which the
inclusion or exclusion of subjects is not entirely under the control of the
experimenter. In such cases inclusion may depend on other factors, like the
variables of interest. For example, in animal studies it is easier to find a
large group of animals than a small one. The development of methods for
correcting the raw data to form valid estimates is a major objective of the
research.
