
* 9504525
* Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Analysis, Rank Data andMultivariate Ranks
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 07/15/1995,04/30/1997
* John Marden,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 147,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504525 PI: John Marden Institution: University of Illinois
Title: Multivariate Analysis, Rank Data and Multivariate Ranks ABSTRACT This
research explores several areas of multivariate statistical analysis and the
modeling and analysis of rank data. In rank data, several judges rank a set of
objects from best to worse. Research in the analysis and modeling of such data
includes evaluating distances between rank vectors by looking at the set of
distances as a convex cone; extending unidimensional unfolding models to several
dimensions by using orthogonal ``contrasts" of objects, each contrast being a
collection of groups of objects; and using quotient groups of the group of
permutations with respect to particular subgroups to represent contrasts and/or
patterns of ties in rank data. Related to rank data is rank-based nonparametric
analysis of variance, wherein the the cells in the design are the objects. Main
and interaction effects are defined nonparametrically in multiway layouts, rank-
based procedures for hypothesis testing of these models are developed, and
invariance and likelihood principles are used to find universally efficient
rank-based test procedures. Finally, an approach to extending univariate rank
procedures to multivariate procedures, including multivariate analogs of popular
univariate statistics (Wilcoxon/Mann-Whitney, Kruskal-Wallis, Jonckheere-
Terpstra, Kendall tau, Spearman rho, etc.) and tests of symmetry hypotheses on
covariance matrices, is detailed relying on a particular definition of
multivariate rank. Iteration of the rank function may provide an approach to
defining multivariate probability functions and inverse functions, with
applications to generating random vectors and multivariate QQ-plots. The main
focus of this research is to analyze and extend a number of popular statistical
procedures. Rank data, in which a number of judges ranks a number of objects
from best to worse, arise in many are as, including political science,
sociology, education, psychology, and consumer preferences. Such data typically
show a high degree of complexity, often due to the presence of distinct camps
among the judges, natural groupings of the objects, or a continuum of possible
preferences of the judges (along, e.g., a liberal/conservative continuum). New
statistical models based on groupings of objects are able to capture such
complexities in many cases. This research extends the scope of these models by
considering multiple groupings or continuums. (There may be separate
liberal/conservative continuums for social issues and for economic issues.)
Related research is applicable to many fields, including agriculture, biology,
economics, and environmental sciences as well as the social sciences. Most
statistical studies are directed towards comparing individuals or treatments
(e.g., fertilizers, drugs, educational methods) based on one or more
measurement, or finding relationships between different measurements (e.g., diet
and health). The basic methods depend on fairly restrictive assumptions,
assumptions which often do not apply in real scientific situations.
Consequently, a great amount of work has been dedicated to developing procedures
which work well even when the assumptions are violated to a certain extent. It
is particularly important that the procedures not fail in the presence of a few
unusual values. When comparisons are based on only one attribute, rank-based
procedures are easily applied and understood, and valid under reasonably mild
conditions. These methods are applied by taking the data (on, e.g., cholesterol
level) and replacing them with their ranks (i.e., the lowest level becomes ``1",
the next ``2", etc.) It is very common to wish to make comparisons based on more
than one attribute, e.g., cholesterol level and blood pressure. In such cases,
ranking individuals is more problematic since their order with respect to
cholesterol may not be the same as that with respect to blood pressure. A major
component of this research uses a particular approach to ranking individuals on
several attributes simultaneously. Procedures are developed based on these
rankings that parallel those for single attributes. These methods are easy to
use and widely valid, being especially resistant to unusual observations.
