
* 9504798
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Modeling in Continuous Time, Delayed Autoregressive Processes, and Chaos
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,07/03/1995
* Kung-Sik Chan,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 81,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504798 PI(s): Kung-Sik Chan and Osnat Stramer Institution:
University of Iowa Title: Nonlinear Modeling in Continous Time, Delayed
Autoregressive Processes, and Chaos Abstract: In analyzing nonlinear time series
data sampled irregularly, it is natural to consider non-linear continuous-time
models for the (unobserved) underlying continuous-time process. Owing to the
intractability of the likelihood function for such kind of nonlinear models, the
existing estimation methods in the literature are somewhat ad hoc. This research
contributes to the statistical inference for non-linear continuous-time modeling
based on (possibly irregularly sampled) discrete-time observations. This
research consists of four parts. In part I, the investigators study maximum
likelihood estimation for the general class of nonlinear continuous-time
autoregressive process, abbreviated by NLCAR(p). The investigators derive a new
expression for the likelihood function which can be evaluated via simulation.
The investigators implement the simulation-based maximum likelihood estimation
procedure for some classes of NLCAR(p) models. The investigators then study the
sampling properties of the maximum likelihood estimator so obtained. In part II,
the investigators apply the Lagrange Multiplier tests for detecting non-
linearity and also those for other diagnostic purposes, and study their large
sample properties. In part III, the investigators extend an approach relating
ergodicity and stability to continuous-time models. In part IV, the
investigators study delayed continuous-time non-linear autoregressive processes
whose state space is an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. They also study the
recurrence (stationarity) properties and the statistical inference for the
delayed non-linear autoregressive processes. In this research, the investigators
study new statistical methods useful for analyzing data which are taken over
possibly unequal ti me intervals. Such kind of data is known as irregularly
sampled time series, and occurs frequently in diverse areas including business
forecasting, environmental statistics, medical statistics, physical and
engineering science. The investigators study computer-intensive methods which
provide the relevant tools for studying and testing for the nonlinear structure
of irregularly sampled time series data. The investigators also develop some
mathematical statistics and probability theory fundamental to the understanding
of the new methods. LEVEL OF EFFORT STATEMENT At the recommended level of
support, the PI will make every attempt to meet the original scope and level of
effort of the project.
