
* 9504918
* Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Empiricals in Regression with Survival Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,07/03/1995
* Song Yang,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1998
* USD 48,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504918 PI: Song Yang Institution: Texas A&M Title: Weighted
Empiricals in Regression with Survival Data Abstract: This research involves
various semiparametric regression models, with right, double or interval
censoring. These models include the commonly used multiplicative hazard model
and the log transform of accelerated life model, the relatively new frailty
model, and the rarely studied multiplicative odds ratio model. In all these
models, the covariates are allowed to be time-dependent. The weighted Nelson-
Aalen hazard function and Kaplan-Meier survival function are defined via
weighted empirical processes and some self consistency equations. Various
estimating equations and estimating functions are established using these
weighted functions. Some classes of the regression estimators, including the
rank, minimum distance and M-estimators, are then obtained and analyzed. The
efficiency and robustness of the estimators and some goodness-of-fit tests of
the models is studies, as well as the practical issues on computing these
estimators. The models and related statistical problems studied in this research
have applications in areas such as medical follow-up studies and industrial
reliability tests. In situations involved in those areas, the available data are
often incomplete due to various censoring. The censoring is attributed to the
conditions of the patients or machine operating systems and is influenced by
factors such as treatment, age, stress, and load. These influences can be
formulated by some of the models in this research. Through studies of these
models and related statistical problems, the conditions of the patients or
operating systems can be better understood, predicted, and controlled. Compared
with the existing research literature, the new methods in this research will
require different or more sophisticated computing algorithms. Implementations of
these methods provide a background to, and are facilitated by, efficient coding
and high performance computing.
