
* 9504955
* Mathematical Sciences: Hidden Mark CV Models, Semi-parametric Models, and Sample Reuse Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,04/09/1997
* Peter Bickel,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 150,000.00

Proposal: DMS 95- 04955 PI: Peter Bickel Institution: UC Berkeley Title: Hidden
Markov Models, Semi-Parametric Models, and Sample Reuse Models ABSTRACT This
research involves development of methodology for inference in hidden Markov
models; for model fitting, diagnostics and tests for semiparametric models; and
studies of novel types of resampling methods. In the first area the main goals
are to extend the work of Baum and Petrie (1966) and the investigators to
underlying continuous state and time Markov processes and Markov random fields;
and to study methods which achieve computational savings without sacrificing
efficiency. In the second area, the goal of the investigators is to produce a
unified approach to testing and model selection between and within models
arising in biostatistics, econometric and elsewhere. In the third area, the goal
is to study m out of n with and without replacement bootstraps for various
purposes including setting critical values in difficult testing situations. The
goal of this research is to develop statistically sound and computationally
feasible estimates, tests, and error bounds in some types of complex models for
data that arise, naturally in a number of important fields. Applications of
hidden Markov models include speech recognition by machine and estimation of
genomic sequence characteristics, of significance in biotechnology. Applications
of semiparametric models include transportation choice and other aspects of
civil infrastructure studies. Reliable resampling methods, our final area of
study are essential for calculating error bounds and thresholds for the complex
procedures we are developing and in fact are an essential part of the procedures
as a whole. Their implementation is possible only in our age of ever more rapid
computation.
