
* 9504882
* Mathematical Sciences: Design of Experiments: Improving Practicability of Some Useful Concepts
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,06/21/1995
* John Stufken,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504882 PI: John Stufken Institution: Iowa State University Title:
Design of Experiments: Improving Practicability of some Useful Concepts
Abstract: This research focuses on developing tools to obtain efficient designs
for various settings. It involves the development of algorithms and, where
needed, supporting theory. Issues that are addressed include blocking in mixture
experiments, avoiding undesirable level combinations in factorial experiments,
and converting a given block design to a trend-free or nearly trend-free version
of that design. A critical concept is a generalization of the idea of trade-off
in block designs. Designed experiments are essential in most industrial
experiments and in many areas of scientific research. It is almost always
crucial to use limited available resources efficiently, and to assure that the
collected data can be used to answer questions of interest reliably. Areas of
application include experiments for product quality assessment and improvement
in industrial production processes, and experiments for quantitative research
in, for example, agricultural sciences, social sciences, and engineering
disciplines. Much of the research in design of experiments concentrates on
identifying efficient designs for a specific problem, often not broad enough to
be relevant for more than one area of application. The usefulness of previous
work has at times been limited by restrictions on the results induced by the
mostly mathematical tools used to derive the results. Application of some of
these methods has also suffered from the mathematical sophistication that is
required from a user. The investigator develops new methods and algorithms to
find efficient designs for various specific problems. These algorithms, which
can be implemented easily with existing computer software, facilitate use of the
new methods, and do not require any mathematical sophistication of a user.
