
* 9504924
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Theory and Methods for Errors in Variables Regression and other Multivariate Inference Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1995,06/16/1997
* Leon Gleser,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/1999
* USD 135,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504924 PI: Leon Gleser Institution: U. of Pittsburgh Title:
STATISTICAL THEORY AND METHODS FOR ERRORS-IN-VARIABLES REGRESSION AND OTHER
MULTIVARIATE INFERENCE PROBLEMS Abstract: This research compares the mean
squared error risks of various estimators of regression slopes that correct for
bias due to measurement error in the predictor variables. Included in these
comparisons is the naive (uncorrected) least squares estimator that ignores
measurement error. Emphasis is placed on bias correction that makes use of
knowledge about the repeatability (reliability) of the vector of measurements on
the predictors to "correct the slope estimates for attenuation." Various ways of
obtaining and analyzing information concerning the reliability of the vector of
measured predictors are considered, including the use of reliability studies of
individual components and/or subvectors of the predictor vector and the
elicitation and use of expert opinion. These separate sources of information are
combined to yield frequentist or Bayes point estimators of the reliability
matrix of the measured predictors; this matrix is used to correct least squares
regression slopes for attenuation. Methods for forming confidence (or credible)
intervals for slopes, and also for components of the reliability matrix are
derived and compared. Computational algorithms for finding likelihoods and
posterior distributions in both these problems, and also in multivariate growth
curve and seemingly unrelated regression models, are written and tested on real
and simulated data. Much of scientific research concerning complex systems or
organisms is concerned with relationships among quantities . For example, the
number of successfully hatched eggs of a certain species of marshland wildfowl
might be related to the concentrations of one or more pesticides in the marsh.
When the rates of response or change of a variable (such as the number of
successfully hatched eggs) to changes in other predictor variables (such as
various pesticide concentrations) are estimated by conventional statistical
methods, it is assumed that the predictor variables are measured exactly.
Unfortunately, environmental, biological or psychological variables rarely are
measured exactly. If predictor variables are measured with error, the
conventional estimates of response rates are biased. To correct for such bias,
errors-in-variables regression models assume that each measurement is the sums
of the true value of the quantity being measured and a random error. In this
case, the proportion of the unit-to-unit variability of a measurement that is
due to the variability over units of the true value, called the reliability of
the measurement, can be used to correct the bias of the conventional estimates
of response rates. When several variables are simultaneously used as predictors
of another, more than the reliability of each individual predictor is required
for this purpose; it is the reliability of the measurements of the predictors as
a whole, or ensemble, that must be ascertained. Because the particular
collection of predictors may not have been used before, information about the
reliability of the predictors as an ensemble must be pieced together from a
variety of sources. The investigator's research is concerned with how best to
obtain and combine information from data summaries of prior studies that used
some (but not necessarily all) of the predictor variable, data from the current
study and expert opinion to obtain the required reliability information and
correct bias in the conventional estimates of response rates. Also studied are
ways to determine and summarize the accuracy of the resulting estimates.
Insights and methodology from this research has broad applicability to questions
of combining information from several small studies concerning the
interrelationships among variables, not all of which appear in every study. One
of the products of the research is computer software that allows information to
be combined from several studies on the same subjects (or environmental
locations) and then displayed so as to give the relative likelihoods of various
statistical models in the light of the evidence presented by the data itself.
