
* 9505440
* Mathematical Sciences: Diagnostics in Structured Data and Quality Improvement
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,06/20/1995
* Douglas Hawkins,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 114,000.00

Proposal: DMS 95-05440 PI: Douglas Hawkins Institution: University of Minnesota
Title: Diagnostics in Structured Data and Quality Improvement Abstract: The
principal directions of the work are case and model diagnostics, and
methdologies for handling data with a natural ordering such as time series, or
regression data ordered by one of the predictors. The first branch of the work
extends methods for identifying atypical cases in multiple regression,
multivariate and time series data, and for moderating their effects on the
subsequent analysis of the data. The second branch of the work addresses
problems of methodologies for identifying structural changes in ordered data
(for example regression and multivariate data) and for overcoming the
difficulties caused by unknown parameter values. A major application for this
work is statistical quality improvement. Many important societal problems
involve making valid inferences from complex data sets. The decision whether a
facility is adding to the pollution levels in the groundwater, for example, is
made on the basis of series of groundwater samples. Analyzing these series is
complicated by the presence of apparent maverick values, which may be the result
of laboratory error or may reflect actual pollution events. The methods
developed with this award help to recognize such values and to resolve the issue
of the true pollution levels. Quality improvement is of great importance - both
in manufacturing and in all areas of government and the private sector. Pointers
to quality improvement for deterioration can be found from identifying
structural changes in series of measurements The development of powerful easily-
used change diagnostics in this research will lead to sounder and more reliable
ways of pinpointing the sources of change. The work has both methodological and
computational elements. While the computational aspect benefits from high
performance computing equipment and me thods, the development of better
computational procedures also leads to solutions to problems currently beyond
the powers of even the most powerful computer systems.
