
* 9505114
* Mathematical Sciences: Robustness and Scale in Spatial Applications of Markov Chain Monte Carlo for Bayesian Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1995
* David Higdon,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

Proposal: DMS9505114 PI: Dave Higdon Institution: Duke University Title:
Robustness and Scale in Spatial Applications of Markov Chain Monte Carlo for
Bayesian Inference Abstract: The proposed research develops flexible prior
distributions for Bayesian inference for spatial systems. From the modeling
standpoint, spatial priors that are mixtures over simple Markov random fields
(MRF's) are developed in two distinct contexts. In the first, mixtures will be
constructed to allow robust inference when anomalies, and heterogeneity are
present in the spatial process. In the second context, mixtures over different
scales will be considered, so that the scale of the MRF can be rigorously
treated as a parameter when making inference. Only very recent advances in
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) make inference from such models possible.
Applications in agriculture, imaging and environmental monitoring will be
considered. The proposed research will develop statistical methodologies for
analyzing spatial data which combines information at various scales. Development
of spatial models suitable for agriculture, imaging (eg. remote sensing and
medical imaging), environmental monitoring and assessing environmental trends
are main goals of this research. Current statistical methods typically require
restrictive assumptions which often make formal analyses in these areas
difficult or impossible. This methodology will relax these assumptions. A
primary motivation for combining information from various scales is for dealing
with geographical information systems used for environmental monitoring. Such
systems invariably contain data at varying scales which can be incorporated in
the analysis.
