
* 9505290
* Mathematical Sciences: Random Coefficient Models and Robust Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1995
* Douglas Simpson,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1998
* USD 107,000.00

Proposal: DMS 95-05290 Principal investigator: Douglas G. Simpson Institution:
University of Illinois Title: RANDOM COEFFICIENT MODELS AND ROBUST ANALYSIS
Abstract: Random coefficient models have found wide application for modeling
correlation, incorporating laboratory or study effects, and in developing
Bayesian estimates and inferences. Marginal analysis is an alternative approach
in which models are developed directly for marginal distributions (integrated
over random effects), and the inferences are at the level of population average
effects rather than at the level of individual experimental units. Connections
and contrasts between these general modeling strategies and robust statistics
will be developed. The aim is to develop fresh ideas for attacking hard problems
in applied statistics. Among the problems to be attacked: robust generalized
linear modeling and graphical data analysis; environmental exposure risk
assessment combining information from multiple studies with varying protocols
and endpoint measurements; inferences for random function data arising from
spectral measurement instruments. With the wide availability of powerful
computers, increasingly complex data are being collected. In analytical
chemistry it is now routine to qtore separation spectra electronically. In
environmental toxicology large databases are being assembled on potentially
hazardous pollutants. The proposed research is directed at the development of
statistical methods for such data. In combining information from multiple
exposure--response studies, it is possible to model uncertainty due to things
such as interlaboratory effects or species differences using modern
computational techniques and new statistical paradigms. In environmental
chemistry, fluctuations in the amount of material assayed and in the measuring
instrument itself lead to extra randomness in the measurement. Adjusting for
this effect is critical to the success of the metho ds, particularly as the
number of features measured, e.g., peaks on a mass spectrum, becomes large. The
proposed research will develop toolkits for analysis, inference and diagnostics.
Key components of the work are algorithm development, simulation studies,
asymptotic analysis, testing of the methodology, and software development. The
major applications driving this research are in environmental risk assessment
(combining information) and environmental monitoring (spectral measurements),
targeting strategic national concerns in environmental management. ??
