
* 9505109
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Methods for Nonlinear Inference in Time Series with Stochastic Variance
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1995
* Nicholas Polson,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/1999
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9505109 PI: Nick Polson Institution: University of Chicago Title:
Statistical Methods for Nonlinear Inference in Time Series with Stochastic
Variance Abstract: This project develops and applies hierarchical statistical
models for nonlinear inference problems to the new areas of multivariate data
with stochastic variance as well as nonnormal errors. Previous research by
Jacquier, Polson and Rossi (1994) has shown that this methodology is better than
the usual statistical methods, such as generalized methods of moments, for the
case of normal univariate stochastic variance. This research utilizes Markov
chain Monte Carlo techniques and hierarchical modeling to construct and
implement a methodology for inference which incorporates multivariate stochastic
variance and nonnormality. Within this methodology, it is straightforward to
examine the effects of alternative assumptions such as different error
distributions on the resulting inferences. In addition, the project develops an
outlier diagnostic procedure to be used in the presence of stochastic variance.
This research develops a general methodology for analyzing time series data,
such as stock prices, interest rates and other financial series, where variance,
or volatility, changes over time. Until recently, such data were analyzed
assuming either constant variance or variance changing according to a
predetermined pattern. Recent statistical work has shown that a better way of
analyzing these data is to assume randomly changing variance. This approach is
known as stochastic variance (or volatility) time series modeling. This research
provides a more general framework for analyzing these models which does not rely
on the usual limiting assumptions of existing methodologies. A number of
statistical tools are provided to analyze the data within the stochastic
variance framework. The methodology developed in this research presents an
improved way to analyze time series data, and severa l examples based on
financial time series are included.
