
* 9510516
* Mathematical Sciences: Exact Confidence Regions for Multi- dimensional Contingency Tables
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1995,06/22/1995
* Laura Lazzeroni,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9510516 Lazzeroni Abstract Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium and linkage
disequilibrium are important concepts in population genetics. In practice,
estimation of linkage disequilibrium in haplotype data is equivalent to
estimation of the interactions in a large, sparse, multidimensional contingency
table. Simultaneous estimation of Hardy-Weinberg and linkage disequilibrium on
multilocus genotype data introduces the additional complications of missing
information and symmetry constraints on marginal probabilities. To avoid large-
sample approximations that can be unreliable for these data, one approach is to
use "exact" statistical methods that condition inference on observed marginal
totals. Unfortunately, computing exact confidence intervals and regions is
presently infeasible because of the large number of tables consistent with the
marginal totals of an observed table. The principal investigator designs and
studies methods for exact inference for multidimensional contingency tables.
These methods employ Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms to simulate the
conditional distributions required to construct exact confidence regions for the
interaction parameters of a table. Topics addressed by this research include:
development of useful statistical models of genetic disequilibrium; design,
optimization, and convergence properties of the algorithms; and statistical
properties of the resulting estimates. Genetic disequilibrium can point to the
association of particular alleles with an increased risk of disease, reveal
population substructure, or serve as a guide in positional cloning. This
research provides geneticists with tools for estimating the degree and form of
genetic disequilibrium evidenced by a set of data, and to evaluate the precision
of those estimates. The methods will also be useful for estimating interactions
in large, sparse, multidimensional contingency tables that arise in other
settings.
