
* 9615340
* Mathematical Sciences: Third North American Conference of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability; July 23-26, 1997; Laramie, Wyoming
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/1997,08/19/1996
* Snehalata Huzurbazar,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 04/30/1998
* USD 14,000.00

DMS9615340 Huzubazar This award provides partial support for the third New
Researchers' Conference in Statistics and Probability. Participants at this
conference are recent Ph.D. recipients and doctoral students who are within a
year of completion of their degrees. This is the only conference in North
America exclusively for new researchers in Statistics and Probability. The first
two conferences, held in August 1993 and July 1995, were very successful and had
close to fifty participants each. The conference, planned by the New
Researchers' Committee of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS), will
also be listed as one of the special pre-meeting conferences at the 1997 annual
meeting of the IMS. The objective of the conference is to bring together, in the
early years of their careers, researchers from diverse areas of Statistics and
Probability. Research areas include computationally intensive statistical
methods, Bayesian and non-Bayesian inference, applied probability and stochastic
process, as well as areas with an emphasis on application of statistical methods
such as biostatistics, environmental statistics, and engineering. The conference
is limited to 50 participants, and lasts for 3 days during which each
participant is required to present her/his research in the form of a short talk
or in a poster. Such active participation is important for researchers in
beginning stages of their careers because it facilitates an exchange of research
ideas. The program also includes three overview talks by senior researchers on
cutting-edge research in Statistics and Probability as well as a panel
discussion on how to initiate a research program. The conference will be held
before the annual meetings of the Institute of Mathematical Sciences so that
participants can then attend those meetings.
