
* 9625350
* Mathematical Sciences: Semi-parametric Methods for Longitudinal Data Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1996,07/21/1999
* Naomi Altman,NY,Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 50,000.00

DMS 9625350 Altman Linear and generalized linear mixed models are powerful tools
for analysis of longitudinal response curves. This research focuses on semi-
parametric extensions of these models: recovery of the underlying curve via
self-modeling methods, estimation and inference for parameters which summarize
covariate effects and the use of the curves as data in statistical routines such
as analysis of designed experiments, discriminant analysis and clustering. A
novel feature of the representation is separate parametrization of the time and
response axes which allows the covariates to act on the response both by changes
in the level of response and by time dilation or contraction. Estimation and
inferential techniques are under development. The methodology has applications
in the many areas in which mixed models are used: medical and epidemiological
research, environmental studies, public policy assessment, and economics, to
name just a few. In many studies the response of each individual can be thought
of as a curve over time. Examples include the the progression of HIV infection
in patients under different treatment programs and the degradation of pesticides
in different soils under different environmental conditions. Similar types of
data are used for public policy assessment, economics, psychology,
pharmokinetics and numerous other fields. Understanding the evolution of
response over time can be critical to interpreting the effects of treatments and
other influences. Recent advances in statistical modeling have greatly improved
the efficiency of estimating treatment effects but require that the investigator
specify the shape of the response curve and the types of treatment effects
expected prior to analyzing the data. The methods developed for this project
allows the shape of the response curve to be determined from the observed data,
while retaining simple measures of treatment effects. A novel feature is that
treatments which stretch the time scale of the response (for example, by slowing
disease progression) are handled in a natural way. Related work covered by this
project involves the use of response curves to find subgroups with similar
response evolution and for classification of individuals into groups, such as
healthy and diseased.
