
* 9625774
* Mathematical Sciences: Time Series and Point Processes: Networks and Wavelets
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1996,04/17/1998
* David Brillinger,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

DMS 9625774 Brillinger This project has two parts. A first is to develop
statistical techniques for dealing with graphical models whose vertex variates
are time series or point processes. Part of the motivation comes from problems
in the neurosciences and in system sciences where one sets down box and arrow
diagrams meant to provide the flow of information between interconnected units.
In the neuroscience case the units will be neurons, the data will be the firing
times and models will developed and fit for the interconnections of single units
or of groups of units. Analyses will be carried out for experimental data
including some collected from neurons distributed through the auditory system of
the cat. In various other substantive fields one is also interested in detecting
the presence of connections and estimating the strength of those connections.
The second part of the project concerns the development of wavelet variants, for
random processes, of some existing ordinary statistical techniques. Wavelets are
of use in eliciting signals of nonstationary character from time series and
images for example. Both parts of the project will require development of
complex stochastic models and their properties, having in mind practical
implementation. A time series is a wiggly line meant to represent a phenomenon
fluctuating in time, such as a seismogram, an electrocardiogram or an
electroencephalogram. A point process is a collection of times at which an event
of interest occurs, such as an earthquake or a nerve cell firing or changes in
mean level (for example of a river). A network is a flow or wiring diagram of
interacting entities such as nerve cells or cities or computers. A focus of the
research is with the case of time series or point processes recorded at each of
the units of a network. The time series and point processes are interacting and
it is desired to learn the strengths and directions of those interactions.
Wavelet analysis is a novel method for elicitilg information concerning
phenomena that may be changing, from time series or image records. The problem
of detecting and estimating change arises often in problems of the environment
and in particular of global warming. It is intended to extend the wavelet
technique to other types of evolving and distributed data such as point
processes or categorical-valued processes.
