
* 9626658
* Estimation and Testing in Non-regular Likelihood Problems Via Adapting Spacing Method and Empirical Process Techniques
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1996,06/17/1996
* Yongzhao Shao,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 80,681.00

DMS 96-26658 Shao The methods of maximum likelihood estimation and likelihood
ratio test have constituted the cornerstone of statistical inference. In
numerous cases, the maximum likelihood method generates estimates with optimal
asymptotic properties and the likelihood ratio test is known to be powerful.
However, there are many important practical situations where these methods break
down. This research focuses on investigating non-regular likelihood problems
including estimation problems where likelihood functions may be unbounded (e.g.,
efficient estimation of a unimodal distribution) as well as hypothesis testing
problems where the likelihood ratio test statistics do not have chi-square type
limiting distributions (e.g., testing homogeneity in Tukey models). This
research involves generalizing the maximum product of spacings method, which is
a natural way to rectify the problems caused by the unboundedness of likelihood
functions and to preserve the essential asymptotic optimalities usually
possessed by the maximum likelihood method. In addition, the research involves
adapting and extending modern empirical process techniques to characterize the
asymptotic behavior of the rescaled likelihood ratio statistic. Scientists and
engineers often build models based upon various prior assumptions about the
underlying conditions. Very often, these assumptions fail to hold in real
applications. If the model is too sensitive to small departures from those prior
assumptions, the results from such models will not be reliable, and may be
misleading with far-reaching adverse consequences. It is, therefore, very
important to develop efficient methods to check the validity of model
assumptions, and to develop techniques that are not constrained by unrealistic
assumptions. This research concerns efficient procedures for testing model
validity and introduces "robust" statistical models which remain effective even
when prior assumptions are not exactly true. Such proced ures have broad
applications ranging from biotechnology to high-speed computing system. In
particular, advancement in this research area would be crucial in fostering
modern manufacturing, for it relates to developing optimal procedures for
assessing reliability and quality control. In this respect, the research plays
an integral role in the promotion of economic growth by improving manufacturing
processes, thereby ensuring U.S. competitiveness in world markets.
