
* 9626784
* Design of Experiments and Canonical Moments
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1996,07/24/1996
* William Studden,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 66,000.00

DMS 9626784 Studden This research is composed of two related parts: one part
deals with the design of experiments and the other deals with canonical moments
in Statistics and Probability. The research in the design area involves the
analysis of complex computer codes, the use of rational functions in regression
theory and the analysis of rigid designs. Complex computer codes are analysed
asympotically in order to optimally choose input values to use for further
prediction purposes. The theory involves the use of stochastic processes,
multidimensional interpolation theory and approximation theory. The second part
involves the use of normalized moments of distributions on the real line called
canonical moments. These have been used successfully in designing experiments in
one dimensional polynomial regression. The present study investigates some
unanswered questions in moment theory and random walks. Experimental design
problems in general involve how to choose which experiments to conduct to obtain
maximal information at minimal cost.The present research involves the analysis
of complex computer codes where the problem is to decide on optimal input values
to predict the outcome at other possible input values. This relates
significantly to high performance computing which is one of NSF's current
strategic areas.
