
* 9626135
* Model Uncertainty in Prediction, Variable Selection and Related Decision Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1996,06/18/1996
* Merlise Clyde,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 79,000.00

DMS 9626135 Clyde Statistical predictions based on complex models may be very
sensitive to modeling assumptions, such as choice of covariates. As a result,
choosing a single model may not lead to satisfactory predictions and may
significantly underestimate prediction intervals due to not incorporating
uncertainty about the model choice into the final answer. Model uncertainty
often outweighs other sources of uncertainty in problems, but is often ignored.
Bayesian methods offer a very effective and conceptually appealing alternative:
predictions and inferences can be based on a set of models rather than a single
model; each model contributes proportionally to the support it receives from the
observed data. This research involves Bayesian methods for stochastically
searching high dimensional model spaces. As the number of models is very large,
the challenge is therefore that of finding efficient ways of exploring the space
of models, selecting plausible ones, and attributing to each of them a weight
(approximating the posterior probability) for the mixing-based prediction or
other utility calculations. Examples for the methodology include applications in
wavelets and generalized additive models: calibration and prediction in
spectroscopy using wavelet packets; determining the influence of particulate
matter on mortality adjusting for other covariates in the presence of model
uncertainty; and variable selection and prediction in binary regression models
for seedling survival. Model averaging using importance sampling to sample from
high dimensional model spaces is an effective solution. This approach is
extended to selecting transformations of variables, subspace selection and
thresholding in wavelets, and generalized additive models in the applications
described above. Methods for sampling models with a probability proportional to
their expected utility are also developed. %%% Finding and using models to
describe data is a fundamental problem in both statis tics and the sciences.
Statistical predictions may be very sensitive to the set of explanatory
variables included in a model. Selecting a particular model based on selecting a
subset of the explanatory variables and using this model for prediction, may
lead to riskier decisions due to not incorporating uncertainty about model
choice into the final answer. Model uncertainty often outweighs other sources of
uncertainty in problems, but is usually ignored. In this research, predictions
and inferences can be based on a set of models rather than a single model; each
model contributes to the decision proportionally to the support it receives from
the observed data. As the number of possible models is very large, the challenge
is therefore that of finding efficient ways of exploring the space of models,
selecting plausible ones, and attributing to each of them a weight for the
weighted prediction or other decisions. The methodological developments are
driven by the following applications: calibration and prediction in
spectroscopy; and determining the influence of particulate matter on mortality
adjusting for other meteorological variables when there is uncertainty about
which variables should be included in the prediction model. ***
