
* 9626532
* Mathematical Sciences: Leveraged Bootstrap
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/1996,05/15/1996
* Jian-Jian Ren,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1999
* USD 63,000.00

DMS 96-26532 Ren The objective of this research is to investigate a new
resampling method, called the Leveraged Bootstrap. The Leveraged Bootstrap
facilitates research in a broad class of nonparametric and semiparametric
statistics using various types of censored data, including right censored data,
doubly censored data, interval censored data, etc.. This method does not depend
on the extensions of the usual statistics for complete data to incomplete data,
and is simple, computationally efficient and easily applicable to a wide of
variety of statistical inference problems with different types of censored data.
In this research, the following issues are considered: (i) how the leveraged
bootstrap should be applied in practice; (ii) the efficiency of the leveraged
bootstrap; (iii) comparison with other methods. Specifically, the investigator
studies the application of the leveraged bootstrap in some statistical inference
problems such as the empirical likelihood methods in constructing confidence
bands and tests, and the hypothesis testing problems which are associated with
several statistical models. %%% Various types of censored data are generally
referred to as incomplete data in statistics literature. For instance, a patient
who has died from heart disease cannot go on to die from lung cancer. In such a
case, the survival time of lung cancer of the patient is incomplete. Recently,
doubly censored data and interval censored data have been encountered in some
very important clinical trials such as breast cancer research and AIDS research.
The statistical research on these types of censored data still generally lags
behind that on right censored data. The principle difficulties in statistical
analysis using these complicated types of censored data are that the usual
methods developed for complete data often do not have direct extensions to
incomplete data, and that the usual nonparametric bootstrap can be quite
computationally time consuming in certain cases. This research is to develop
some new statistical methods which are accurate, computationally efficient and
easily applicable for different types of censored data. ***
