
* 9626181
* Statistical Quality Control for Multistage Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS, PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
* 08/01/1996,04/23/1998
* Mark Schervish,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 126,000.00

The statistical modeling of multistage sequential manufacturing processes
requires models both for processes running as desired and for processes
suffering from faults. In addition, tools are needed for monitoring and
controlling the process, for diagnosing faults, and for predicting future data.
This research project is developing such models and tools. A starting point is a
hierarchical mixture of recursive regression models with Markov transition
structure having the faulty processes as absorbing states. Developing the models
requires understanding the sensitivity of predictions to the parameters of the
models. For example, the use of absorbing states for faulty processes, although
intuitively appealing and mathematically simple, does lead to some undesirable
results that need to be addressed. Prediction requires numerical methods for
adequately summarizing uncertainty from many sources. In particular, it is often
necessary to predict yield several stages in the future for an ongoing process,
and the marginal distributions for the output are not available in closed form.
Monitoring ongoing processes requires the development of appropriate summary
statistics and displays. Diagnosis and monitoring both require the ability to
partition uncertainty amongst several competing possibilities (such as different
possible faults) and make decisions based on the relative costs of the possible
errors. %%% The research develops a general framework for modeling multistage
sequential manufacturing processes. The framework facilitates monitoring of
ongoing processes, prediction of future and current yield, and diagnosis of
faults. In a multistage process with in-line measurements, information becomes
available sequentially and one needs to update one's state of knowledge as the
information arrives. This leads naturally to the use of a Bayesian statistical
approach to the modeling of uncertainties in such a process. The process level
problems addressed by this research are those of in-line measurement choice,
control chart construction, learning about immature processes, and process
control. The research will lead to more sensitive monitoring tools and more
comprehensive prediction and diagnosis tools that should help to improve the
competitiveness of American manufacturers in high technology areas such as very
large scale integrated circuit production. ***
