
* 9626159
* Bayesian Wavelet Modeling with Applications in Turbulence
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS, GLOBAL CHANGE
* 08/01/1996,07/24/1996
* Brani Vidakovic,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 65,000.00

DMS 9626159 Vidakovic This research connects recent theoretical advances in both
nonlinear wavelet shrinkage theory and Bayesian statistical wavelet modeling to
time series measurements of stochastic phenomena. The researchers study: (i)
cost measures that serve as criteria for the best wavelet basis selection, (ii)
statistical models in the wavelet domain that range from Hilbert space
projections to coherent Bayesian models, and (iii) the model induced shrinkage
in the wavelet domain. It is demonstrated that wavelet regression and density
estimation are excellent tools in denoising and parsimonious description of
complex dynamic processes, such as turbulence. The turbulence measurements are
characterized by local ``bursts'' in time and frequency domains are providing an
ideal media for testing shrinkage methods, best basis choice, and wavelet
modeling. The existence of power laws, consistent with Kolmogorov's K41 theory
is used to assess the proposed shrinkage methods. Wavelets are novel building
blocks and excellent descriptors of many complex phenomena in a variety of
scientific fields. This research applies wavelets to an important and
omnipresent phenomenon arising in hydrology and atmospheric science: the
turbulence. Recent theoretical advances in statistical modeling and estimation
are combined with the power of several intrinsic properties of wavelets to
produce superb tools for modeling, denoising, and analyzing complex turbulence
measurements.
