
* 9626118
* Mathematical Sciences: Three Topics in Mathematical Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1996,06/01/1998
* Lawrence Brown,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 126,000.00

DMS 9626118 Brown This research involves three statistical topics. i) There are
several useful formulations involving nonparametric function estimation
including nonparmetric regression, nonparametric density estimation and the
standard nonparametric signal processing model. Recently the investigator and
others have proved the asymptotic equivalence of these models in settings
involving observation of one dimensional response variables. The investigators
propose to construct a formulation for asymptotic equivalence to enable
obtaining effective equivalence results for multidimensional response variables.
ii) One standard method for constructing statistical tests in certain complex
parametric situations involves conditioning on an ancillary statistic and
constructing a test within the (simpler) conditional problem at the desired
level of statistical significance. Unfortunately this procedure entails some
peculiar statistical decision theoretic consequences. These are investigated
more fully and alternatives are proposed to this standard methodology which are
nearly as simple to implement but avoid these undesirable consequences. iii)
Standard tests for bioequivalence are inherently one - dimensional in that they
look at only one performance aspect at a time. This research constructs
multidimensional bioequivalence procedures based in part on principles contained
in recent research by the investigator and collaborators. Statistical procedures
are often classified as single parameter, multiparameter, or nonparametric
depending whether the research looks respectively at one performance
characteristic, several related ones, or an unstructured continuum of them, such
as a response function over time of unspecified shape. i) An important component
of the modem biotechnology enterprise involves testing whether newly developed
replicas of existing technologies have the same effect as the original. For
example, does a (cheaper) generic drug work exactly t he same as the original
prescription drug it is intended to replace. Standard statistical tests of
"bioequivalence" have been formulated to test this hypothesis based on data
gathered about the two technologies. These standard tests are inherently one-
dimensional, and can examine only one performance facet at a time. This research
involves the construction of general statistical tests of bioequivalence which
can simultaneously examine several related performance aspects. ii)
Nonparametric function estimation lies at another extreme in statistical
methodology. Such techniques involve little prior structure and few apriori
assumptions. They are thus extremely valuable in a variety of modern scientific
enterprises involving analysis of masses of complex data including research on
the environment and on global change. One technical problem impacting this area
has been the existence of several apparently different mathematical formulations
for such problems. This research involves the creation of a unified theory for
such problems which will enable more efficient research and more effective use
of these methods. iii) A third aspect of this research involves the notion of
asymptotically ancillary statistics. These are a technical device invented in
part to simplify the analysis of complex multiparameter models. Modern data
collection and computing have vastly increased the importance of analyzing such
models, but more familiarity with them reveals certain peculiarities and
deficiencies which result from using this technical device. This research
proposes alternate technical advice which is nearly as simple to use but avoids
these peculiarities.
