
* 9632955
* Mathematical Sciences: Support for the 45th Annual Gordon Research Conference on Statistics in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering; August 25-30, 1996; Oxford, England
* DMS,STATISTICS, Proc Sys, Reac Eng & Mol Therm
* 06/01/1996,05/07/1996
* Lyle Ungar,RI,Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9632955 Ungar The Gordon Research Conference on Statistics in Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering has met annually since 1951. It provides an important and
highly stimulating opportunity for the exchange of new ideas among researchers
and workers in statistics, chemistry and chemical engineering. In order to
further the exchange of ideas, the 1996 Conference will, for the first time, be
held outside the US, in Oxford (UK). This will bring US scientists in contact
with the leading scientists in the fields of statistics, chemistry and chemical
engineering in Europe. The 1996 Conference will work along two lines. On the one
hand, outstanding statisticians present novel and up-to-date topics relevant for
chemists and chemical engineers and on the other hand, outstanding chemists and
chemical engineers present real-life problems and proposed solutions. This
approach maximizes the interaction between the different groups: chemists and
chemical engineers learn new statistical methods and statisticians hear about
complex real-life problems. %%% The Gordol Research Conference on Statistics in
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering lies on the interface between statistics,
chemistry and chemical engineering. Hence, the conference attracts a broad
spectrum of participants. The resulting cross-fertilization of ideas from
different areas of science and engineering significantly benefits all
participants. Research statisticians are exposed to real problems in chemistry
and chemical engineering; applied chemists and statisticians learn first hand
about new statistical research which they can use in their everyday work; and
research chemists and chemical engineers can discuss their statistical ideas
with eminent statisticians. Statistical methodology, as covered in this
conference, provides important quantitative tools in numerous fields of
research, including meeting national goals for improved competitiveness in the
chemical industries via enhanced product quality and productivity, and
recognition and avoidance of environmental hazards. This conference will allow
open presentation and discussion of recent research on the frontiers of
statistics and its relevance for all areas of chemistry and chemical
engineering. ***
