
* 9632662
* Using CAVE Technology to Explore High-Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 03/15/1996,03/20/1996
* Dianne Cook,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

This research explores visualization methods for examining high-dimensional data
with low-dimensional projections with CAVE Virtual Reality technology. Dynamic
graphical methods for exploratory data analysis are examined in a 3-d immersible
environment. The methods are based on generating motion graphics from continuous
sequences of 3-d projections of high-dimensional data. Interactive user control
is considered in the form of controlling the path of the 3-d sequences in the
data space. Virtual Reality offers the construction and realization of an
artificial 3-dimensional world that has important potential use in scientific
areas. Statistics is the science of making sense of complicated data. For
example, typical environmental data sets may contain thousands of data values on
hundreds of variables. Graphical methods are needed for exploring and
determining relationships among variables such as tree crown health, topography,
temperature, population density and atmospheric pollutants. This research
explores statistical graphical methods for visualizing many variables
simultaneously using CAVE Virtual Reality technology. The research relates to
the Federal Strategic Area of Improved Environmental Quality in that the
examined methods can provide insights for examining spatially measured
environmental data. It also relates to the Federal Strategic Area of Harnessing
Information Technology because it examines using Virtual Reality technology for
organizing and synthesizing information.
