
* 9634300
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Change Research Program
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1996,08/26/1996
* Robert Lempert,CA,Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9634300 Lempert Although technology issues appear vital to climate-change
policy, the Integrated Assessment community currently lacks a suitable framework
for considering the implications of new technology for policy choices. The
fundamental problem is the unpredictability of the evolution of technology over
the time spans of relevance. Currently available decision-analysis tools are
predicated on the ability to craft some credible best- estimate prediction of
the future. However, policy problems such as climate change face extreme
uncertainties for which it is not possible to construct well-characterized best
estimates. In such cases, prediction-based policy analysis is often unable to
resolve acrimonious debate among stakeholders who believe in different best
estimates, and often results in constrained thinking about possible policy
options. In their recent work the investigators have demonstrated an alternative
framework for policy analysis that does not depend on making best-estimate
predictions of the future. The approach is based on two concepts called adaptive
strategies and exploratory modeling. Exploratory modeling treats problems having
massive uncertainty by conducting a large number of computer simulation-
experiments on many plausible formulations of the problem, rather than using
computer resources to increase the resolution of a single best-estimate model.
Adaptive-decision strategies focus on modeling environmental policies where
decision-makers can make midcourse corrections based on observations of the
relevant environmental and economic systems. In this research project the
investigators will use the exploratory modeling/adaptive strategies framework to
examine how the potential of new technology should affect near- term climate
change policy choices. The research has two specific goals: 1) demonstrate and
advance the capabilities of the exploratory modeling/ adaptive strategies
framework, and 2) examine a central climate-change po licy question -- under
what conditions should society pursue technology-specific policies (e.g., tax
credits, subsidies, or government procurements) in addition to carbon taxes?
Policy-makers must often make decisions whose ultimate success depends on
factors that cannot be predicted at the time the decision is made. However,
currently available decision- analysis tools used to help policy-makers compare
alternative policies are predicated on the ability to craft some credible best-
estimate prediction of the future. Under conditions of extreme uncertainty,
prediction-based policy analysis is often unable to resolve acrimonious debate
among stakeholders who believe in different best estimates, and often results in
constrained thinking about possible policy options. Climate change provides an
important example. Future technology developments could have profound impacts on
climate-change policy, but no one can accurately predict the impacts of
technology on the future costs of reducing greenhouse-gas emissions, nor the
effects that various policies will have on these costs. In recent work, the
investigators have demonstrated a new framework for policy analysis that does
not depend on making best-estimate predictions of the future. The approach is
based on two concepts, called adaptive strategies and exploratory modeling, that
take advantage of the new analytic capabilities provided by recent computer
technology. Exploratory modeling treats problems having extreme uncertainty by
conducting computer simulation-experiments on a very large number of plausible
estimates of the future and using sampling strategies and data visualization to
find important patterns in the results. Adaptive-decision focus on modeling
environmental policies where decision- makers can make midcourse corrections
based on observations of the relevant environmental and economic systems. In
this research project, the investigators will use the exploratory
modeling/adaptive strategies framework to examine how the potential of new
technology should affect near-term climate change policy choices. In particular,
the project will: 1) demonstrate and advance the capabilities of the exploratory
modeling/adaptive strategies framework, and 2) examine a central climate-change
policy question -- under what conditions should society pursue technology-
specific policies (e.g., tax credits, subsidies, or government procurements) in
addition to carbon taxes?
