
* 9700733
* International Workshop on Wavelets in Statistics; October 12-13, 1997; Durham, NC
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1997,05/22/1997
* Brani Vidakovic,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

DMS 9700733 INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON WAVELETS IN STATISTICS ISDS, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA. October 12-13, 1997. Brani Vidakovic Abstract.
Statistical wavelet modeling and computational research have, in recent years,
become burgeoning areas in both theoretical and applied statistics, and are
beginning to impact developments in statistical methodology and in various
applied scientific fields. Wavelet ideas are developing in statistics in areas
such as regression, density and function estimation, factor analysis, modeling
and forecasting in time series analysis, spatial statistics, with ranges of
application areas in science and engineering. The emerging interests in Bayesian
statistical modeling and wavelets is generating exciting new directions for the
interface of two research areas, with significant potential for future impact on
applied work. This international research workshop, focused on the interface of
wavelets and statistical science, is held in recognition of the recent growth
and current vibrancy of research at the interface of the disciplines. The
meeting will provide an opportunity to summarize the current status of research
on wavelets in statistics, to explore the applied impact that statistical
wavelet modeling and wavelet in statistics are having, and to suggest and
stimulate novel theoretical, methodological and computational research
directions. The workshop is planned at an opportune time to assess and address
the dual question of the future prospects: for significant contributions of
wavelet ideas to statistical science and application, and for furthering
watelet-based technology through the use of statistical concepts and models.
