
* 9703876
* New Approaches to Nonparametric Regression Estimation for Continuous and Discrete Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1997,03/22/1999
* Elias Masry,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 162,000.00

Masry 9703876 The research is concerned with regression functions estimation in
a hybrid setting: the underlying processes are continuous in time, and so is the
regression function, but the observations are taken at discrete-times. This is
common in many practical situations where the collected data is irregularly
spaced as in environmental and oceanographic studies. The instants at which the
data is obtained constitute a point process with a FINITE mean sampling rate but
nevertheless result in no loss of information. The goal of the research is to
identify appropriate non-equally spaced sampling schemes; formulate suitable
estimates based on a modified Nadaraya-Watson approach and on the more recent
local polynomial fitting approach; and study their convergence properties
including asymptotic normality and rates of strong convergence. A fundamental
requirement is that the consistency of the regression estimates, as the number
of observations tends to infinity, holds for ALL positive values of the mean
sampling rate. Results of this type do not hold for conventional equally-spaced
data unless the sampling rate is allowed to diverge to infinity. Scientists and
engineers collect huge amounts of data in wide range of disciplines including
communication systems (e.g., Internet traffic, satellites), econometrics (e.g.
stock market), geology (e.g. earthquakes), and environmental science (e.g.
pollution levels). While much of the observed data is continuous in time, the
processing of the data is carried out by using computers which convert the data
to a digital form. The research develops digital processing methodologies
(irregular sampling methodologies) which do not lose any information during the
conversion process from continuous-time data to discrete-time data. The context
of the research is 1) to forecast the future evolution of the phenomena being
observed and 2) to filter signals observed in the presence of corrupting noise.
