
* 9704432
* Bayesian Time Series and Dynamic Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1997,04/20/2000
* Mike West,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 272,000.00

Bayesian Time Series and Dynamic Models Mike West Abstract This research
involves development of new statistical models, methods and computational
algorithms for analysis and forecasting of time series. The investigations will
include various aspects of Bayesian state-space modelling for time series,
introducing new models for non-stationary time series models, methodology for
structured latent process analysis and time series decompositions, new models
and computational methods for multiple time series analysis including dynamic
latent factor models, dynamic Bayesian hierarchical models, and non-Gaussian and
non-linear models. Part of the research involves investigation of strategies for
dealing with high-dimensional time series data sets and issues of time series
data reduction and summary. Stochastic simulation and computer algorithms are
ingredients, and will lead to new computational tools for simulation-based
Bayesian analyses in various problems of dynamic modelling and time series
analysis. Related areas of the research will include time series model
uncertainty, assessment and prior specifications, problems of contamination
structures and data cleaning, and models involving statistical mixture
structure. These projects represent advances in time series modelling and
analysis, and contributions to other areas of statistical science, that will be
of broad interest and practical relevance to scientists and researchers in
various disciplines as well as to statisticians. The new statistical methods
resulting from this project extend the scope of applicability of current time
series analysis tools to more complex, non-linear and multivariate problems. A
significant component of the research involves computationally intensive methods
to fit and explore models to data in applications. The research is motivated, in
part, by existing problems of statistical modelling and inference in current
application areas in several fields, specifically inclu ding projects in the
neurosciences, in geology driven by issues of global environmental change, in
financial modelling and forecasting, and in biomedical engineering and signal
processing.
