
* 9704487
* Computer-intensive Methods for the Statistical Analysis of Dependent Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1997,06/26/1997
* Joseph Romano,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William B. Smith
* 08/31/2001
* USD 88,154.00

Romano 9704487 This project involves the on-going development of resampling and
subsampling as they apply to dependent data, i.e., time series, random fields,
and (marked) point processes. The investigator's efforts are directed towards:
(a) relaxing the conditions for asymptotic validity of computer-intensive
methods for dependent data (e.g., allow for nonstationarity, slow mixing rate,
etc.); (b) rendering subsampling more `automatic' by devising a built-in
procedure for estimation of the rate of convergence of the statistic in
question; (c) improving the accuracy of distribution estimation by techniques
such as Richardson extrapolation, and by optimal choice of block size; (d)
developing appropriate resampling/subsampling methods in the case of alternative
data-collection scenarios (e.g. in the case of measurements at irregularly
spaced locations, i.e., data from a marked point process; and (e) exploring the
idea of `local' resampling for time series. This project involves the
development of computer-intensive methods of statistical inference for the
analysis of dependent data without having to rely on unrealistic or unverifiable
model assumptions. The statistical analysis of dependent data is vital in many
diverse scientific disciplines; thus this research has potentially many
practical applications. For example, consider the problem of stochastic computer
simulation of complex Manufacturing Systems that is an important issue in
Industrial Engineering; the methodology of subsampling for `almost' stationary
time series is most helpful in order to assess convergence and accuracy of the
simulation. For another example, suppose that X(t) denotes an environmental
measurement, e.g. rain precipitation or ozone concentration as measured at
location t. Typically, the t-points where X(t) is measured are irregularly
scattered in space or on the earth's surface. The development of a general
methodology for statistical inference involving data of this type is a signif
icant contribution in spatial statistics and, in particular, studies involving
environmental data.
