
* 9704324
* Statistical Problems in Quality Control, Stochastic Systems and Genetic Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1997,03/24/1999
* Tze Lai,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 255,000.00

Lai and Siegmund 9704324 The investigators develop a sequential method of
change-point detection involving algorithms that are not too demanding in
computational and memory requirements for on-line implementation and yet are
nearly optimal from a statistical viewpoint. Powerful techniques to tackle this
problem are derived from recent advances in sequential testing theory and
boundary crossing problems in random fields. A closely related direction of
research is fixed sample change-point problems and their applications to signal
detection and gene mapping. Related fundamental problems in boundary crossing
probabilities of random processes and random fields are also investigated and
lead to definitive solutions of some long-standing questions concerning the
distribution of generalized likelihood ratio statistics in change-point models.
A third related area of research is estimation and control of time series models
and stochastic dynamical systems whose parameters may change with time. Although
in practice abrupt parameter changes typically occur very infrequently, the
unknown times of their occurrence have led to prohibitive complexity of the
Bayes estimators and controllers in the literature. By using parallel recursive
algorithms and combining some new ideas in sequential change-point detection
with empirical Bayes methodology, these difficulties are resolved to obtain
asymptotically efficient estimation and control schemes of manageable
complexity. One important objective of this research is the development of a
powerful statistical methodology for quality control of modern industrial
processes and for automated fault detection in complex manufacturing systems.
Another objective development of statistical methods appropriate for analysis of
genetic linkage data related to disease susceptibility and other traits in
humans, animals and plants and for extraction of relevant information from these
data that may ultimately lead to better diagnostic tests and tr eatments of the
disease. Applications involve the strategic areas of manufacturing and
biotechnology.
