
* 9704400
* Reliability, Statistical Applications of Order Restricted Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1997,07/20/1999
* Henry Block,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 274,657.00

Block, Sampson and Savits 9704400 This research focuses on the development of
methodology and theory for some major problems facing the statistics and
reliability communities. One major emphasis is on the topic of burn-in. On-going
research involves determining optimal burn-in for classes of distributions and
families of cost structures. Of particular interest is the family of
distributions with bathtub shaped hazard functions. A second major emphasis of
this research is in the development of methods to support the use of the modern
nonparametric ideas of order restricted inference in data analysis involving
multivariate observations. A great deal of theory has been developed for order
restricted inference; however, the research focus here is to utilize some of
these results in important estimation and testing problems, in part, supported
by the application of some of the computational results obtained by the
investigators. This research makes effective use of this elegant class of
nonparametric procedures in modern data analysis. Two other areas of research
are the further development of models and methodologies for data arising from
accelerated degradation experiments, and the continued development of the
modeling of random length multivariate data. These four research areas, while
dealing with varied problems, utilize theory and methods from the allied areas
of reliability, order restricted inference and multivariate analysis. Burn-in is
a widely used engineering practice for increasing reliability by eliminating
weak industrial products before they are released for sale or use. This is an
important topic in many modern American industrial processes. Statistical tools
are being developed to implement new production strategies which are useful in
determining how to deal with items which might fail early in critical uses. The
clinical development of cost-effective new bioengineered pharmaceuticals often
requires identification of those patients who would b enefit substantially more
from new biopharmaceuticals than from standard available treatments. Some of
this research focuses on developing improved statistical techniques to better
identify those patients who would significantly benefit from the new
biotechnology. Other aspects of the research involve obtaining more effective
statistical approaches to allow clinicians to predict the likelihood of specific
patients having a successsful response to a new treatment.
