
* 9704809
* Information Theory and Statistical Model Selection
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/15/1997,09/12/1997
* Dean Foster,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/1999
* USD 104,000.00

9704809 Foster and Stine The research studies the use of information theory for
selecting statistical models. The first component of the research characterizes
statistical model selection criteria as methods for data compression. From this
viewpoint, criteria for model selection choose the model which minimizes the
length of a compressed version of the observed data. The proposed research will
allow one to make these characterizations precise and to extend this paradigm.
The second area of research exploits the relationship between model selection
and data compression, leading to methods of adaptive model selection. This
research builds on and extends context trees which are the underlying
statistical devices used to obtain some of the most effective data compression
algorithms. The third body of research concerns the statistical properties of
the information theoretic estimators implied by these techniques. In order to
allow one to estimate such statistical properties from observed data, the
research also seeks to develop practical bootstrap resampling methods to
determine the accuracy of the statistical estimates. Each phase of the proposed
research combines statistical theory and information theory with computing. In
addition to the use of simulations to validate the proposed methods, the
research will provide publically available software distributed via the Web that
implements the various selection criteria and associated modeling techniques.
Further numerical simulations will benchmark the various large sample results,
measuring the practical performance of these procedures. Given the increasing
prevalence of large data sets in science and economics, traditional statistical
model building faces new challenges. The use of traditional variable selection
methods lead to overfitting, characterized by overly complex models that result
from chance variation. This research attacks this problem in several ways, first
by using in formation theory to construct a common framework in which to study
the latest developments in statistical model identification. Building on this
framework, the research expands the scope of model selection to encompass models
that can adapt to structural changes. In addition, this work develops the
associated statistical properties of these methods, allowing comparison to
classical procedures and practical use in real-world applications.
