
* 9704516
* Graphical Markov Models, Structural Equation Models, and Related Models of Multivariate Dependence: Structure, Equivalence, Synthesis, and Extensions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1997,03/24/1999
* Steen Andersson,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 120,026.00

DMS 9704516 Graphical Markov Models, Structural Equation Models, and Related
Models of Multivariate Dependence: Structure, Equivalence, Synthesis, and
Extensions. Steen A. Andersson Indiana University (together with David Madigan,
Michael. D. Perlman, and Thomas. S. Richardson, University of Washington)
ABSTRACT Graphical Markov models (GMM) and the closely related structural
equation models (SEM) use graphs (= path diagrams), either undirected, directed,
or mixed, to represent multivariate dependencies among stochastic variables in
an economical and computationally efficient manner. A GMM or SEM is constructed
by specifying local dependencies for each variable (= node of the graph) in
terms of its immediate neighbors, parents, or both, yet can represent a highly
varied and complex system of multivariate dependencies by means of the global
structure of the graph. Nonetheless, the local specification permits
efficiencies in modeling, inference, and probabilistic calculations. This
research involves the development of more complex and comprehensive classes of
GMMs and SEMs, determination of the mathematical structure of these (extremely
vast) classes, and the development of more efficient statistical and
computational algorithms for the discovery and analysis of appropriate models
within these classes for specific real-world applications. Among their many
applications, GMMs have become prevalent in statistical science for the analysis
of categorical data in contingency tables, for the modeling of spatially-
dependent processes such as the spread of epidemics in human and animal
populations, and for the development of early warning systems for severe weather
conditions; in computer science (as Bayesian networks) for information
processing and retrieval, for robotics, computer vision, and pattern
recognition, for the debugging of complex programs (such as Windows 95), and for
the representation of expert systems for medical diagnosis; and in decision
science (as influence diagrams) as models for information flow and control and
for combining the opinions of many decision-makers. SEMs have long been used in
fields such as genetics, sociology, econometrics, and psychometrics as networks
for representing the structure of complex causal systems. A crucial feature of
all these models is that they are designed for fast computational
implementation, thereby facilitating the development of software that can
"reason" about real world problems. Related Websites: LA Times Article, October
1996 http://www.hugin.dk/lat-bn.html (Hosted by Hugin Website) Microsoft
trouble-shooting systems, employing GMMs
http://www.microsoft.com/support/tshooters.htm Lockheed News Release describing
application of GMMs in Unmanned Underwater Vehicles.
http://www.lmsc.lockheed.com/newsbureau/pressreleases/9604.html Air Force
Institute of Technology Bayesian Network Page
http://www.afit.af.mil/Schools/EN/ENG/LABS/AI/BayesianNetworks Website
describing a GMM for forecasting severe weather in NE Colorado
http://www.lis.pitt.edu/~dsl/hailfinder/
