
* 9704557
* Estimating Intrinsic Dimensionality
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1997,05/16/1997
* Guenther Walther,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William B. Smith
* 07/31/2001
* USD 91,479.00

Walther 9704557 The goal of this research is to detect nonlinear structure in
multivariate data by estimating the intrinsic dimensionality of a data set. A
multivariate data set that, apart from noise, falls into a lower-dimensional
smooth submanifold is said to have intrinsic dimensionality equal to the
smallest dimension of such a submanifold. A knowledge or estimate of the
intrinsic dimensionality of a data set contributes to the solution of two
important problems in multivariate statistics and pattern analysis: The problem
of finding an appropriate number of parameters for representing the data, and
the problem of deciding whether a two- or three-dimensional representation of
the data exists, which may then be analyzed visually. This research develops a
new way to estimate intrinsic dimensionality that promises be superior to
existing methods for heuristic reasons, and investigates the statistical
properties of the new estimator and its competitors. The new estimator uses a
method to smooth the shape of a multivariate data set in a nonlinear way which
is based on tools from the field of mathematical morphology. The goal of this
research is to detect certain patterns in data, such as structured parts in
medical images. Quite complicated and high-dimensional data sets have often
certain simple, low-dimensional geometric structures in it. To extract
information from these data in an efficient way it is important to find such
structures and describe them in ways that are simple and and amenable for the
processing by computers. This research uses certain geometric tools to develop
such a processing system in a context where the patterns to be found are
corrupted by noise, e.g. transmission errors or blurring in images.
