
* 9705034
* Advanced Methods for the Statistical Analysis of Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 08/15/1997,06/29/1999
* William Eddy,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Eddy, Genovese, & Lazar 9705034 Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is
a powerful new tool for understanding the brain. With fMRI, it is possible to
study the human brain in action and trace its processing in unprecedented
detail. During an fMRI experiment, a subject performs a carefully planned
sequence of cognitive tasks while magnetic resonance images of the brain are
acquired. The tasks are designed to exercise specific cognitive processes and
the measured signal contains information about the nature and location of the
resulting neural activity. Neuroscientists use these data to help identify the
neural processes underlying cognition and to build and test theoretical models
of cognitive function. This is inherently a problem of statistical inference,
yet the statistical methods for fMRI are still undeveloped. In this project, the
statistical methodology for these large and complex data sets is advanced on
three fronts: dealing with model response variation, developing better
registration and acquisition methods, and analyzing spatial activation patterns.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is a new tool that is currently
being used to study the brain and the way it functions. Very large amounts of
data, with considerable noise, are collected on neural activity while specific
cognitive tasks are being performed. In this way, cognitive scientists hope to
understand the processes underlying the way humans think. Statistical inference
is a natural way of approaching this question. However, the complex nature of
the data means that standard methods are not applicable and the methodologies
used in fMRI for data analysis are still relatively undeveloped. The current
project advances the statistical methodology for fMRI data by working in three
directions. Brain response to a given task varies not only by location, but also
in different replications of the same experiment. This source of variability is
not taken into account by the models now in use. The first direction of the
project incorporates this source of variation, resulting in more precise
inferences. Subject motion during fMRI scanning is the focus of the second
direction, while the third direction involves quantifying how spatial patterns
of activation change over time. This allows the comparison of different
individuals and groups.
