
* 9705209
* Multidimensional Depth Functions, Multidimensional Generalized L-Statistics, and Related Procedures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1997,06/27/1997
* Robert Serfling,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* William B. Smith
* 06/30/2001
* USD 95,774.00

DMS 9705209 Serfling In order to provide strengthened foundations for
statistical analysis of multidimensional data, this research develops a general
theory of statistical depth functions. General theory is developed which unifies
and extends the few examples of depth functions presently in the literature.
Based on the notion of center-outward ordering of multidimensional data points
by "depth," corresponding notions of multidimensional location, spread,
quantiles, ranks, and other traditional one-dimensional sample statistics are
formulated and studied in this research. In this framework, statistics such as
multidimensional L-statistics, rank statistics, and generalized forms of these
statistics, are investigated (extending previous work of the investigator for
the one-dimensional case). Further, corresponding notions of "contours" are
investigated. Statistics are developed which perform well overall with respect
to robustness criteria (e.g., breakdown points), equivariance (relevant to the
geometric structure), computational ease, conceptual consistency (with
associated population notions), and theoretical tractability.Tools used, and
further developed, for this research include functional analytic and U-statistic
methods. Application contexts receiving special attention include robust and
nonparametric regression and analysis of variance. This research develops
improved methods for analyzing multidimensional data. For a "cloud" of data
points, one wishes to have a sense of where the "center" is located, for
example. One can take the average of the points, or one can seek to define a
"middle point" that is less influenced by the extremities of the data cloud.
Similarly, other representative features of the data cloud need to be defined as
analogues or extensions of concepts already in use for analysis of simple one-
dimensional data. This research systematically treats such issues and develops
new methods to be put into practice. Such summary statistics enable the main
featur es of a data cloud to be conveyed by means of a few easily interpretable
numbers, thus enabling one to describe the data adequately within the confines
of a conventional statistical report. Whereas visual methods lose their
effectiveness for dimensions greater than three, the summarizing methods
developed in this research apply equally well for any number of dimensions.
Multidimensional data sets are arising increasingly in the very complex data-
gathering activities now pursued in the various arenas of modern society and
strategic national concern. This research leads to tools for simplification and
reduction of this complexity. Further, this study develops methods for
interpreting the data as but a sample from a target population about which one
seeks to make statistical inferences. For example, the question of what exactly
is being estimated by such data is addressed. Basic mathematical advances needed
for development of these new statistical methods are also accomplished as part
of this research.
