
* 9705166
* Significance Testing of Pattern Correspondence Statistics: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1997,10/27/1999
* Richard Smith,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* William B. Smith
* 07/31/2000
* USD 63,000.00

SMITH DMS 9705166 General circulation models (GCMs) are numerical models used by
climatologists to predict patterns of future climatological change as a result
of greenhouse gases and other factors. In recent years, much attention has been
given to the verification of GCMs from observational data, through pattern
correlation statistics which measure how well the observed and model-based data
agree. The current research is a collaboration between a statistician and a
climatologist, developing new tests for the significance of pattern correlation
statistics and for estimating tuning parameters such as the weight to be given
to different components of the climate signal. The methodology includes
developing new spatial-temporal models for the distribution of climate data,
combining nonstationarity in space with long-range-dependence in time. The
broader context of the work is the debate over global warming and in particular
whether observed changes in climate can be ascribed to man-made causes such as
the greenhouse gas effect or merely reflect climate variability due to natural
causes. New statistical tests, currently being developed by the Principal
Investigator, allow more rigorous discrimination between the effects of
greenhouse gases and those of other causes such as sulfate aerosols and changes
in solar flux. The project is contributing to the strategic area of environment
and global change, in the form of new methods of assessing the causes of global
climate change.
