
* 9705032
* Latent Variable Models in Action: Hierarchical Bayes and Mixture Models for Repeated Discrete Measures with Individual Differences
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 07/15/1997,07/06/1999
* Brian Junker,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 144,000.00

NSF DMS-9705032 Latent variable models in action: hierarchical Bayes and mixture
models for repeated discrete measures with individual differences Brian Junker
Carnegie Mellon University PROJECT ABSTRACT: A central feature of this research
is the development of widely applicable methodology for latent variable models
for measurement problems in education, psychology and the social sciences. This
methodology is being developed and tested in several specific areas:
Monotonicity and stochastic ordering properties that follow from the strictly
unidimensional latent variable representation are being studied and applied to
nonparametric scaling problems. A promising Markov chain Monte Carlo method is
being extended and applied to a variety of problems, including: correct modeling
of rater variability in educational achievement data; accomodating heterogeneous
catchability in multiple-recapture censuses; and developing methods for
multidimensional and hierarchical latent variable models for discrete repeated
measures. In addition, the research addresses the sensitivity of inferences to
underspecification of the model. A second thrust of the research is to refine
and develop existing characterizations of unidimensional latent structure into a
statistical theory of, and statistical methods for assessing, latent variable
dimensionality. This work aims to more fully blend psychometric and statistical
approaches to latent variable models for repeated discrete measures.
Psychometric methodology tends to concentrate on model building and model
features; and psychometric data analysis tends toward issues of scaling
(selecting questions that ``hang together'' in the sense that a unidimensional
latent variable model holds), reliability (ensuring that the latent variable can
be estimated well from the questions selected), and the assessment of latent
variable dimensionality from data. Statistical methodology tends to sidestep
these bas ic psychometric questions, and instead concentrates on finer model
adjustments, and various inferential and predictive tasks. The focus of this
research is on statistical and psychometric features of latent variable models
for repeated measures data, which is of interest to quantitative psychologists,
educational measurement specialists, and cognitive scientists, as well as other
social scientists. Much of the work is collaborative in nature, and it is built
around the development of theory and methodology motivated from, and useful for,
substantive applications.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
