
* 9711624
* Advanced Integrated Science Modeling Capability for Integrated Assessment Studies
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 11/15/1997,10/30/1997
* Donald Wuebbles,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 04/30/2001
* USD 280,000.00

9711624 Wuebbles The objective of this research is to develop advanced modeling
capabilities for the natural science modules to better meet the needs of future
integrated assessment studies. The model will be designed to better represent
spatial variations and to improve the treatment of processes relevant towards
evaluating the biogeochemical cycles important to determining atmospheric
composition and resulting climatic effects at the regional scale. By extending
the process level understanding of regional impacts into the Integrated
Assessment (IA) model, the work proposed here will substantially improve the
understanding of climate change impacts and extend the range of issues, which
can be addressed in an IA framework. For specific applications, this effort
includes the appropriate connections with a state-of-the-art energy/economics
model. The model will be applied to a selected set of studies to address policy
related questions on climate change; in particular the role of agriculture,
forestry, and land-use for future greenhouse gas emissions and their
implications on future climate. Although the primary focus of this model
development will continue to be on the natural sciences, a much more powerful
tool for fully integrated assessment will be achieved through a close
interaction with the ongoing state-of-the-art modeling of economic, ecosystem,
and social science processes. It will be an important aspect of this project
that it will have a well designed modeling tool that can be used in a variety of
ways for assessing the relationships between global change and the social
sciences. In particular, this modeling tool will allow the exploration of human
dimension of global change decision making and policy science in an integrated
global and regional framework, while providing fast and efficient first
approximation answers to pressing policy questions related to global change.
