
* 9802522
* Estimation and Computation for Multivariate Classification and Mixture Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1998,01/24/2000
* Bernard Flury,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 64,205.00

9802522 Bernhard Flury

This research focuses on methods of classification in multivariate statistics,
studying theoretical, practical, and computational aspects. The investigator
explores finite mixture models with an "improper" component, i.e., a component
in which each data point has the same density value. This leads to a flexible
class of estimators that depend on the setting of a tuning parameter. For the
extreme values of the tuning parameter, the resulting methods of estimation
correspond to fully parametric maximum likelihood, and to nonparametric
likelihood (empirical distribution function), respectively. The estimators are
useful for contaminated data, and their performance is compared to traditional
robust estimators. The main computational tool is an application of the EM
algorithm. In another problem related to finite mixture analysis the
investigator studies the question of dimensionality: if interest focuses on a
subset of variables measured, should one use only that particular subsetfor the
purpose of estimating the parameters of the mixture, or should one use the
remaining variables ("covariates") as well? In addition, this research develops
the asymptotic distribution theory for maximum likelihood estimators in
multivariate models that are usually regarded as untractable by conventional
methods (common canonical variates, partial common principal components, the
discrimination subspace model, and others), and investigates iterative
computational methods needed for estimating their parameters.

Methods of classification play an increasingly important role in areas such as
remote sensing, pattern and speech recognition, and taxonomy. The investigator
studies methods of estimation and computation in multivariate situations, i.e.,
when many variables are measured on the same objects. In particular, the finite
mixture model used in this research allows us to improve statistical methodology
in situations where the data is distorted by errors and outliers. Efficient
computational methods developed in this research allow us to exploit this
powerful methodology, and to make it applicable to problems in many areas,
including biotechnoloy and environmental sciences. Further research topics
involve models of allometric growth in biology, improved estimation in
unsupervised methods of classification, the development of efficient
computational algorithms for recentlycreated multivariate methods of data
analysis, and the analysis of periodic phenomena in biology.
