
* 9802960
* Research on Sieve Approximations to Non and Semiparametric Models, Hidden Markov Models and Comparison of Phylogenetic Tree Biologies
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1998,05/05/2000
* Peter Bickel,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2002
* USD 290,197.00

----------------------------------------------------------------------- Proposal
Number: DMS-9802261 PI: Peter Bickel Institution: Project: Research on sieve
approximations to non and semiparametric models, Hidden Markov models and
comparison of phylogenetic tree biologies. Abstract: A theoretical investigation
of the "plug in" property in the context of non and semiparametric models. The
intention of the investigators is to characterize non and semiparametric models
in which the outcomes of appropriate fitting procedures can be safely plugged in
for a broad range of uses, and the study of model selection criteria when the
loss function reflects the goal of fitting some features of the data well rather
than a global fit. This project includes: *Further development of a theory for
testing parametric or semiparametric hypotheses in a semi or non parametric
context. *Further development of the theory of inference for Hidden Markov
Models. The investigators propose extension to state space models. *Development
of new procedures and analysis of existing procedures for estimating fixed
effects and prediction of random effects using semiparametric models for
longitudinal and/or "pharmacokinetic" data. *Further development of the theory
and practice of selecting m in the m out of n bootstrap *An examination of the
sensitivity to choice of stochastic model in the construction of phylogenetic
trees Tests and diagnostics for semiparametric models such as those the
investigators intend to continue to develop are useful in a number of areas. For
instance, the Black Scholes option pricing formula is widely used in finance.
One of the methods the investigators have already developed show the invalidity
of the formula for large data set and points to plausible more realistic models.
Phylogenetic trees are used not only for representing evolutionary relationships
among species of animals and plants but also, as in the case we are g oing to
study, important families of proteins. Studying the types of models that lead to
plausible evolution trees should also lead to pattern recognition algorithms
which will be useful in classifying protein families and hence to relating new
proteins to families whose properties are known. This is a major activity in the
search for new bioactive compounds in biotechnology.
