
* 9802261
* Bayesian Analysis, Decision Theory, and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1998,01/24/2000
* James Berger,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2002
* USD 374,471.00

James O. Berger DMS-9802261

Five research areas in Bayesian analysis and statistical decision theory are
addressed. The greatest effort is in model selection, in particular the
development of automatic Bayesian methodology for choosing between models. This
is based on construction of automatic prior distributions. Other problems in
model selection that are considered include the question of optimal choice of a
model when prediction is the goal; study and comparison of large sample
approximations in Bayesian model selection; and development of Bayesian measures
of criticism of a single proposed model. The second area of research is
conditional frequentist testing, and its unification with Bayesian testing,
especially as applied to clinical trials. Using a modification of the approach
to developing automatic priors for model selection that was mentioned above, the
mixture modelling problem is also addressed. Quite general mixture models,
involving populations with differing (and unknown) orientation and measurement
errors are considered. A fourth area of research is the development of good
prior distributions for covariance matrices and hierarchical models, in part
through the concept of decision-theoretic admissibility. The final area of
research is Bayesian analysis involving large data sets.

The advances in model selection methodology are used to study global change
problems such as detection of climatic changes due to causes such as greenhouse
warming. The developments in mixture modeling are applied to astronomical
problems, in particular the problem of modeling the source of gamma ray bursts.
The work on covariance matrices is used to study detection of patterns, such as
El Nino, in climatological fields. The investigations in Bayesian analysis of
large data sets span these problems, finding general tools for analyzing such
data sets. The research benefits education and human development through the
training of graduate studentsm and the incorporation of the developed
methodology in statistics courses at Duke University and elsewhere.
