
* 9802071
* Extended Linear Modeling with Free Knot Splines
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1998,06/07/2000
* Charles Stone,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2002
* USD 209,135.00

DMS 9802071 Charles J. Stone

In many statistical models of current theoretical and practical interest, the
log-likelihood function depends on one or more unknown functions. The theory and
methodology of such models, referred to as extended linear models, are
particularly tractable when the models are concave; that is, when the log-
likelihood depends concavely on the unknown function or functions. Among the
class of concave extended linear models are regression; logistic, probit,
Poisson, and other forms of generalized regression; multiple logistic regression
(which is useful in multiple classification); hazard regression for survival
analysis; the extension of hazard regression to event history analysis; and
models for the estimation of density and conditional density functions. In the
context of such models, polynomial splines and their tensor products are natural
building blocks for constructing finite-dimensional estimates of infinite-
dimensional main effects and low-order interactions, and the resulting ANOVA
decompositions provide an insightful tool for data analysis. Corresponding
nonadaptive theory and adaptive methodology have been extensively developed in
recent years. In this research, in order to reduce the gap between the existing
theory and methodology and to improve on the methodology, similar theory and
methodology and methodology for free knot splines are being developed, in which
knot locations are viewed as free parameters to be determined by the maximum
likelihood method along with the other parameters of the model.

The investigator is concurrently working on a monograph on extended linear
modeling with splines with four of his collaborators, all former Ph. D. students
and Research Assistants on previous NSF Grants of the investigator. The research
on free knot splines will be incorporated into the monograph. This should
contribute to the civil infrastructure by encouraging the inclusion of spline-
based methodology in commercial statistical software packages, which would
facilitate its use in the analysis of data of scientific and industrial
importance. It should also extend the appeal of this methodology to include
researchers in the data mining community.
