
* 9803273
* Messy Data Modeling and Related Topics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1998,07/10/1998
* Minge Xie,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2002
* USD 46,786.00

----------------------------------------------------------------------- Proposal
Number: DMS 9803273 PI: Minge Xie Institution: Rutgers University Project: Messy
Data Modeling and Related Topics Abstract: The main objective of this research
is to investigate a number of problems arising from dealing with messy data sets
that occurred in many disciplines of science. The data studied in this research
violate conventional assumptions, such as independence, homogeneity, among
others, which are otherwise adopted under more standard settings. Six specific
topics are presented; each corresponds to at least one violation of conventional
assumptions, and a messy data set may have one or more of these types of
violations. According to their origins from two different motivating data sets,
two of the six topics address problems on group testing scheme (Dorfman, 1943)
and its variants, including issues on modeling false negatives and relaxing the
assumption of independence on individuals. The rest of the topics investigate
practical and theoretical issues related to modeling batch correlated regression
data and develop new models and methods for heterogeneous observations. These
developments will not only solve the specific type of problems, but also
stimulate new researches to develop more general methodologies. This research
develops statistical methodologies, models, and related theories to address
issues arising from modeling and analysis of messy data, which can be found in
many disciplines of the sciences, including life science, environmental science,
social science, industry and economics. A common feature of these messy data is
that they all violate some conventional model assumptions, which otherwise are
adopted under more standard settings. Accurate modeling of messy data can
eliminate irrelevant information and provide better understanding of underlying
mechanisms; ultimately benefiting prediction and decision making. Although
tremendous progress has been made in development of both sophisticated
statistical methodologies and elegant mathematical theories in the past half
century, many important problems in modeling and analysis of messy data have yet
to be tackled, both from practical and theoretical viewpoints. This research
investigates several such problems. Although the models and methodologies are
tailored to specific problems in the Pharmaceutical industry and environmental
science, these developments will not only solve the specific type of problems,
but also stimulate new researches to develop more general methodologies.
