
* 9803365
* Discrete Models for High-Level Image Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1998,07/17/1998
* Valen Johnson,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2001
* USD 59,169.00

9803365 Valen E. Johnson

This project develops statistical models for automatic image analysis. The image
models developed are defined by arbitrarily placing a large number of points,
called facets, in a template image. The facet points are organized
hierarchically, and are arranged either on grids of increasing resolution or
determined using more sophisticated criteria, e.g., they may be located at local
extrema in the scale-space of the image. Object shapes are established by
connecting facets in a tree-like structure, and then using the shape of the tree
in the image template to model expected shapes of facet trees in observed images
from the class. Typically, thirty to forty thousand facets are positioned within
a two-dimensional image template, whereas one-quarter to one-half million facets
are placed within three-dimensional image sets (e.g., magnetic resonance images
or positron emission tomography images).

Models generated under this proposal facilitate computationally efficient high-
level analysis of generic images. These models are applicable to a wide range of
image modalities, and require only that a template image or prototype image be
available for the group of images under investigation. Given an image template
for the class, derived models can be applied with little or no operator
intervention to obtain automatic segmentation, object identification, and
volumetric analysis for available image data.
