
* 9803627
* Statistical Modelling and Dimension Reduction for Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1998,05/09/2002
* Jane-Ling Wang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2003
* USD 64,001.00

9803627 Jane-Ling Wang

Curve or functional data are of increasing importance due to enhenced high
performance computing facilities and increased awareness that such data require
special methods of analysis. Such data arise for example in longitudinal studies
and in aging research. This research involves the development of new
nonparametric methods to analyze such data. The focus is on procedures which
involve both multivariate techniques and smoothing methods. Of particular
interest are ANOVA and regression models for curve data. Emphasis is given on
methods viewing the curve data as generalizations of one or several stochastic
processes. Given a Karhunen-Loeve representation of the underlying processes,
ANOVA for curve data can be based on the estimated principal components or on
the whole curve. In this context, curve registration is of interest. New
regression methods for curve data is also proposed. One of the regression
methods extends the karhunen-Loeve representation to allow covariates to act on
either the mean function or the covariance functions of the representation.
Another regression method extends the sliced inverse regression (SIR) method for
multivariate data to curve data. Such an approach for curve data has the
advantage of model flexibility and accomplishes the goal of dimension reduction
before the nonparametric model fitting stage. It is computationally simple and
suitable as an exploratory tool for functional data analysis.

This research is motivated by collaborative research of the investigator on
biological lifespan and aging. Recently, there is an accelerated interest in
aging research partly due to its financial and policy impact and partly due to
its intrinsic aspects. The elderly population (age 65 or above) will swell as
the babyboomers begin turning 65 in the year 2011 so its impact is self-evident.
The investigator has been active in this research area through the analysis of
large data sets on the aging of mediterranean fruit flies (medflies). One of
these data sets contains the complete reproduction history, in terms of the
number of eggs laid daily, for each of the 1,000 female medflies in the
experiment. The scientific question is how to relate reproductive traits to
survival and mortality of the medflies. Another data set on the nutrition
effects to mortality of male and female medflies is studied. Here the scientific
question of interest is to relate nutrition and gender effects to aging. The
procedures developed in this study are applied to these and other medfly data to
judge the practicality and scientific merits of the methods. They also help to
address the underlying biological issues about the aging process.
