
* 9803649
* New Monte Carlo Methods for Scientific and Statistical Computing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1998,12/14/1999
* Jun Liu,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* William B. Smith
* 05/31/2001
* USD 142,255.00

----------------------------------------------------------------------- Proposal
Number: DMS 9803649 PI: Jun S Liu Institution: Stanford University Project: New
Monte Carlo Methods for Scientific and Statistical Computing Abstract: Monte
Carlo methods have increasingly been recognized by scientists as indispensable
tools for difficult computational problems. Its applications include
biochemistry, computational biology, computer science, engineering, finance,
physics, seismology, traditional statistics, etc. The primary objective of this
research, as motivated by various applications encountered by the PI, is on
designing and analyzing new Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. The
research plan includes three related projects, all concentrating on the MCMC
methodology. The first project proposes two new hybrid Monte Carlo methods.
These methods combine a gradient-type move, or a conjugate direction-type move,
with Metropolis algorithm. The new methods aim at alleviating slow-mixing
behavior (or ``stickiness'') observed in discretized Langevin diffusion and
molecular dynamics, and can be applied to simulating images, predicting protein
structures, neural network training and other continuous-optimization problems.
The second project focuses on generalizing the multigrid Monte Carlo (MGMC)
method used by physicists in computations of lattice field theories. Our
preliminary work reveals a close connection between the MGMC and the
reparameterization method in statistics literature. The generalized MGMC
proposed in this project unifies these seemingly different methods and provide a
generic approach to the search of more efficient MCMC schemes. Its use in random
effects model and probit model is currently under investigation and its
applications in Bayesian image analysis, such as pattern synthesis and image
smoothing, will be explored. The third part of the proposal is concerned with
theoretical analyses of the dynamic weighting method recently proposed by Wong
and Liang (1997). As shown by the authors, the method has tremendous potential
in various optimization problems, such as the traveling salesman problem,
circuit partitioning problem, neural network training, and Bayesian model
selection. A few variations of the dynamic weighting are suggested and a
functional analysis method is outlined for studying convergence properties and
weight behavior of the DW. It has long been recognized that many complicated
systems, such as reactions in atomic bombs, fluid dynamics, molecular movements,
etc., can be studied via computer simulation. One of the most popular approach
of this sort, the Monte Carlo technique, simulates a complex system described by
probability distributions. The technique was named after the famed gambling
resort because its procedures incorporate the element of chance. In the recent
two decades, people come to realize that Monte Carlo techniques is also
applicable to a much wider class of problems including global optimizations,
statistical inferences, signal processing, target tracking, artificial
intelligence, financial modeling, computational biology, data mining, and many
others. The PI has successfully applied Monte Carlo techniques, together with
suitable statistical models, to the understanding of relationship between
remotely related DNA or protein sequences; to dynamic system updating (such as
target tracking); to neural network training; and to Bayesian statistical
inference. This project targets at developing more efficient Monte Carlo methods
for dealing with challenging computational problems, such as prediction of the
3-D structure of a protein molecule from its primary sequence. A common feature
of all Monte Carlo methods for simulating complex systems is that they rely on
cumulative evolutions of small, albeit random, local changes. This often leads
to a very slow-converging algorithm. For example, because of s uch local moves,
with currently available methods one needs years of super-computer time in order
to simulate one tenth of a second of movement of a protein molecule. The PI
outlines a general method to conduct global moves in Monte Carlo methods;
proposes to incorporate ideas in optimization literature (i.e., gradient and
conjugate direction methods) to speed up Monte Carlo simulations; and suggests
avenues for the theoretical understanding of several new and promising Monte
Carlo methods. Success of this research will benefit scientists and engineers in
coping with their computational challenges.
