
* 9803281
* Statistical Methods for Process Control and Improvement in Advanced Manufacturing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1998,07/13/2000
* Vijayan Nair,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 08/31/2002
* USD 209,017.00

Proposal Number: DMS 9803281 PI: Vijayan N. Nair, University of Michigan Mark H.
Hansen, Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies Project: Statistical Methods for Process
Control and Improvement in Advanced Manufacturing Abstract: This research
project deals with methods for modeling, monitoring, diagnosis, and improvement
of manufacturing processes with spatial data. The scope of the project goes
beyond the traditional Shewhart's paradigm for statistical process control (SPC)
which focuses primarily on process monitoring. A significant part of the
research is the use of in-process and product quality data to develop failure
diagnostics and to relate these to potential problems for process improvement.
These issues are studied in the context of an integrated framework for process
control and improvement. An overall strategy is proposed for using the spatial
information in defect clustering as the basis for process improvement. The
methodology consists of several parts. First, process monitoring methods for
routinely monitoring the spatial data and detecting objects with significant
clustering are developed. A Markov random field model with small-scale
clustering is used to characterize ``in-control'' data. Statistical methods for
failure diagnosis (signatures of spatial patterns) are obtained and the patterns
are then related to process information for improvement. Various approaches for
doing this including parametric models for large-scale clustering and formal
methods based on classification are studied. Several other related topics,
including modeling and analysis of ordinal data from temporal and spatial
processes and the analysis of spatial data from designed experiments are also
studied. These methods are developed and studied in the specific context of
wafer map data in integrated circuit (IC) fabrication. Semiconductor
manufacturing is one of the key manufacturing industries in the US, and hence
statistical methods for process and yield improvement are clearly important from
a practical viewpoint. However, the research issues and methods developed here
are quite generic in nature and are of general interest to many other
manufacturing processes with spatial data, including flat panel displays,
printed circuit boards, and the manufacture and assembly of auto-bodies. These
advanced manufacturing and high-technology industries all share the following
features. Massive amounts of in-process and production data are now being
collected routinely, made possible by advances in computing and data capture
technologies. Much of these data have complex structures, in the form of spatial
objects, images and so on. At the same time, competitive market pressures are
placing a lot of emphasis on reducing product development cycle time. Moreover,
process/product designers are operating on the boundaries of available subject
matter knowledge of the underlying technology. Products are being manufactured
and marketed before the technology is well-understood. These manufacturing
processes are often not ``stable'', as is commonly assumed in the traditional
statistical process control (SPC) paradigm. Thus, there is a critical need for
statistical methods that exploit the extensive information available from in-
process and product quality data not only for process monitoring but also for
process improvement. The results from this research project will significantly
advance methodology for the continuous improvement of advanced manufacturing
processes.
