
* 9803794
* Workshops on Nonlinear and Nonstationary Signal Processing
* DMS,STATISTICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,06/04/1998
* Richard Smith,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 19,000.00

Richard L Smith DMS-9803794

The classical theory of signal processing is based on models which are
stationary, linear and in many cases also Gaussian. Recent advances in time
series and the theory of signal processing have drawn attention to many new
models and methods. Among these are nonlinear autoregressive and nonlinear
state-space models, state-space models with time-varying or state-dependent
coefficients as models for nonstationary and nonlinear series, linear non-
Gaussian processes which pose some specific problems not encountered with
Gaussian processes, methods derived from the theory of dynamical systems, and
many others. There has been a parallel growth in the applications of signal
processing in many areas such as engineering, finance, the environment, etc. The
current project aims to develop new research in both the theory and applications
of this diverse range of topics.

The project will provide funds for US-based researchers to attend a series of
workshops taking place within a six-month program on "Nonlinear and
Nonstationary Signal Processing" at the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical
Sciences, Cambridge, England. The overall theme of the program is to bring
together researchers in different areas of statistics and signal processing,
with the intention of fostering research links between the two groups. Within
this overall structure, a number of workshops on specific themes will be
organised. The themes include Bayesian approaches to signal processing,
financial applications, environmental applications, dynamical systems and the
analysis of large data sets in industry. Participants from the USA will receive
travel and subsistence support from the grant; some of the money is reserved for
women, minorities and new researchers.
