
* 9817552
* Statistical Evaluation of Global Observing Systems
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 10/01/1998,08/06/1998
* Ta-Hsin Li,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 09/30/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9817552 Ta-Hsin Li

Satellites, particularly low-Earth-orbiting (LEO) asynchronous platforms, have
become the primary vehicle for monitoring global environmental behavior from
space because of their capability of global coverage. Satellite data, combined
with in situ observations, are increasingly important for global climate and
environmental assessment and prediction. The sampling properties of satellites
have a great impact on satellite-based data products. Sampling errors due to
poor sampling design or improper use of satellite data can cause rapid
deterioration in accuracy. Evaluation of sampling errors thus constitutes an
integrated part of the uncertainty assessment of environmental assimilation,
estimation, and prediction.

The overall goal of this research is to improve our understanding of sampling
errors for global observing systems and to enhance our ability to assess the
impact of sampling errors on the estimation of global environmental parameters.
Ultimately the proposed research will lead to effective design of sampling
schemes and quality assurance of satellite-based data products.

To achieve the overall goal, this research proposes to develop general
statistical methodology and procedures for exploration and evaluation of
sampling errors in various derived parameters from various observing systems.
The observing systems considered include single polar and nonpolar platforms,
intercalibrated multiple polar and nonpolar satellites, and combinations of in
situ point-gauge networks with polar/nonpolar satellites. The derived parameters
of interest include the coefficients in the advanced global representations
using the spherical harmonics and the empirical orthogonal functions (EOFs).
Special attention is paid to small-scale/short-wavelength parameters that are
important to the estimation of regional and interseasonal to interannual changes
and trends. For efficient representation of regional activities, the research
also proposes to develop statistical theory and algorithms of spherical wavelets
and investigate sampling errors in the spherical wavelet representations.

The proposed research is exploratory in nature, conducted both analytically, via
theoretical analysis, and numerically, via computer simulations and numerical
experiments using physical-statistical models and assimilated data. Successful
completion of the research is expected to improve our understanding of sampling
errors for various important global observing systems and our ability to assess
the impact of sampling errors on the estimation of important global
environmental parameters. The methodology and procedures developed in the
research are expected to be helpful in guiding the data-collection planners to
evaluate different sampling designs prior to a data-collecting mission and make
optimal choices according to their understanding of the environmental fields to
be observed. The research results are also expected to be useful in the
uncertainty assessment and quality assurance of satellite-based data products
that are now widely used for environmental studies.

This research project in environmental statistics is jointly supported by the
MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the DMS Statistics Program.
