
* 9870193
* High Dimensional Statistical Problems: Theory and Methods
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1998,09/12/2000
* Bruce Lindsay,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2002
* USD 278,307.00

DMS-9870193 Lindsay

The research will be directed toward the broad theme of recovering statistical
information about variation of interest in the presence of confounding variation
in high dimensions. The initial work involves developing new tools for the
methodology of Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) based on two new ideas:
first, the investigator will develop a maximum information approach to the
estimation of nuisance correlation parameters in GEE, and second, he will
develop a quadratic inference methodology as an alternative to the point
estimator/standard error approach. The first enhancement has been found to
increase efficiency under covariance misspecification. The second allows one to
develop ANOVA like model selection techniques for the estimating equation
framework while automatically meeting the maximum information criterion. These
new tools will then be used in a wider range of challenging applications
involving high dimensional correlated data. An additional theme of the research
is the development of more widely consistent nonparametric estimators for
situations in which maximum likelihood fails.

Modern statistics is faced with an explosion of increasing complex and
sophisticated scientific data. One of the key features of such data is that it
is high-dimensional. It is also characterized by having high degrees of
interdependence between observations. The goal of the research is to enhance our
ability to separate the effects of this interdependence from the features of the
data that we are most interested in. The initial focus of this research is on a
popular method of dealing with longitudinal data, an example of which would be
response variables that are measured repeatedly over time on a group of
patients. The structure of the interdependence of observations within a patient
is then a nuisance feature which we must adapt to if we wish to learn how the
response variables are affected by explanatory variables. New methods will be
developed that are more efficient and reliable for this setting, and they will
then be extended to other problems with correlated structures.
