
* 9910238
* Fourth International Conference on Forensic Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 01/01/2000,01/03/2000
* Bruce Weir,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 12/31/2000
* USD 10,000.00

9910238

The Fourth International Conference on Forensic Statistics will be held at North
Carolina State University on Dec. 5-8, 1999. The conference is intended to allow
statisticians, forensic scientists, lawyers, and scholars from related
disciplines to discuss the many and varied uses of Probability and Statistics in
legislative, administrative and judicial proceedings. Forensic Statistics, the
application of Statistics and Probability to legal matters, is an expanding
field. The current debates surrounding the presentation of evidence based on DNA
profiling and epidemiological studies on the health effects of various drugs are
just two examples. There is a great need for statisticians to provide guidance
to forensic scientists, and lawyers and the courts. By bringing together
statisticians, forensic scientists, lawyers and other scholars, this fourth
international conference will further the interdisciplinary understanding of
Statistics and Probability applied to legal matters. The conference is the
fourth in a series. The previous conferences have been held at Univ. of
Edinburgh and the Arizona State University. Based on previous attendance, about
250 people are expected to attend the fourth conference. This proposal provides
funds to insure that U.S. participants will be able to hear and network with the
best experts on this topic from this country and from abroad, and to provide
access to the conference by graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, new
researchers, and members of underrepresented groups.
