
* 9970902
* Some Problems in Nonparametric Regression
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1999,11/17/1999
* Randall Eubank,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2002
* USD 80,335.00

This project is concerned with a number of inference problems in nonparametric
regression analysis. Two of the problems being considered involve the use of
nonparametric smoothing methodology to assess the lack-of-fit of certain types
of parametric models. The development of such lack-of-fit tests has been an
active research area for about the last 10 years. However, effective methods for
obtaining analytic assessments of the relative performance of such tests has
not, as yet, been determined. One of the goals of this project is derivation of
a framework for studying the relative asymptotic efficiency of nonparametric
smoothing based tests using an asymptotic intermediate efficiency approach that
makes it possible to extend the concept of asymptotic efficiency into the
nonparametric, or infinite dimensional, alternative setting. The other lack-of-
fit testing problem being studied concerns nonlinear parametric regression
models. This problem is of particular interest since it provides a case where,
in some instances, the usual smoothing parameter asymptotics obtain under the
null model and thereby allow for the development of asymptotically distribution
free test statistics. Another collection of problems under consideration is
concerned with the derivation of suitable variance estimators and associated
heteroscedasticity diagnostics in the context of partially linear models.
Variance estimators are needed here for a number of reasons which include their
use in testing hypotheses about the parametric components (e.g., treatment
effects) of the model. A final class of problems under investigation concerns
computational methods for boundary correcting smoothing spline estimators. These
problems have implications and applications to the problem of interval
estimation in nonparametric regression that are also being explored.

One of the most common approaches to statistical analysis involves the fitting
of data by a parametric model. Such models are frequently developed through
consideration of the physical nature of a problem under study which may suggest
a mathematical relationship or model for the data. For example, in Biology there
are mathematical models that have been proposed for relating growth (of humans,
animals, etc.) to age, while in Meteorology there are mathematical models
deriving from physics that attempt to predict the development of storms and
weather patterns. This project is concerned, in part, with the study and
development of various statistical methods for assessing the validity of
parametric models. The methods being considered use flexible data fitting
techniques known as nonparametric smoothers to evaluate and compare fits
obtained from a proposed or postulated parametric model. Those smoothes can be
used to obtain statistical tests that can, in turn, be used to assess the
accuracy of a model in question. This is particularly important because an
incorrectly specified model can have potentially dangerous consequences in that
it can produce incorrect conclusions and predictions about the process under
study. In addition to the development of new testing methods, techniques are
being developed for the comparison of different tests to determine which type of
test performs the best in different situations that might be encountered in
practice. Other problems under study include the development of computationally
efficient methods for computing certain types of data smoothers and methods for
conducting statistical inference when it may not be possible to completely
specify a parametric model for a set of data. The latter problem arises
frequently in practice where it may be reasonable to assume a particular
parametric form for a portion of the model corresponding, for example, to
presence or absence of cancer in a subject, but there is no obvious choice for a
parametric model involving other influential variables, such as the time of a
subject's evaluations.
