
* 9970785
* Saddlepoint Methods in Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1999,05/30/2001
* Ronald Butler,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 07/31/2003
* USD 120,000.00

9970785

The first project has three parts. (I) Laplace-type approximations are developed
for many of the matrix argument special functions including the important Bessel
and hypergeometric functions. These functions arise in MANOVA settings and
determine the noncentral distributions for the majority of test statistics as
well as the sample eigenvalues. Often it is the moment generating function (mgf)
of the noncentral distribution that is specified in terms of the special
function; in this case the mgf can be approximated and then inverted using a
saddlepoint approximation. (II) Saddlepoint approximations are used in computing
reliabilities and failure rates of complicated stochastic feedback systems.
System applications include various passage times in random walks, queues,
multistate survival models, and some stochastic epidemic models. The methods
allow for very accurate determination of the transient behavior of the systems
including many important performance characteristics useful in system design.
(III) Saddlepoint methods are suggested for the stable laws to approximate all
of these distributions and densities. This development should make it easy to
implement Bayesian computation using stable error laws as needed in financial
mathematics.

The second project consists of three parts. (I) Very accurate approximations are
proposed for some classes of special functions. These special functions arise in
all areas of the physical sciences and were created by mathematicians because
they repeatedly arise as the solutions to important scientific problems and also
because they are extremely difficult to compute. In the field of statistics,
these functions determine the power and performance of many commonly used
statistical tests in multivariate analysis. Computation of these functions
requires immense amounts of computing time even in our modern computing
environment. The proposed approximations are simple, explicit, highly accurate,
and should be useful in all the physical and engineering sciences. (II) General
methods of approximation are given for the performance characteristics of
complicated stochastic systems including various queuing systems, survival
models, and stochastic epidemic models. Such stochastic systems and networks
underlie all areas of science and include models for computer system networks,
ecosystems, production management methods in manufacturing, and reliability
testing. This second portion of the project develops methods for assessing these
performance characteristics which, in turn, allow for the practical
consideration of system design. (III) Some methods for statistical inference in
financial mathematics are proposed. In this area, certain probability
distributions, referred to as the stable distributions, are known to be very
useful in modeling financial returns. Unfortunately these distributions are
still extremely difficult to compute and existing routines for their computation
are not very accurate. This proposal suggests some very simple and highly
accurate approximations that should make such analysis routine and easy.


