
* 9971980
* Extreme Values, Time Series and Prediction
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1999,09/27/1999
* Richard Smith,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2002
* USD 65,000.00

The research in this project focuses on a number of theoretical and applied
topics concerned with prediction and extreme values in time series. Theoretical
research includes: (1) spectral methods for fitting regression models where the
residuals form a bivariate time series with unknown spectral density of possibly
long-range dependent form; (2) extensions of the methodology to spatial-temporal
series; (3) decision-theoretic comparisons of Bayesian and frequentist methods
for prediction of extreme values, and (4) extensions of (3) to multivariate
processes, including ideas both from hierarchical models and multivariate
extreme value theory.

The applications which have motivated these topics come from two distinct areas,
namely (a) climatology, and (b) the evaluation of risk in insurance and finance.
On (a), the P.I. has previously collaborated with two leading climatologists (T.
Wigley and B. Santer) on an autocorrelation-based method of detecting climate
signals in series of hemispheric temperature averages. The new research, which
continues this collaboration, includes more extensive and rigorous techniques
for separating signals from background noise in cases where the statistical
structure of the background noise is unknown. Extensions will be developed to
cases in which the patterns of temperature over the earth's surface are
described, not just through northern and Southern Hemisphere averages, but
through much more detailed summaries over spatial grid boxes. The benefit of
this research is improved methods for detecting anthropogenic influence on the
earth's climate, which related to the Federal strategic interest in Environment
and Global Change (EGCH). The second topic (b) is concerned with extensions of
the idea of "value at risk" which has become a widely studied topic in the
fields of insurance and finance. Value at risk is a collection of tools for
assessing the probability of very large financial losses, but most currently
available systems do not use the most advanced statistical techniques available.
The new research will assess alternative measures of risk using statistical
methods derived from the mathematical theory of extreme value probabilities.
