
* 9971848
* Bayesian Inference Estimation in Nonparametric Regression and its Frequentist Properties
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1999,08/13/1999
* Linda Zhao,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2002
* USD 77,770.00

Nonparametric regression analysis is a rapidly developing contemporary
statistical methodology. It avoids some of the restrictive assumptions in more
classical regression approaches. However, to date it has suffered by comparison
from an almost total absence of the inferential tools (e.g. tests and confidence
intervals) which help make classical regression analysis so useful. Zhao (1998
preprint) proposed the first proper Bayesian estimator for nonparametric
regression which has acceptable performance for every sample size. The current
proposal is to extend this construction in various ways and to study the
inferential properties related to such Bayesian formulations. Its various
properties, including the acceptable performance of its Bayes estimator, suggest
that Bayesian inference based on this prior distribution and its extensions may
be feasible. They may also present a satisfactory comprehensive set of
inferential tools for nonparametric regression analysis and related
formulations.

Regression analysis is a classical general statistical tool, which has been
widely used in virtually every area of statistical applications. Nonparametric
regression analysis is a more recent methodology, which avoids some restrictive
assumptions in the classical theory. The general theory includes nonparametric
formulations of regression, of density estimation, of signal processing and of
spectral density estimation in time series analysis. The theory has already
found significant applications in areas such as medical and environmental
imaging, economic analysis, computer engineering, and geophysics. Bayesian
analysis is a very powerful general statistical methodology. This research
project proposes a possible way of using Bayesian techniques to solve
nonparametric regression problems.
