
* 9971186
* Non- and Semi-parametric Identification and Prediction of Autoregressive Models, with Applications to Econometrics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1999,08/10/1999
* Lijian Yang,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2002
* USD 77,508.00

This research focuses on (1) data-driven estimation, testing, and multi-step
prediction for non- and semi- parametric autoregressive conditional
heteroscedastic (ARCH) models, in order to combine the exponentially decaying
feature of classic ARCH models with nonparametric flexibility; (2) estimation
and lag selection using plug-in bandwidths for non- and semi- parametric
seasonal autoregressive models, with improved efficiency for the semiparametric
models; (3) test of higher order interaction terms and a linearity test that
leads to simpler models with easier interpretation, and improved estimation
accuracy; (4) lag selection for multivariate time series and volatility
functions, which aids in identifying parsimonious models and hidden structures
among variables; and (5) nonparametric multi-step prediction for additive and
functional coefficient autoregressive models.

A time series consists of numbers observed over time. Economic indicators such
as the daily exchange rate of the Euro against the US Dollar and the monthly
rate of unemployment in the United States are important financial time series.
In the study of crimes, the number of crimes committed each month over several
years are useful for finding patterns of crime victimization. Time series
analysis attempts to discover from the data how future observations relate to
past ones, usually through some elementary functions. Recent research efforts,
however, have demonstrated the disadvantages of imposing simplistic structures
on the series. This research develops flexible new methods to understand the
dynamic structure of a much broader class of time series data for which the
relationship among observations are nonlinear, infinitely dependent and/or
seasonal. For instance, monthly unemployment rate data usually exhibit seasonal
patterns that are best described by a semiparametric seasonal model. This
research enables one to predict future observations based on past information
much more accurately. Improved forecasting of foreign exchange, stock and other
volatile prices will provide crucial information about the future state of the
economy. New insights into the interaction of various economic indicators could
lead to a more informed strategy of economic development. The tools developed
through this research have the potential for analyzing non-economic time series
data as well. For instance, seasonal forecasts of future crime rates may help
law enforcement agencies to create a more effective crime prevention plan.
