
* 9971301
* Topics in Nonparametric Analysis and Model Building
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1999,08/14/2002
* Kjell Doksum,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 08/31/2004
* USD 164,000.00

9971301 This project is the continuation of our research on the question of how
intuitive and concise linear model concepts and techniques can be extended to
nonparametric settings and on the development of nonparametric techniques for
model diagnostics, dimensionality reduction, and assessing adequacy of
particular classes of models. Some of the procedures considered in this research
are based on conditional versions of the familiar regression, covariance, and
correlation coefficients, where the conditioning is on covariates restricted to
neighborhoods. The size of the neighborhood serves as a resolution scale, and
dependence of the response on the covariates is measured and summarized at
multiple scales. Other procedures are curve or surface estimators and estimators
of integral functionals of distributions. Many of the estimators to be
considered depend on smoothing parameters needed in estimation of curves and
surfaces. A large part of the research addresses the problem of developing
reliable data-based methods for smoothing parameter selection. Properties of
estimators are studied using both asymptotic methods and Monte Carlo
simulations.

The advent of computer data bases of unprecedented size and complexity, and the
dramatic increase in computer power, makes desirable and possible the
development of more flexible models, concepts, and procedures. These can be used
to study relationships between variables and to construct models without the
need of relying on rigid global assumptions. Much of the recent work in
statistics has addressed this need for more general and flexible methods. This
research further extends this work with a special focus on procedures that are
counterparts to many commonly used linear model concepts and that expose
important features in the data using intuitive and familiar ideas. The developed
procedures are applied to financial, economic, insurance, medical, and other
data.


