
* 9971127
* Statistical Inference for Spatial Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1999,05/04/2001
* Michael Stein,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2003
* USD 252,000.00

9971127

This proposal focuses on two major areas in spatial statistics: inference for
point processes and prediction and inference for Gaussian random fields. The
work in point processes is largely motivated by questions arising in the
analysis of an important cosmological catalog of locations along the lines-of-
sight between quasars and the Earth of what are known as heavy-element
absorbers. This catalog provides a means for assessing the clustering of matter
in the universe over very large spatial scales and for describing changes in
this clustering as the universe has evolved. The absorber catalog can be most
simply modeled as a collection of realizations of a point process observed on a
large number of intervals. The fact that the process is observed over many
regions rather than one large contiguous region produces some interesting
opportunities and challenges for estimating properties of the point process and
obtaining valid standard errors for the estimates. For example, one can use
resampling methods with the regions as sampling units to obtain confidence
statements, although the problem is rather difficult if, as in the absorber
catalog, the regions are of different sizes. The proposed work on Gaussian
random fields addresses several problems related to prediction when the
covariance structure of the random field is partially unknown. Under the natural
asymptotic regime of an increasing number of observations in a fixed and bounded
domain, only in some very simple cases is it presently possible to prove that
predictions based on an estimated covariance structure are asymptotically
optimal. Recent work by Putter and Young provide a promising approach for
proving such results. This proposal also addresses the design of observation
networks for prediction when the covariance structure is unknown. For
prediction, the local behavior of the random field is critical and practical
experience has demonstrated that evenly spaced observations are poor designs
when trying to infer this local behavior. This proposal aims to provide
theoretical support to this empirical finding. For example, preliminary work
shows that there is tremendous potential for improving the estimation of the
fractal dimension of a Gaussian process by taking observations on two grids of
very different spacing rather than on a single evenly spaced grid.

Spatial statistics is a rapidly growing area of inquiry with broad applicability
to the natural and social sciences. Despite its present widespread usage, the
theoretical properties of many commonly applied procedures in spatial statistics
are poorly understood. The first major topic of this proposal is the analysis of
data made up of locations in space. This work is motivated by a cosmological
data set that provides important information about the large-scale structure of
the universe. Estimating this large-scale structure is a critical component in
resolving the fundamental cosmological problem of how the universe evolved from
its nearly uniform early state to its present highly clumped state. In addition
to the direct application the proposed work has to cosmology, the problems
addressed also occur naturally in microscopy. The second major topic in this
proposal is the prediction of quantities such as temperature, pollution
concentrations and soil characteristics whose levels vary randomly across space.
Two specific problems include studying the properties of such predictions when
there is uncertainty about how the values of this quantity fluctuate in space
and selecting the locations of observations to yield accurate predictions.
Spatial prediction is widely used in the atmospheric sciences, pollution
monitoring, hydrology and mining.


