
* 9971814
* Computing Environments for Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/1999,04/26/2002
* Luke-jon Tierney,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 06/30/2003
* USD 366,619.00

9971814

The objective of the proposed research is to improve the ability of researchers,
instructors, and other users of statistical methodology to apply statistical
methods in new problem areas. The proposed research is concerned in particular
with the exploration and development of new principles for the design of
statistical software to take advantage of modern computing power. This work
explores the use of compilation and multi-threading in statistical computing. It
examines the advantages of different language forms, including graphical
languages, for expressing statistical ideas. Principles for developing effective
systems for dynamic graphical explorations are also explored.

The objective of the proposed research is to improve the ability of researchers,
instructors, and other users of statistical methodology to apply statistical
methods in new problem areas. The proposed research is concerned in particular
with the exploration and development of new principles for the design of
statistical software to take advantage of modern computing power. This work
examines how to build on new developments in computer science to allow
statistical data analysis to take full advantages of the speed and graphics
capabilities made available by advances in computer hardware. The insights and
methods developed in this research will lead to improvements in the practice and
the teaching of statistical ideas within mathematics, engineering, and other
areas of technological education.
