
* 9971051
* Optimal Curve Estimation: from Asymptotic to Small Sample Sizes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1999,08/24/1999
* Sam Efromovich,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 08/31/2002
* USD 50,957.00

SAM EFROMOVICH Optimal curve estimation: from asymptotic to small sample sizes
9971051

The primary focus of this research is to explore the bridges between the sharp
asymptotic theory of nonparametric curve estimation and practically important
cases of small sample sizes. Main objectives are as follows: (i) For the case of
classical direct statistical settings, like density estimation or
heteroscedastic regression, create the theory and methods of finding minimal
sample sizes (the degree of the problem) where asymptotically sharp data-driven
estimates outperform any other estimates. (ii) For indirect statistical
problems, such as nonparametric survival analysis, blurred images or regression
with measurement errors in predictors, create the theory of equivalence between
these settings and the corresponding direct ones with a particular emphasis on
finding the relation between sample sizes needed for a similar quality of
estimation. (iii) For nonparametric curve estimation problems involving time
series with heavy tails and long range dependence, which frequently arise in the
modern communication systems like the World Wide Web, develop optimal data-
driven procedures of nonparametric estimation.

Statistical theory is primarily interested in finding most accurate procedures
for large samples while in practically interesting cases sample sizes may be
both large and small. Moreover, the notion of a large or small sample depends on
an underlying setting. The research is devoted to developing universal
procedures, which are simultaneously optimal for both large and small sample
sizes. The developed methods will be tested on the following specific practical
problems which motivated this proposal: (1) Insulin secretion by the type II
diabetes patients; (2) The geomagnetic polarity time-scale and the speed of
seafloor spreading using marine magnetic observations, and how these factors
affect environment and global change; (3) Drinking water quality including
monitoring arsenic and other cancer-causing substances in New Mexico; (4)
Learning machines for screening patients in emergency rooms; (5) Engineered
systems for the analysis of transformed and noisy images. These applied problems
will be done together with Sandia National Laboratories, the UNM Medical Center
and Maui High Performance Computing Center.
