
* 9971903
* Analysis of High Frequency Time Series Data and Structural Breaks
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1999,05/22/2002
* Ruey Tsay,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2003
* USD 188,647.00

9971903

Two research projects are being proposed. Project (I) is concerned with analysis
of high frequency time series data. Its objective is to develop a multivariate
framework for analyzing effectively and efficiently high-frequency data observed
in many scientific areas such as environmental study, finance and
telecommunication. It focuses on modeling time durations between observations
and the associated quantities of interest by using a flexible dynamic model to
govern the evolution of conditional distributions of variables involved. The
model also takes into account the effects of exogenous variables and cross
dependence between the variables. The proposed model builds on ideas of
generalized linear models by relating conditional means and variances of the
variables to the contemporaneous time duration and available information. The
model decomposes discrete-valued variables into ``direction'' and ``size'' of
changes and uses a stochastic scale parameter evolving over time to describe the
dynamic of time duration. Consequently, the proposed model combines two sets of
dynamic equations to form a multivariate dynamic system for high frequency time
series data. Properties of the proposed multivariate models are investigated,
and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods are used in estimation. Project (II) is
concerned with detecting and modeling structural breaks in multivariate time
series analysis. It generalizes univariate results to the multivariate case in
several directions such as to include processes with long-range dependence, to
provide a joint detection for several types of structural breaks, and to
investigate the relationships between detected breaks among components.

Advance in technology and data collection enables researchers to observe high-
frequency data such as traffic patterns in internet, minute-by-minute
measurements of ozone concentration and meteorological data via a satellite, and
tick-by-tick transactions data in financial markets. Key features of these data
include extremely large sample sizes and in some cases irregularly spaced time
intervals between events. Analysis of such data is important for many reasons,
including (a) it can provide an early warning signal, via predicting time
interval to the next event and the associated measurements, of potential big
surges in internet traffic or air pollution index in a metropolitan area, (b) it
can shed light on the micro-structure of the system under study that is critical
to understand the dynamic behavior of the data, and (c) it gives a framework on
which scientists or data analysts can assess potential risk under different
scenarios in a timely manner such as estimating the risk of a position held by a
financial institution over a given time horizon. The goal of the proposal is (a)
to provide an efficient and effective method for analyzing such high-frequency
data, (b) to bridge the gap between theory and applications of high-frequency
data analysis, and (c) to develop methods for detecting structural breaks in a
multivariate system that can occur in practice. The proposal intends to use
recent developments in statistical estimation, large-scale data processing, and
multivariate time series analysis to achieve its goal. Results obtained by the
proposed research will have applications in many scientific areas beyond
statistics such as in environment and global change, in telecommunication, in
e-commerce, and in finance. Students will participate in the proposed research.
