
* 9971212
* Resolution and Minimum Aberration for Nonregular Factorial Designs
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/15/1999,06/17/1999
* Boxin Tang,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 05/31/2002
* USD 97,417.00

9971212

A regular fractional factorial is uniquely determined by its defining relation
and it has a simple aliasing structure in that any two effects are either
orthogonal or fully aliased. When we have little or no knowledge as for what
effects are potentially important, it is appropriate to select designs having
minimum aberration. Minimum aberration designs enjoy some desirable model robust
properties and therefore can be properly called model robust designs. Regular
fractional factorials are well studied and results are abundant in the
literature. The same cannot be said of nonregular fractional factorials.
Nonregular fractional factorials are given by Plackett-Burman designs, Hadamard
matrices, or more generally by orthogonal arrays. Both regular and nonregular
designs permit orthogonal estimation of all the main effects. When some
interactions are potentially important, the two classes of designs have rather
different behaviors. This leads some researchers to study the projection
properties of nonregular designs. Despite this important contribution, there has
not been a systematic method for assessing and comparing nonregular designs. The
broad objective of this project is to extend the theory and methods in regular
designs to nonregular designs. This is facilitated by the introduction of
J-characteristics, which generalizes the concept of defining relation. The whole
project is conducted by focusing on the following research topics: (i) motivate
and introduce generalized resolution and minimum aberration criteria, (ii)
investigate the hidden projection properties of generalized minimum aberration
in terms of estimability and efficiency of designs, (iii) develop a theory of
J-characteristics and establish their connections with the projection
properties, and (iv) develop, implement, and test efficient computational
algorithms for constructing generalized minimum aberration designs.

In many areas of investigations, such as those of Federal Strategic Interest,
efficient data collection is one of the key steps for the eventual success of a
research project. Well planned experiments ensure relevant and informative data
to be collected. Factorial designs provide cost-effective experimental plans
that allow a large number of variables to be studied simultaneously and
efficiently, and are therefore widely used in industrial experiments for
improving the quality of manufactured products and the productivity of
manufacturing processes. Factorial designs can be categorized into two classes:
regular designs and nonregular designs. Regular designs are well studied and
results are abundant in the literature. The same cannot be said of nonregular
designs. Two reasons for the scarcity of results on nonregular designs are the
lack of general theory and methods, and the associated computational
difficulties in data analysis. The broad objective of this project is to develop
general theory and methods for studying and constructing nonregular designs.
This is achieved by introducing an instrumental concept, called
J-characteristics, that is capable of capturing the properties of a design when
projected onto lower dimensions. Developing and testing a user-friendly computer
package is part of the proposed research. The theory and methods to be developed
in the proposed research will shed new light on the study of factorial designs,
lead to new economical designs for the experiments in the physical, chemical,
and engineering sciences, and promote the application of factorial designs in
the areas such as biotechnology and medical research that have huge potential to
benefit further from the design methodology.


