
* 9971649
* Populations of Complex Objects, Visualization and Smoothing
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/1999,04/16/2001
* James Marron,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 12/31/2002
* USD 208,000.00

DMS-9971649

The need for understanding the structure of populations of complex objects,
including curves, images and surfaces, is becoming increasingly clear,
especially as automatic data gathering capabilities are burgeoning in many
fields. Research into functional data analytic methods is proposed to address
this need. An important part of this thrust will be in the direction of robust
methods, where few of the standard methods are applicable because of the very
high dimensionality coupled with small sample sizes. New visualization methods
are needed for functional data analysis, when the objects are images and
surfaces. Creative visualization ideas are proposed in a different direction in
the proposed work on smoothing. The central issue for real data applications of
smoothing is which features in the smooth are really there? SiZer was one such
methodology, and a variety of improvements are proposed. New visual paradigms
will be developed for the challenging and important cases of dependent data and
two dimensional smoothing. Work is also proposed on studying the mathematical
statistical underpinnings of SiZer, and related methods.

The proposed work is motivated by problems in opthalmology, computer science,
software engineering, and geology. The work in ophthalmology and computer
science is on finding statistical and visual methods for gaining insight into
the structure of populations of complex objects. Possible types of objects are
very diverse, with work under way on images representing corneal curvature and
on shape representations of corpus collosa. The methods developed are expected
to be useful in many other fields, but an immediate benefit will be improved
diagnosis of kerataconus and schizophrenia. The work in software engineering and
geology is a combination of visualization and smoothing methods to find, and
verify, unexpected structure in data. For example one newly developed method,
both establishes a link between perfective maintenance and decreased fault rate
in software engineering, and also provides the first statistically significant
connection between glaciation and volcanism. Another newly developed method
shows how legacy software systems age, and also gives statistical proof of
periods of extinction of mollusks, due to climatic changes.
