
* 9971698
* Estimating Parameters in Spike-convolution Models and Mixture Models
* DMS,STATISTICS, Plant Genome Research Project
* 06/15/1999,06/17/1999
* Lei Li,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 05/31/2002
* USD 79,866.00

9971698

This research links the parametric deconvolution problem in the spike-
convolution model with the estimation problem in finite mixture models. It aims
to weave together good results on algorithms and asymptotics from both sides,
and develop new methodologies, which are implementable in computation and
efficient in theory. The first object of this research, the spike-convolution
model, is introduced as part of the models proposed for DNA sequencing by the PI
and his collaborators. The current sequencing scheme named after Sanger combines
three techniques: enzymatic reactions, gel or capillary electrophoresis and
fluorescence-based detection. This biochemical procedure produces a four-
component vector time series for each DNA fragment. The task of DNA base-calling
is to recover the underlying DNA sequence from the above time series. Most of
the base-calling errors are caused by the diffusion effect of electrophoresis.
It is found that this diffusion effect can be well described by the so-called
spike-convolution model. It arises when a sparse Dirac spike train is convolved
with a fixed point spread function, and additive noise or measurement error is
superimposed. In this model, deconvolution is nothing but a standard parameter
estimation problem, where the parameters include the number, locations and
heights of the underlying spikes, the baseline and the measurement error
variance. The second object of this research, the finite mixture model, is the
framework of many statistical analyses like robustness checking, clustering,
estimating density functions, etc. However, the estimation of the parameters in
mixture models can be very troublesome, especially when many components are
involved. It is believed that a broad class of finite mixture models is closely
related to the spike-convolution model. No simple solution exists to the
estimation problems in these two models because of the complexity. This research
proposes to combine the method of trigonometric moments with a two-stage model
selection procedure, Gauss-Newton algorithm, or EM algorithm depending on the
situations. The numerical and statistical aspects of the new methods and their
variants are examined and compared with those of existing methods. The Toeplitz
forms constructed from trigonometric moments and their statistical properties
play a key role in the proposed methods, and are investigated in full detail.

This research studies the newly proposed spike-convolution model and the long-
standing finite mixture models from a unified perspective. The former is
motivated by the large scale and high throughput DNA sequencing, which is one of
the most important aspects of the ongoing Human Genome Project and other genome
projects. The lack of satisfactory deconvolution techniques and statistical
models has made DNA base-calling---the data analysis part of sequencing---a
bottle neck of these projects. An effective deconvolution technique, a target of
this research, is a fundamental prerequisite for rapid and reliable DNA base-
calling. In fact, similar deconvolution problems arise in many other scientific
disciplines like geophysics, spectroscopy, and chromatography. The research
results are also expected to enrich the understanding and methodologies of
finite mixture models, which have applications to a diversity of fields such as
physics, medicine, and biology.
