
* 9971586
* Algorithms, Approximations, and Valid Statistical Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1999,08/03/2000
* George Casella,NY,Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* William B. Smith
* 07/31/2001
* USD 206,139.00

9971586

New solutions to difficult statistical problems have been found through the use
of algorithms and accurate approximations. Sometimes these solutions can be
extremely difficult to implement and, moreover, the statistical properties of
the solution, and hence the resulting statistical inference, may be difficult to
describe and, in the worst cases, even invalid. The general theme of the
proposed research is to develop computing algorithms, accurate approximations,
and other numerical techniques for a variety of problems, and do it in such a
way that a valid statistical inference results. Some specific projects are the
development of algorithms for hierarchical and missing data models, including
extensions of the EM algorithm to estimating equations; using accurate
approximations and a synthesis of Bayesian and frequentist approaches to provide
valid inferences in nuisance parameter problems; and computation and inference
in discrete data problems, with particular attention to numerical alternatives
to saddlepoint approximations and novel uses of Monte Carlo methods.

Much current research in statistics is influenced by the availability of
exceptionally fast computing, which has led to a reexamination of the approaches
to many problems. These new approaches have provided some solutions to
previously unsolved problems; however, their implementation is often not
straightforward so the solutions will not be available to more than a few expert
users. Such a situation arose in an epidemiological study to estimate the effect
of clinical mastitis, where implementation of the currently available algorithm
was not clear. The type of solution proposed here is straightforward to
implement in this case, as well as in other applications such as estimating the
location of cancer clusters relative to toxic waste sites. This new solution
will also result in statistically valid conclusions, a property not always
enjoyed by computationally intensive procedures. In addition to these
algorithms, research in new statistical simulation methods is proposed which has
application in genetics and biotechnology studies (the linkage of locations on a
chromosome to particular diseases).


