
* 9971751
* Asymptotic Equivalence in Nonparametric Function Problems-Theory and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1999,06/05/2003
* Lawrence Brown,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 347,284.00

Recent results indicate the possibility of constructing a comprehensive
asymptotic theory of nonparametric function estimation. The major focus of the
proposal is on continuing development of such a comprehensive asymptotic
equivalence theory. In particular, the emphasis is on constructive, equivalence
results. These allow researchers to develop statistical methodologies within the
most tractable mathematical formulation and then to readily transfer those
methodologies to the possibly less tractable formulation of practical interest.
Additionally, asymptotic equivalence as so far defined is a very stringent
property which fails in some important practical settings, particularly those
involving higher dimensional problems. One additional aspect of the proposal is
to develop a weaker, but still constructive, partial equivalence theory which
can productively be applied when full equivalence fails. Research involving the
use of equivalence ideas to further develop currently popular spline and wavelet
methodologies is also proposed. This should lead to new, improved adaptive
smoothing spline methodologies and to increased understanding of the existing
adaptive wavelet methodologies.

Contemporary advances in computational and statistical methodology have made it
possible to model and analyze complex patterns arising in two and three
dimensional data contexts. Examples abound in medical, geophysical, and
astrophysical imaging and in the analysis of the data corresponding to such
images. The statistical models accurately corresponding to such images are
"nonparametric" in the sense that they do not possess the restrictive structure
prevalent in statistical models developed in the pre-computer era. The current
proposal is aimed at a broad, but constructive, understanding of such models. In
more detail, there are currently several rather different ways to model and
analyze such nonparametric data. The main focus of this proposal is on
establishing results which constructively demonstrate the operational similarity
of all these models. The constructive nature of the proposal should make it
feasible to move from one model to the other. For example, this can make it
possible to choose one form which is best for efficient computation and then to
directly pass to another which is more efficient for general presentation or for
further mathematical analysis.
