
* 9971331
* A Noninformative Bayesian Approach to some Finite Population Problems when Auxiliary Variables are Present
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1999,08/24/1999
* Glen Meeden,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2002
* USD 75,000.00

9971331

In finite population sampling in addition to the characteristic of interest,
there are often auxiliary variables present which contain information about the
characteristic. For example, a priori the population means or some of the
population quantiles for these auxiliary variables could be known. Classical
theory has developed a variety of methods to exploit this information with
different levels of overall effectiveness. The Polya posterior was developed as
a noninformative Bayesian approach to finite population sampling when little or
no prior information is available. The goal of the proposed research is to
extend the Polya posterior to problems where auxiliary variables are present.
This will be done by restricting the Polya posterior in a natural way so that
given a sample simulated copies of the entire population can be generated which
satisfy the constraints induced by the prior knowledge about the auxiliary
variables. Statistical inference can then be carried out using the simulated
populations in the usual Bayesian manner. The two main technical problems will
be to develop the underlying theory and the techniques for implementing the
simulations which are consistent with the prior information at hand. This allows
for a coherent approach to problems which standard theory must now consider
individually. Several problems will be identified were certain types of prior
information which are often presently ignored can be used in an objective and
effective way. The resulting noninformative Bayesian procedures should have good
frequentist properties.

A fundamental problem of statistics is making inferences about a population when
information is available only about a sample or subset of the individuals making
up the population. For example, we may want to estimate how many days a typical
worker is absent because of illness during a year in a given industry. In
addition to the information in the sample, we may also know the average age or
median education level for all the workers in the industry. Statisticians have
developed various methods to handle such problems depending on what kind of
information beyond the sample is at hand. Some methods work much better than
others. In this research we will study a general approach which can effectively
make use of a variety of types of information. This is done by using the data in
the sample and the prior information to construct simulated or random copies of
the entire population which are consistent with both the sample data and the
prior information. By considering the variability among these randomly generated
copies of the population one can find not only an estimate of the quantity of
interest but a measure of uncertainty associated with the estimate.


