
* 9971405
* Flexible and Adaptive Statistical Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1999,05/29/2003
* Robert Tibshirani,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Xuming He
* 07/31/2004
* USD 497,285.00

9971405

During the 1980's, researchers who were trying to model learning in the brain
developed several novel learning algorithms for multilayer non-linear neural
networks. Somewhat incidentally, these algorithms turn out to be very powerful
techniques for adaptive regression and classification, and have proven their
usefulness independent of whether or not they are a good model for the brain.
They are now being applied to medical diagnosis, chemical process control, shape
recognition and a wide range of other important practical problems. At the same
time, there have been significant advances in adaptive techniques in the field
of statistics. The new statistical methods are more powerful than classical
techniques such as linear regression and linear discriminant analysis. Some of
the recently developed procedures include CART (Classification And Regression
Trees), generalized additive models, MARS (Multivariate Additive Regression
Splines), and sophisticated versions of nearest neighbor algorithms that learn
an appropriate metric for the input space. Although they come from different
fields using different terminologies, these methods have much in common. One
item in this proposal is a research monograph that seeks to bring many of these
ideas under one umbrella, explaining them in a unified fashion. Two other items
explore some recent new methods for improving classifiers and for adaptive model
selection.

This work aims at developing new models and methods for making predictions
based on historical data. These techniques are important in many different
fields including medical diagnosis, financial forecasting and industrial process
control. The area of biotechnology is an especially important application for
these methods. Scientists now have techniques for measuring gene expression
levels for thousands of genes at the same time, allowing the exciting
possibility of determining which human genes are involved in a diseases such as
cancer and heart disease. Sorting through the mass of information is like trying
to find a needle in a haystack, and predictive methods like the ones studied
here will provide an important tool in this search.


