
* 9971770
* Statistical and Computational Methods in Genetic Analysis
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/1999,06/13/2002
* Shili Lin,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 10/31/2002
* USD 50,000.00

Large and complex genetic data sets present a great deal of challenges to
standard data analysis techniques. In many cases, standard methods are
infeasible or even impossible for analyzing such data. This research is to
develop statistical and computational methods relevant to the analysis of
complex human pedigree data. The first main focus is to solve problems that
involve large complex pedigrees, multiple polymorphic markers, incomplete
genotypes, and complex disease models. The second main focus is to study further
the Chi-square (CHS) recombination models, to develop new techniques to
incorporate CHS into methods of gene mapping to achieve greater efficiency of
data, and to apply this methodology to study genetic interference in the human
genome. Most of the proposed research in this project is to be carried out using
the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methodology. Exploration of MCMC methods in
human pedigree analysis thus far shows that this methodology is highly suitable
for estimating probabilities and likelihoods. However, because of special
features of models and methods appropriate for modern human genetics, special
modifications to the standard MCMC approach are required for this technique to
be effective in a variety of genetic mapping problems. This project continues
the work of making these modifications and exploring new applications.

The last decade has seen rapid advancements in the field of human genetics.
Large and complex data sets are accumulating at an incredible rate. Some disease
genes (most of them are for single-gene simple genetic disorders) have been
identified and mapped. This includes the genes responsible for cystic fibrosis,
Huntington's disease and some breast cancers. This has tremendous implication in
genetic counseling, genetic testing and screening, drug discovery, and genetic
therapy. Identification of genetic factors for complex diseases is a far more
difficult task. Complex diseases may be genetically heterogeneous caused by
different susceptibility genes, or may be caused by a combination of genes with
possible environmental effects. Many common diseases have complex etiology, and
are believed to be at least partially due to genetic predisposition. Common
diseases such as diabetes, alcohol dependence, and some forms of cancer are
examples of complex disorders. Methods developed in this research can handle
complex genetic models and make use of available genetic data fully, thereby
increasing the power to map genes for complex diseases.
