
* 9972598
* Bayesian Nonparametric Regression and Density Estimation Using CAR Priors
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/15/1999,07/12/2001
* Dongchu Sun,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Stufken
* 06/30/2003
* USD 127,750.00

9972598

The research deals with several closely related areas of Bayesian hierarchical
models and function estimation problems. The investigators explore the use of
Bayesian techniques for function estimation and their frequentist properties and
use those properties to help choose appropriate noninformative priors. One
aspect of their study is the use of conditional autoregressive models (CAR) and
their generalizations to capture spatial variability and as prior distributions
in nonparametric regression and density estimation problems. Preliminary results
suggest good performance for the Bayesian smoothing parameter choice. Using the
fundamental relationship between penalized methods for function estimation and
Bayesian estimation with high order CAR models as priors, they use sampling-
based techniques (such as Markov chain Monte Carlo) to deal with problems with
large amounts of data. The regression and density estimation problems are
special classes of hierarchical generalized linear models. A common feature is
the need to specify prior distributions for hyperparameters. The investigators
develop noninformative priors for these purposes and assess their suitability.

The methods being developed are motivated by problems in transportation, disease
mapping and wildlife management. The transportation problem consists of modeling
the behavior of residents in a city and their choice of activities and
destinations. The disease mapping work estimates disease incidence by location,
age and gender strata. The wildlife management issues involve similar problems
in estimating hunting success rates for small areas such as counties. All of
these problems entail a spatial component, large data sets, and statistical
inference to small regions. There is a great deal of current interest in these
topics, but many theoretical issues have not been addressed. Results are being
developed to help understand some of the theoretical properties of existing
methods and to suggest new ones. By using objective Bayesian techniques, new
methodology is being developed to handle a wide range of practical problems.
These methods are computer intensive but feasible with the latest computer
technology.


