
* 9978370
* Statistical Innovations to Neurotoxicity Risk Assessment
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 10/01/1999,09/28/2004
* Yiliang Zhu,FL,University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 03/31/2005
* USD 204,175.00

9978370

Neurotoxic potential of environmental substances is typically evaluated through
laboratory experiments, in which a small number of subjects are randomly
assigned to 4-5 exposure groups, and multiple outcomes, including continuous,
ordinal data, are measured repeatedly. The factorial designs, however, do not
always provide sufficient information for characterizing the underlying
trajectories of neurotoxic effects over time. Often the lowest dose that induces
the toxic effects is identified using analysis of variance or multiple
comparison, and is used to derive a safety standard, without accounting for the
magnitude of the effects, or the underlying dose-response relationship. Despite
the US EPA's recommendation in its latest risk assessment guidelines, the use of
dose-response modeling and subsequent estimation of a benchmark dose, a new
approach leading to better safety standards have not been produced. This project
proposes to conduct dose-time-response modeling of neurobehavioral toxicity
using linear/non-linear and generalized linear mixed-effects models. Models that
characterize transient and competing effects are considered. The use of mixed
effects makes it possible to quantify risk for targeted individuals or groups.
The project attempts to develop semi-parametric estimation methods for fitting
mixed effects models, exploring the use of GEE-based EM algorithm, for example.
It is hoped that such semi-parametric procedures may not only generate more
robust estimates, but also simplify the computational aspects of mixed-effects
models. A second technical focus is to develop semi-parametric, bootstrap-
enhanced calibration methods for estimating benchmark doses. In the context of
neurotoxicity risk assessment, benchmark doses lies along a contour line on the
dose-time-response surface. The bootstrap calibration methods can overcome the
limitation associated with small sample size, and illustrate sampling
uncertainty or variation of the benchmark dose estimates. A third technical
challenge is to develop informative and efficient designs beyond the factorial
ones for neurotoxicity screening experiments in terms of dose-time spacing to
achieve maximal information recovery on dose-response (e.g. peak effect time),
and reliable estimation of benchmark doses. The project utilizes the database of
the IPCS Collaborative Study and the EPA studies on Neurobehavioral Screening
Methods.

Neurotoxic effects are recognized as one of the leading workplace disorders.
There are currently more than 65,000 chemical substances that are used in the
USA, yet it is not known how many may be neurotoxic in humans. It is estimated,
however, that a large number of the more than 500 registered active pesticide
ingredients affect the nervous system of the targeted species to varying
degrees. Of the 588 chemicals listed by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists, 167 affected the nervous system or behavior at some
exposure level. As a result of the impact of neurotoxicity on public health,
there are increasing scientific interests in neurotoxic risk to humans, as well
as increasing regulatory needs for developing better safety standards against
environmental exposure. In summary, this project 1) develops effective design
protocols for neurotoxicity screening tests to improve risk characterization; 2)
develops and applies better statistical methods to quantify neurobehavioral
disorders; and 3) develops and tests better procedures for computing regulatory
standards for potential neurotoxicants. The methods developed in this project
are likely to enhance the scientific foundation of risk assessment, and hence to
help improve environmental regulatory policies. This project is supported
jointly by the Statistics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(OMA) in MPS.


