
* 9978321
* Probabilistic Modeling and Computational Methods in Environmental Statistics
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, STATISTICS
* 09/15/1999,09/07/1999
* Richard Levine,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 08/31/2002
* USD 99,600.00

9978321

This project considers the development and application of statistical methods in
two scientific areas: 1) image analysis of geophysical data and 2) modeling of
stated preference ratings data. The recurring theme is to study the
probabilistic model underlying each data structure. The probabilistic modeling
of images is based on the statistical structure of features in order to
compress, reconstruct/synthesize, and statistically analyze the images. The
models are derived from the statistical dependencies between the basis
coordinates of transformed images. In particular, the proposed task is to
develop a computationally efficient independent component analysis in an attempt
to transform images into a set of independent components modeled by Gaussian
processes. If the dependent coordinate systems follow an ICA decomposition, the
statistical dependency between basis coordinates will be modeled through
Markovian processes. As part of the study, validation measures are constructed
to evaluate the image syntheses and reconstructions based on the probability
models. These measures are developed from the Edgeworth expansion of the
Kullback-Leibler information statistic and differential entropy. The study of
stated preference ratings data considers probabilistic models for inferring the
probabilistic structure of censored rankings underlying nominal ratings data.
The hierarchical Bayesian models developed will require computationally
efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo routines incorporating Gibbs sampling and
Metropolis-Hastings steps for fitting the models and drawing appropriate
inferences.

The project aims at developing computationally efficient statistical tools for
probabilistic modeling of geophysical images and stated preference ratings data.
The image analysis methodologies are motivated by two specific geophysical
problems to which the methods developed will be applied: 1) meteorological
forecast verification and 2) geological classification. The goal for forecast
verification is to develop automated, computationally efficient routines to
compare meteorological forecasts and observations at different geographical
scales towards an evaluation of climatological forecast models. The goal for
geological classification is to develop automated, computationally efficient
routines to classify sediments and rock formations based on computer learning
and extraction of features from training data sets. Each of these two
Applications will incorporate methods developed by the project in feature
extraction, compression, reconstruction/synthesis, and statistical modeling.
Methodologies for handling stated preference ratings data are motivated by two
problems in program valuation to which the methods developed will be applied: 1)
rating programs for mitigating impacts of global climate change and 2) rating
programs for improving fish populations in Washington State. In each
application, the goal is the valuation of environmental programs through the
consideration of many underlying attributes such as cost, species impact, and
environmental impact, to name a few. The statistical analysis will incorporate
the probabilistic and econometric models and inferential tools developed by the
project to study program ratings and preferences elicited from participants in
the two studies. This project is jointly supported by the Statistics Program in
the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) in MPS.


