
* 9982846
* Monte Carlo Filters for Nonlinear and Non-Gaussian Dynamic Systems
* DMS,STATISTICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 09/15/1999,09/17/1999
* Rong Chen,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 08/31/2002
* USD 55,000.00

9982846

This research is concerned with Monte Carlo methods for nonlinear and non-
Gaussian dynamic systems. The basic idea of the Monte Carlo filter is to
sequentially generate random samples from the distribution of the current state
of the system. Compared with traditional filtering methods, simple, flexible,
yet powerful Monte Carlo techniques provide effective means to deal with complex
dynamic systems. The investigator studies four specific topics in this research.
Topic (I) studies a special Monte Carlo filter called Mixture Kalman filter for
the conditional dynamic linear models, a class of widely encountered systems in
practice. This filter utilizes the `marginalization' operation to improve
efficiency. Topic (II) studies a partial rejection control operation, an
operation aimed to generate more efficient random samples in Monte Carlo
filters. Topic (III) studies methods to deal with dynamic systems with unknown
system coefficients, an important but difficult problem. Topic (IV) is devoted
to several applications of Monte Carlo filters, including tracking multiple
maneuvering targets in a clutter environment; Bayesian receivers in digital
wireless communications; on-line estimation of the market volatility in
financial time series analysis; and stochastic system control with non-Gaussian
innovations.

Dynamic systems are widely used in almost all fields of applications. Examples
abound in radar or sonar surveillance systems, in mobile telecommunications, in
economic and financial data analysis, in computer vision, in medical
diagnostics, in speech recognition, in feed-back control and guidance systems,
and in Internet traffic monitoring and control, just to name a few. Most of them
are nonlinear and non-Gaussian. One of the main challenges in dealing with
dynamic systems is that they usually require on-line (in real time) estimation
and prediction (filtering) of the ever-changing system characteristics, given
the continuous flow of observations and information from the system. The
investigator studies and develops Monte Carlo filters for nonlinear and non-
Gaussian dynamic systems. The basic idea of the Monte Carlo filter is to
sequentially generate random samples to represent the status (distribution) of
the current state of the system. Modern computing power has made it feasible to
use Monte Carlo methods as filtering methods in application. Compared with
traditional filtering methods, simple, flexible, yet powerful Monte Carlo
techniques provide effective means to deal with complex dynamic systems. This
research enriches the toolkit of on-line filtering for nonlinear and non-
Gaussian dynamic systems. Faster and more effective filtering techniques will
certainly have significant impact on a wide range of important applications in
real life and make significant contributions to advancing science and
technology. It also promotes the interdisciplinary research between engineering
and statistics.


