* 8505318
* Research Initiation:  Structural Properties of Nonlinear    Systems with Applications to Their Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1985,10/31/1987
* Jessy Grizzle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kristen M. Biggar, N-BioS
* 10/31/1987
* USD 59,430.00

System models are based on physical principles, laws, and simplifying
assumptions. These models often possess specific structural characteristics
which could be exploited when the system is analyzed. Two of these
characteristics are considered in this research. The first concerns the study of
systems which possess symmetries. The classical notion of symmetry in
Hamiltonian systems is extended to systems with inputs, which are of interest to
control engineers. This research will provide further information on the
structure of systems with symmetries and will make direct use of this in
resolving certain optimization problems. The second topic deals with a geometric
basis for the study of discrete time systems and focuses on the study of
invariant distributions for such a class of systems. These distributions are
closely linked to the classical notion of a subsystem and induce local
decompositions of the system. As such, they give a powerful tool for the study
of various decoupling problems in nonlinear discrete time systems. Geometric
methods are applied consistently to obtain structural information about
nonlinear systems, as characterized by the presence of symmetries or invariant
distributions. This information is then used to resolve certain control problems
in both the continuous and discrete time domains.