* 8510209
* Research in Transport Theory of One Dimensional Semicon-    ductor Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1985,07/31/1989
* Jean-Pierre Leburton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Queen
* 07/31/1989
* USD 153,791.00

The new epitaxial technologies of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and metalorganic
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) have added astonishing possibilities to the
fabrication of sophisticated semiconductor structures like GaAs-A1As
superlattices and heterostructure layers. Progress in fine line lithography
makes one-dimensional (1-D) structures feasible in the near future. The
potential of these new synthetic materials for device applications are
considerable. In this research effort, transport properties will be studied and
the possible applications of 1-D semiconductor systems to high performance
devices will be explored. The work is theoretical. The approach includes a
theory of the dielectric function of quasi-1-D systems and the derivation of the
collective modes of a 1-D electron gas. The transport theory is based on the
semi-classical Boltzmann equation and special emphasis is given to the electron-
polar optical phonon interaction and to inter-carrier scattering. The 1-D
electron distribution function for low and high field transport will be
obtained. The guideline of this investigation will be the analogy of 1-D
structures with magnetotransport. For complex transport processes, simulation
methods (Monte Carlo) will be developed.