* 8511388
* A Geophysical Survey of the Interaction between the Chile Ridge and Chile Trench
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1992
* Steven Cande, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 05/31/1992
* USD 737,416.00

This is a major geophysical field program to survey the southern Chile margin
where a mid-ocean spreading ridge (Chile Ridge) is being subducted along the
Chile Trench (Chile Triple Junction). Collected will be multichannel seismic
reflection data, SEABEAM bathymetric data, gravity data and dredge samples. The
principal scientific objectives of this survey are 1) to test models for the
tectonic effects of ridge crest subduction, and 2) study subduction processes
under the extremal conditions of a ridge-trench collision. This area is a unique
tectonic setting and perhaps the best place in the world to study this
interaction. Here, over a short distance straddling the triple junction, it is
possible to study what happens before, during, and after the subduction of an
active spreading center. Specific objectives involve comparing the deep
structure, surficial morphology, and tectonic fabric of the inner-trench wall in
zones corresponding to conditions before, during and after ridge-trench
collision. To address these objectives data will be collected, processed and
analyzed from four different transects or corridors across the trench. These
data will provide the necessary information for planning and developing specific
drilling objectives and drill sites for future ODP drilling in the area. They
also will be used for interpreting and extrapolating drilling results in a
regional tectonic context.