* 8517519
* Specialization and Coordination of Individuals in a Complex Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Robert Jeanne, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 109,771.00

It is a general rule among social insects that colony members specialize on
different tasks required for the growth, defense, and reproduction of the
colony. Most previous studies of division of labor among workers have limited
analysis to the level of the "caste," the group of workers performing a given
role for a prolonged period of time. However, some recent evidence suggests that
behavioral differences among individual members of a caste may play an integral
role in how the colony organizes work. Dr. Jeanne's research will take the
analysis of the organization of work in social-insect colonies down to the level
of the individual. The overall goal is to understand how the colony's response
to a contingency, which at the global level appears to be deterministic
(certain), is put together from the responses of individual workers, which
appear to be idiosyncratic and probabilistic. Dr. Jeanne will analyze nest-
construction behavior of a species of tropical wasp on which he has already done
detailed preliminary work. He has two objectives within his overall goal. The
first objective is to determine the characteristics and behavioral correlates of
individual variability in nest construction. Experiments will be conducted on
individually marked workers, working within the social context, to determine if
their levels of activity are related to age and to different individual
thresholds of response to the stimuli that release nest-construction activities.
The second objective is to experimentally test for mechanisms hypothesized to
regulate nest-construction behavior. The end result will be an understanding of
the nest-construction system in terms of responses to stimuli, feedback
pathways, and modes of communication among workers engaged in the activity. What
we know so far about the coordination of complex activities of social insects
suggests a parallel with what Sydney Brenner and his associates are finding out
about development in simple organisms, namely that much of the "grammar of
assembly" lies in the interaction among the component parts of the system.
Specifying this grammar for a social insect is the ultimate goal of this
research.