* 8521169
* Cooperative Research in Sub-Saharan Africa on Oxygen        Isotope Ratios in Freshwater Gastropods as Paleoclimatic    Indicators
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Paul Abell, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1989
* USD 3,000.00

This proposal requests supplemental funds for NSF Grant No. EAR8416071 to permit
Dr. Paul I. Abell, Professor of Chemistry, University of Rhode Island, to pursue
with Dr. Christine Betterton, Bayero University, Nigeria, Dr. H. V. Clarke,
University of Zimbabwe, and other scientists in Sub-Saharan Africa, for a period
of 6 months, a program of cooperative research on oxygen isotope ratios in
freshwater gastropods as a paleoclimatic indicator. Samples of modern gastropod
shells and their aqueous environments will be studied first to provide base line
data. The technique then will be applied to selected fossil gastropods in
studies of paleoenvironments from a variety of locations in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Freshwater gastropods record environmental information in the stable oxygen
isotope ratios of their shells. This information includes a sensitivity toward
temperature in the decomposition of the calcium carbonate of the shell as well
as evaporative effects stemming from the host body of water in which the
gastropod lived. This study may provide additional insights into
paleoenvironments. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.