* 8521270
* The Application of Transition Radiation to Non-invasive     Angiography (Physics)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Melvin Piestrup, Adelphi Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 05/31/1990
* USD 224,389.00

The purpose of this research is to demonstrate the value of transition
radiation in angiography. Within this area of diagnostic radiology, the specific
interest is centered on the development of a non-invasive method of coronary
angiography based on the use of monoenergetic x-rays at energies close to the
K-absorption edge of iodine. In the past, both conventional and synchrotron
sources have been used. Unfortunately, the conventional sources lack
monochromatic x- ray beams of adequate intensity, while the cost of a
synchrotron source is prohibitive. The specific motivation for the proposed
studies is an urgent need to reduce both the risk and cost of coronary
arteriography. The proposed method involves the acquisition of radiographs at
x-ray energies slightly above and below the k-edge in iodine at 33.16 keV and
the subsequent digital subtract of these two images to achieve maximum contrast
in the visualization of the intra-arterial iodine. The high brightness and
laser-like collimation of transition radiation make it an ideal source of x-rays
for medical applications. This source has received a relatively small amount of
attention as a x-ray generator of high brightness. Yet the radiation per
electron is several orders of magnitude greater than synchrotron radiation, and,
as demonstrated in Phase I of this program, a moderate electron beam of 100 to
500 MeV can be used, whereas a synchrotron source requires electron energies of
3 GeV or greater to obtain 30 keV photons. Transition radiation is a cost
effective source of hard x- rays for non-invasive angiography for the detection
of coronary disease; lithography for the production of integrated circuits;
x-ray analysis of biological material; and high resolution medical x-ray of
organs such as kidneys and heart.