* 8550580
* Community Science Project
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/1986,02/29/1988
* John Falk, Howard County Chamber of Commerce
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 02/29/1988
* USD 159,848.00

The Community Science Project is an effort to improve science education by
broadening the participation of community elements in the educational process.
Parents, business-industry, Chambers of Commerce, museum (and related
institutions), professional and trade associations, universities, community
colleges, and trade and technical schools need to expand their involvement in
the total educational process, and work out strategies for sharing science
education obligations and benefits. Because the resources are already in place,
the project hopes to demonstrate how major changes can be effected without
necessitating significant increases in educational costs. In a stepwise fashion,
the project will implement and document a self-sustaining model for broadening
educational representation and participation; exploiting underutilized community
resources; encouraging two-way, non-altruistic interactions; and upgrading
community awareness, knowledge, capabilities and attitudes in science/society/
technology areas. The plan involves identifying sectors/organizations within
Howard County that could or should be involved with science education. These
groups will be contacted and their potential contributions to science education,
and any needs they have that schools or other community sectors could satisfy,
will be identified and documented. Needs and contributions will be matched and
the Principal Investigator will arrange meetings between relevant groups,
facilitate interactions, and provide technical assistance where necessary.
Follow-up meetings with all sectors/organiza-tions will be arranged to determine
what they have done in science education, and needs and resources lists will
again be generated. The overall process of developing lists of needs and
resources, matching lists, and facilitating the resulting community interactions
will be continued. The program will be expanded in a stepwise fashion and will
involve a grassroots effort. The staff, working out of the Howard County Chamber
of Commerce, will be responsible for identifying and recruiting experts in the
community, utilizing their expertise in the most cost-effective manner,
documenting meticulously the interactions established, and assisting the county
to develop its own strategies for maintaining the program without external
funding.