* 8550424
* Honors Workshop on the Teaching and Learning of Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1986,03/31/1989
* Glenda Lappan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1989
* USD 198,101.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences for 24 exemplary mathematics teachers and 48 of their
less well-prepared school colleagues. The overall goals of the project involve
the updating and deepening of the participants' mathematical backgrounds and
teaching methodologies, the networking of the participants, the conduct of
frequent school- and campus-based helping and sharing sessions by the
participants and project staff, and the investi-gation of the modelistic
approach within a carefully planned documentation, assesssment and evaluation
effort. Participants will be carefully selected to assure commitments of the
leader teacher, their two peers, and their school administrators to the project
goals. The project will operate from a conceptual model of teacher education
which encompasses five phases for constructing new knowledge for leadership
activities: demonstration, practice, feedback, coaching for transfer, and
coaching for leadership. In the first summer 24 high school algebra teachers
will participate in a three-week workshop on the campus of Michigan State
University. They will study the conceptual development of elementary algebra as
well as new applications in coding theory and linear programming, observe
teaching demonstrations with beginning algebra students, and develop plans and
activities for implementation into their own teaching. During the next school
year the teachers will integrate new teaching practices and algebraic
applications into their classes, which project staff will visit at least three
times for coaching sessions. The entire group will meet three times (5 days)
back on the campus to share and assess progress and to plan for the outreach
during the second year. During a one-week summer conference, the 24 honors
teachers wil work with two peers to begin their team improvement. During the
1987-88 school year the lead teachers will continue to coach these outreach
teachers, who will be visited and also coached by the principal investigators.