* 8550425
* Mathematical Modeling in the School Curriculum:  An Honors  Workshop for Secondary Mathematics Teachers in the South-   central Pennsylvania Region
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1986,09/30/1988
* Frank Swetz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 09/30/1988
* USD 132,714.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences for 35 exemplary secondary school mathematics teachers
from the south-central Pennsylvania area. The overall project goals involve the
updating and deepening of the participants' mathematical backgrounds and
teaching methodology, the networking of the participants, the conduct of in-
service workshops by the participants in their home schools, the dissemination
of the project materials and results to nearby school systems, and the
investigation of the modelistic approach within a well-planned documentation,
assessment and evaluation effort. Participants will be selected through
recommendations provided by educational specialists in the Intermediate Units,
which provide services to 72 school districts. Participants will study the
theory and practice of mathematical modeling, as well as the teaching of school
mathematics emphasizing mathematical modeling and problem solving during a
5-week workshop on the Capitol Campus. In small group sessions they will work
together to apply their new understandings to develop plans and materials for
implementing mathematical modeling into their own teaching. Further, they will
collaboratively plan for the half-day workshop each is required to conduct for
their school colleagues. During the Autumn follow-up, they will be observed and
assisted by project staff in their own classrooms. They will conduct the
workshop for peers, attend three half-day symposia on mathematical applications
presented by guest industrial mathematicians, and prepare written reports of all
project activities. The participants will be recognized and honored, and they
will earn eight graduate credits.