* 8550921
* Planning Conference:  Strengthening the Research Base for   Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1986,03/31/1988
* Marjorie Gardner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 03/31/1988
* USD 62,406.00

Science education requires a solid research base if long-term gains in
educational quality are to be achieved and consolidated. This research base must
take account of the content and structure of subject matter disciplines, the
contexts in which science teaching occurs, and the principles of teaching,
learning, and reasoning in scientific domains that are emerging in research.
This project will convene a planning conference on research for science
education that will bring together forty leading professionals who are experts
in (1) subject matter disciplines of science, mathematics and computer science;
(2) the study of classroom teaching and curriculum development; and (3) the
study of cognitive processes of learning, reasoning and problem solving.
Conference participants will assess the current state of knowledge, examine the
prospects for advances based on currently available resources, and identify
activities likely to significantly increase this knowledge and lead to changes
in educational practices in science education. Project participants will develop
plans for further collaboration and follow-up activities. In addition, the
participants will draw up a specific set of recommendations and priorities for
mathematics, science and technological education, including suggestions
concerning the relative merits of various research methodologies. Conference
proceedings will be published and distributed to 3,000 members of professional
educational research societies, universities, research centers, funding agencies
and other interested parties. Results of the conference will be discussed in
organized symposia and will be presented at appropriate professional meetings in
1986.