* 8550604
* Nebraska Mathematics Scholars Program for Secondary School  Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1986,04/30/1991
* Donald Miller, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 04/30/1991
* USD 833,892.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences for 60 exemplary secondary school mathematics teachers
from rural Nebraska school districts. The overall goals of the multiyear project
involve: 1) the updating and deepening of the participants' mathematics
backgrounds and teaching methodologies, 2) the networking of the participant
Fellows, six outstanding secondary mathematics teachers selected to be part of
the project staff as Senior Fellows and the six university and college
mathematics faculty, 3) the conduct of implementations of problem-solving
lessons in participants' classrooms, 4) the conduct of at least four all-day in-
service workshops by the participants for their colleagues in their home
schools, 5) appropriate recognition for honors teacher participants, 6) the
dissemination of the project methods, materials and results to nearby school
systems and rural states, and 7) the investigation of the modelistic approach
within a carefully planned documentation, assessment and evaluation effort.
Selections of the 60 project Fellows and six Senior Fellows will be based upon
detailed applications requiring expressions of teacher and school commitments to
implement project emphases. Twenty Fellows, two Senior Fellows and two
professors will study together at each of three sites (UN-Lincoln, Chadron State
College, and Hastings College), all completing a similar program of professional
development after three years which will include 6 graduate mathematics courses,
3 computer seminars and 3 dissemination seminars (24 graduate credits from UN-
Lincoln). The participants will complete a five-week intense residential
workshop each summer, rotating as a group to a different campus each summer.
Participants will be visited and observed in their classrooms and in their
workshops with their peers, and each will prepare a videotaped session to be
shared with project staff and participants. Careful documentation and analysis
of these observations and of teacher reports will provide a significant basis
for a detailed project evaluation, both by project staff and expert external
evaluators.