* 8550202
* Junior High/Middle School Life Science Program
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1986,03/31/1991
* Harold Pratt, Jefferson County Public Schools
* Continuing grant
* Patricia A. Ferguson
* 03/31/1991
* USD 680,364.00

The Jefferson County Public School System is developing a year-long junior
high/middle school program in life science which emphasizes the understanding
and care of the human body. The development will be done in close cooperation
with the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center and with the support of
local physicians and university-level scientists and science educators. The
program will provide an alternative for teachers and schools seeking materials
to improve their life science curriculum and will serve as a resource for
schools seeking to integrate health topics with their existing life science
course. A part of the program will also direct students toward an ability to
make decisions in and about their local environment. Provisions have been made
to develop a variety of materials for this portion of the course that will fit
other "local" environments, i.e., a variety of exosystems across the country. A
text integrating reading activities, laboratory activities, and student
questions along with the supporting teacher's guide will be produced. The
Jefferson County Public Schools will be joined in their effort by The NETWORK,
Inc. of Andover, Massachusetts. The role of The NETWORK is to create a strong
training and support system for the course materials, evaluate their
effectiveness, and disseminate the materials on a national basis.