* 8550948
* Reading Rainbow
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1986,07/31/1988
* Twila Liggett, Nebraskans for Public Television Inc (NPTV)
* Continuing Grant
* Paula Duckett
* 07/31/1988
* USD 400,000.00

READING RAINBOW is a 25 part PBS children's television series produced by the
Great Plains National Instructional Television Library, a part of the Nebraska
Educational Television Network. It addresses the national problem of more and
more youngsters reading less and less. This award-winning television series has
been successful in using television to stimulate children ages five through nine
to read good books. The series attracts an audience of 7.8 million children with
ratings equal to those of THE ELECTRIC COMPANY and MR. ROGERS' NEIGHBORHOOD.
Program evaluation shows equally enthusiastic responses from parents, teachers,
librarians and, most importantly, children. Support will be provided for a
series of five READING RAINBOW programs which focus on scientific themes. These
episodes will be integrated into the on-going series and build on young
children's curiosity and interest in the world as well as demonstrating to
children how science relates to all aspects of their lives. In an increasingly
technological society, children need stimulation to seek out books related to
science, reinforcing early curiosity and strengthening life-long interest in
science. Women and minorities are well represented on READING RAINBOW staff and
in the productions themselves. Great care is taken to ensure a broad
representation of people including racial and cultural groups, female and male,
senior citizens and people with varying physical disabilities. Community
outreach organizations involved include: the National PTA, American Booksellers
Association, American Library Association, National Educational Association and
the International Reading Association. In connection with the science series,
Reading Rainbow staff will involve the National Science Teachers Association and
a special public relations effort will be organized to promote READING RAINBOW
to science museums and other organizations that conduct science education
program activities for children.