* 8550917
* Establishment of a Board on Mathematical Sciences Education
* EDU,EDU
* 03/01/1986,08/31/1988
* Philip Smith, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Peirce Hammond
* 08/31/1988
* USD 580,000.00

The National Research Council, the principal operating agent of the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering, has established a
36-member Board of Mathematical Sciences Education (MSEB). Its primary purpose
is to provide a continuing national assessment capability for mathematical
sciences education at all levels. The Board will provide leadership, service,
and coordination through a variety of work products focussed on issues affecting
the quality of instruction in the mathematical sciences. The conception of the
MSEB has evolved through a broad base of input from the mathematics and
mathematics education communities. Emanating from two national conferences on
precollege mathematics education, the Conference Board of Mathematical Sciences
endorsed the recommendation of its specially convened task force which urged the
establishment of such a board at the National Research Council. The MSEB will
function with an anticipated outreach extending to the state and local levels
throughout the nation. Its activities will be conducted through issue-oriented
task forces that will report to the Board. The membership is broadly
representative to bring perspectives of classroom teachers, local and state
school authorities, educational administrators and supervisors, local, state and
federal governmental officials, college and university faculties, leaders of
professional mathematics and education associations, parents, and employers. An
Executive Committee of the Board, chaired by Dr. Shirley A. Hill, will help to
guide the overall efforts. Appointments, reports, and other Activities of the
Board will follow the procedures of the National Research Council. The purpose
of this National Science Foundation grant is to provide initial support for
activities in two targetted problem areas, "Framework and Alternative Models for
School Mathematics Curricula" and "Study of the Impact of Testing on Mathematics
Education K-14." Special committees and panels will be operationalized to
prepare concept papers and to design study procedures, to conduct open forums
and surveys, and to return specified deliverables. It is expected that each of
these problem areas will receive continued attention during the second year of
anticipated support. In addition it is expected that a third domain of activity,
"In-service Teacher Development", will receive attention and support.