* 8550386
* Life Lab Elementary Science Program:  Curriculum Developmentand Field-Testing
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1986,05/31/1989
* Ronald Henderson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Patricia A. Ferguson
* 05/31/1989
* USD 124,229.00

The activities of this project will build upon the nationally recognized Life
Lab Elementary Science Program. Project Life Lab is a garden- based,
experiential science program in which elementary students learn concepts in
biology, chemistry, physics, nutrition, earth science and mathematics. In the
Life Lab, students explore science through classroom exercises and practical
activities in the garden laboratory, and work cooperatively in solving
scientific problems and making decisions on the basis of the data they have
collected. This program began in 1978 when Green Acres Elementary School in
Santa Cruz, California, built a small greenhouse on its grounds. Though the
greenhouse was intended for recreational purposes, teachers soon found that
their students were learning science from their gardening work, and enjoying it
thoroughly. Over the next five years, teachers, administrators and community
members developed the greenhouse project into Project Life Lab, a multi-
disciplinary science program. Life Lab lessons integrate concept learning and
practical applications in ways that demonstrate to students that science relates
to everyday life. This project will continue development of curricular
materials, initiate development of assessment instruments, identify essential
conditions for successful adoption of the program, and define an organizational
framework for elementary science education.