* 8550162
* UCD/Northern California Science Project for Pre-College     Secondary Honors Teachers of Physical Science
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1986,04/30/1989
* Wendell Potter, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 04/30/1989
* USD 324,048.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences for 40 exemplary secondary school physical science
teachers from 15 counties throughout central and northern California. The
overall goals of the multiyear project involve the updating and deepening of the
participants' physical science backgrounds and teaching methodologies, the
networking of the participants and university science faculty, the conduct of
in-service workshops by the participants in their home schools, appropriate
recognition for honors teacher participants, the dissemination of the project
materials and results to nearby school systems, and the investigation of the
modelistic approach within a carefully planned documentation, assessment and
evaluation effort. Selections of participants by a faculty and school committee
will be based upon detailed applications requiring expressions of teacher and
school commitments to implement project emphases. Working with university
scientists, a full-time science curriculum specialist and four mentor teachers,
the participants will complete a three-week summer workshop and monthly day-long
meetings designed to increase their conceptual understanding of physical
sciences, to develop strategies and materials for teaching thorough
understanding of fundamental concepts and principles, and to develop materials
and techniques for use in their presentation of in-service workshops.
Participants will earn academic credits from the University of California,
Davis. During the in-service workshops which the participants will design and
conduct, the science curriculum specialist and other project staff will be
available for consultation and support. Participants will be visited and
observed in their classrooms and in their workshops with their peers. Careful
documentation and analysis of these observations and of teacher reports will
provide a significant basis for a detailed project evaluation.