* 8550085
* A Longitudinal Study of the Development of Adolescent and   Young Adult Attitudes Toward and Knowledge about Science    and Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1986,03/31/1993
* Jon Miller, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 03/31/1993
* USD 4,355,724.00

The middle-school and high-school years are a period of change and
crystalization in terms of life goals, disciplinary and course preferences, and
social and political attitudes. The literature provides a number of cross-
sectional descriptions and models concerning cognitive and attitudinal
development during adolescence and young adulthood, but there are no
longitudinal data available to study these processes. The proposed longitudinal
study will examine the (1) development of interest in science and mathematics,
(2) the growth of scientific literacy, (3) the development of attentiveness to
science and technology issues, and (4) the attraction to careers in science and
engineering among two national cohorts of adolescents and young adults. One
cohort will begin with a national sample of 3,000 seventh graders and follow
them through the 10th grade. The second cohort will begin with a national sample
of 3,000 10th graders and follow them for the next four years through the first
full year after high school. Data will be collected from students, teachers,
counselors, principals, and parents. A purposive sample of two or three school
districts with exemplary elementary school science and mathematics education
programs will be selected and comparable data will be collected in these
districts. The analysis will consist of a series of expanding multivariate
developmental models that will seek to understand cognitive and attitudinal
growth and change in the context of family, school, and peer influences. Each
wave of data collection will provide an opportunity to examine cognitive and
attitudinal change measures in an increasingly rich context of previous
measures. Periodic reports will be issued with each cycle of data collection and
the data will be made available to other scholars on a timely basis. The first
phase of the project, being funded at this time, provides approximately 15
months for instrument development and pilot testing, for sample selection, for
monitor selection and training, and for working with the research advisory
committee.