* 8550976
* Meeting Teachers - Mathematical Needs in the Modern         Technology:  A Mathematics Recruitment/Recertification      Program (MTRRP)
* EDU,EDU
* 09/01/1986,08/31/1989
* Bessie Tucker, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1989
* USD 264,532.00

This project will upgrade the mathematics skills and teaching techniques of
teachers of grades K through 6. The project consists of courses and activities
offered at two levels. Level I courses and activities are offered for teachers
from grades K-3 and Level II courses and activities for teachers from grades
4-6. Twenty different participants will be selected for each of these two levels
during both 1986-87 and 1987-88. Participants will be selected from within a
50-mile radius of Jackson State University. The program for each level will
consist of both academic-year workshops and a summer workshop. The academic-year
component will consist of twelve evening sessions each semester and nine
Saturday sessions. During the evening sessions the participants will work with
course content and methodology. During the Saturday meetings the participants
will discuss and share ideas regarding methods employed to effectively implement
their experiences. Experts in the areas of teaching techniques and computer and
calculator use, will be invited as guest lecturers. Principals and
superintendents will be invited to attend the Saturday sessions. During the
summer workshop, teachers will work one-on-one with elementary school students.
Emphasis will be placed on recognizing individual differences and adapting
teaching methods to such differences, on relating to learners with different
interests and backgrounds, and on planning and using a variety of teaching
methods.