* 8550514
* To Train Prospective Master Teachers in Middle School Mathe-matics Using a Problem Solving Format
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/1986,08/31/1988
* John Creswell, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 08/31/1988
* USD 278,133.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences for 30 exemplary middle school mathematics teachers from
the Houston, Texas area. The overall goals of the multiyear project involve the
updating and deepening of the participants' mathematical backgrounds and
teaching methodology, the networking of the participants, the conduct of in-
service workshops by the participants in their home schools, the dissemination
of the project materials and results to nearby school systems, and the
investigation of the modelistic approach within a carefully planned
documentation, assessment and evaluation effort. Working under the assumption
that leadership potential involves special characteristics, the project team and
Advisory Board, which consists of representatives for 10 cooperating school
districts, will engage in a thorough selection process. Documentation of the
individual participant's entering characteristics and the competencies developed
through project activities will contribute to the overall project evaluation.
Participants will complete four special mathematics courses designed to
encompass the CUPM recommendations for junior high school teachers, earning 12
graduate semester credits for the University of Houston. They will study with
university faculty chosen for their excellence in teaching teachers. Mathematics
studies will include ideas from mathematical problem solving, probability and
statistics, history of mathematics, abstract algebra, number theory, and
geometry. Participants will also complete 15 graduate semester hours of studies
related to the pedagogy of middle school mathematics. Uses of microcomputers,
diagnosis and remediation, and problem-solving strategies will be featured.
During the in-service workshops which the participants will design and conduct,
project staff will be available for consultation and support. Participants will
be visited, observed, and videotaped in their classrooms and in their workshops
with their peers. Careful documentation and analysis of these observations and
recordings will provide a significant basis for a detailed project evaluation.