* 8550066
* Using Computers and Problem Solving to Improve Instruction  in Secondary School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1985,04/30/1989
* Robert Pendergrass, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 04/30/1989
* USD 191,637.00

Southern Illinois University (SIU) has put together an interesting three-part
project to strengthen mathematics education within the University and the
greater St. Louis areas. It will offer 32 teachers of secondary school
mathematics the following: (1) the opportunity to participate in a 6-week summer
session which will emphasize problem solving and the appropriate use of the
computer in mathematics education, (2) the necessary guidance to develop useful
classroom materials for the teaching of mathematics and computer science, and
(3) the resources of the University in establishing a support network through
the creation of a mathematics resource center. Participants will have a
sufficiently good background in mathematics. At least two, but no more than
four, will be selected from a single school to insure peer support in the school
setting. TenCo, a 10 county microcomputer consortium, has not only expressed
support for this project, but has agreed to make its very large library of
computer software available to the University and participants of the program.
Biweekly group meetings, patterned after the very successful meetings of the
elementary school Teachers' Center Project at SIU will be held during the
academic year for the purposes of exchanging information and feedback on
materials and their use. Seminars will be held at both campuses of SIU, at
Edwardsville and East St. Louis, to insure continued involvement of minority
teachers. These meetings will serve as the basis of a local teacher "network."
Group activities will include programs of interest to University faculty,
participants, and their colleagues.