* 8550900
* Integrating Mathematics Programs and Computer Technology    (The IMPACT Project)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1986,05/31/1990
* Daniel Dolan, Montana Council of Teachers of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Ivo Lindauer
* 05/31/1990
* USD 362,475.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences for 30 Montana mathematics teachers, grades 7-12, who
will be selected on the basis of geographic distribution and leadership ability
to become regional mathematics teachers and present workshops throughout the
state. The IMPACT project's main goal is to develop a leadership program for
mathematics teachers (7-12) that will result in a comprehensive statewide in-
service program for mathematics teachers in these grades. Two two-year summer
institutes featuring mathematics content and the use of computers as a regular
component of the mathematics curriculum will be conducted. A carefully selected
set of computer software specifically related to those topics ordinarily found
in the 7-12 mathematics curriculum will be evaluated and organized for classroom
use. Thirty teachers will be trained and 30 new teachers will be added the
second year. These qualified leaders have the potential to impact 5000-8000
workshop participants over a five year period, thereby covering most of the
state. This program will provide an opportunity for teachers who are expected to
teach all 7-12 mathematics to learn about and use software at both the junior
and senior high school levels. It has a wide cross-section of involvement
including the private sector, the Office of Public Instruction, local schools,
the State University system, and professional organizations.