* 8550479
* Building a Resource Network to Serve Colorado's Front Range Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1986,10/31/1989
* Manert Kennedy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Phillips, Natl. Biosystems, Inc.
* 10/31/1989
* USD 232,518.00

The Colorado Alliance for Science is a consortium of schools, school districts,
businesses, industries, institutions of higher education, professional
societies, research laboratories, state agencies, and community groups working
collaboratively to improve precollege science education in Colorado. The
Colorado Alliance is seeking to establish a resource-sharing network in science
education aimed toward initiation and maintenance of high-quality science
programs in schools. The approach used will involve: -the school principal
working with teachers in a school to develop a high-quality science program in
accordance with assessed needs of that school. -sponsors from industry and from
higher education working with teams and helping them locate resources and solve
problems. The project will have five phases: organizations; recruitment and
participant selection; planning and exploration; information-gathering and
resource development; leadership. New sets of school teams will proceed through
these phases starting at the beginning of each year. The project will be started
in four schools; six new schools will start the phases in Year II; 11 new
schools will join the network and start the phases in Year III. By the end of
three "cycles," each of the 19 schools in the Weld County created a high-quality
science program uniquely suited to its needs. Teams that start the project in
the first cycle will be asked to help guide new teams that enter during cycle
teams.