* 8550892
* Metropolitan Kansas City/Elementary Science Specialist
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1986,02/28/1990
* Larry DeBuhr, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 02/28/1990
* USD 248,119.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide professional development for 90
leadership teachers who will become a cadre of Elementary Science Specialists
over a period of three years. They will provide leadership for the improvement
of elementary science education throughout metropolitan Kansas City, a bistate
metropolitan area with 12 cooperating school districts at this time. The
proposal is the product of a sustained, cooperative planning effort that has
spanned more than one year. The project will include working with classroom
teachers and with principals to enhance the quality and quantity of science
education in elementary schools. The program features an innovative course of
study integrating science content with instruction that is appropriate for
elementary school classrooms. It includes workshops for principals, supervised
internships in schools, and in-service activities conducted by the leadership
teachers throughout the participating school districts. The program involves
considerable support, planning, and cost-sharing from the cooperating school
districts. This cooperation provides some unique opportunities to involve a
variety of community institutions including the Kansas City Zoo, The National
Energy Foundation, and the Science Pioneers. Careful evaluation is planned that
will provide important feedback to the project directors, to the cooperating
school districts, and to the teachers involved. This model for teacher
enhancement may also serve as a prototype for the development of more
appropriate approaches to the science preparation of preservice elementary
teachers at the University of Missouri, Kansas City.