* 8552396
* Wisconsin Science Education Service Center
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1986,05/31/1990
* Kenneth Dowling, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 05/31/1990
* USD 938,595.00

The Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System is embarking on a
comprehensive plan for the in-service education of teachers of elementary,
middle, and high school through the establishment of Science Education Service
Centers at three campuses of the University of Wisconsin. The Wisconsin
Department of Public Instruction will cooperate to develop a network of these
model science education service centers that will be designed to meet the
diverse needs of science teachers from all parts of the state. The three initial
center sites chosen represent different population profiles: (1) an urban
corridor where the minority population is highest, (2) a medium sized cities
area that has both an agricultural and industrial dependence with the highest
concentration of native Americans in the state, and (3) a low-density population
mostly dependent on agriculture which has attracted a large concentration of
Hmong immigrants. In the first year, the University of Wisconsin (UW)-Green Bay
and UW- Milwaukee Centers will provide in-service courses and activities for 75
high school teachers and 40 middle school teachers, respectively. In the second
year, the UW-LaCrosse Center will begin operating--along with the continuation
of the other two Centers--for the benefit of 50 elementary school teachers. All
three Centers will continue to operate at this level in years three and four.
Programs at each of the sites include appropriate content courses, laboratory-
based activities, and a structured follow-up schedule insuring support for these
participating teachers. A network of representatives from these three sites as
well as from other UW campuses will function as an advisory committee to this
project. This network will also serve as an initiator for similar Centers at
additional campus sites throughout the state.