* 8552376
* Regional Energy Workshops to Update Middle School and       Junior High Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1986,09/30/1988
* Marily DeWall, National Science Teaching Association
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/1988
* USD 260,282.00

This Leadership Activities project for MS/JHS teachers involves the
collaborative efforts of eight electrical utility companies, the National
Science Teachers Association, and the National Science Foundation. It will
provide a two-week summer workshop for 80 middle school/junior high school
teachers at 8 regional centers serviced by the participating electrical utility
companies (10 teachers/site), geographically distributed throughout the U.S. A
regional committee of science educators will select the participants based upon
a formal application and commitment of supervisory personnel in applicant school
districts to support participants in follow-up efforts of curriculum
implementation and in-service activities. In the proposed second year of the
project the numbers of teachers will increase to 120 distributed among 12
regional centers serviced by electrical utility companies. Workshops will be
staffed by appropriate utility company staff, local college and university
professors, and environmentalists. A master teacher will be retained at each
site to assist participants in developing classroom activities and appropriate
in-service programs. Follow-up support will be available to participants from
the workshop staffs. The overall goals of the project focus on increasing the
knowledge of the participating teachers in the areas of the science and
technology involved in electrical energy production, including the societal,
economic and environmental impacts of that production; the translation of that
knowledge into appropriate activities for middle and junior high school
classrooms; and the communication of that knowledge to colleagues of
participants in their schools through in-servics activities. The classroom
activities developed will be piloted in classrooms, revised, edited and
published so that all participants will share in the benefits of the collective
efforts. National energy education resource guides and curriculum efforts will
also be made available to the participating teachers.