* 8554596
* Leadership Development of Physics Teaching Resource Agents
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1986,06/28/1988
* Jack Wilson, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 06/28/1988
* USD 437,840.00

This grant provides support for continuation and further development of a
program of the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) which developed a
nationwide cadre of Physics Teaching Resource Agents. Project staff will again
recruit outstanding high school physics teachers whose classroom practice has
been judged to be exemplary and effective. Subsequently, these resource teachers
will participate in a series of workshops dealing with strategy, techniques,
content, and technological innovation which have been tested and validated by
the AAPT. The participants will also develop skills in conducting their own
workshops for colleagues in their own regions of the United States. The AAPT
will provide follow-up support for the local workshops with resource personnel,
limited amounts of funding and materials, and the loan of laboratory equipment
and computers. It is anticipated that approximately 100 physics resource
teachers will participate in the workshops, each reaching out to approximately
60 more teachers. Thus, the workshop may ultimately influence approximately
6,000 teachers. In 1985, 100 teachers participated in the program and by March
15, 1986, 203 workshops involving 3,370 participants had been conducted with
additional workshops planned for the spring of that year. Three national
meetings of the Physics Resource Teachers are planned. Attendance at two of
these meetings will be supported by the National Science Foundation while
support to attend the third meeting will energetically be sought by AAPT project
staff from external sources. Participants have been quite effective in their
first year in acquiring external support, and these efforts will continue to be
promoted. It is anticipated that this program can become self-sustaining.