* 8554433
* MATHCAPS: Mathematics Consortium for Applications and       Problem Solving Project
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1986,08/31/1990
* Katie Dunn, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1990
* USD 851,600.00

This Leadership project will provide enhancement and professional development
experiences for 150 exemplary mathematics teachers and up to 450 of their peers
from the eastern Tennessee area. The overall goals of the multiyear project
involve the updating and deepening of the participants' mathematical backgrounds
and teaching methodology, the networking of the 540 participants, the conduct of
frequent in-service helping and sharing sessions by the participants in their
schools, the dissemination of the project materials and results, and the
investigation of the modelistic approach within a carefully planned
documentation, assessment, and evaluation effort. The MATHCAPS consortium of
teachers and administrators of area schools, faculty, and administrators of
colleges and universities, state-level educators and officials, scientists from
a Federal research laboratory, and leaders from business and industry provides
the strategic approach and financial base for institutionalizing the project. In
the first phase 30 middle school leader teachers will participate in an 8-week
summer workshop, academic year meetings, and a 5-week summer workshop. The 150
peers will visit each summer workshop in order to build their project
involvements. The mathematical education goals, contents and methods of the
project have been conceptualized through advice from teachers, supervisors,
mathematics teacher educators and researchers, and evaluation experts. Selection
procedures are thorough, involving specific commitments of time and effort by
leader teachers, peer teachers, and their principals. Treatments of major
mathematical curricular areas will be provided through Visiting Scholars
selected for their expertise from research and teaching experience. Frequent and
meaningful academic year follow-up will be completed by project staff and all
teachers. Significant materials will be produced, utilized and refined by the
staff and the teachers, including videotape protocols of outstanding teaching
and in-service modules for use by other leader-peer teams of teachers. All
aspects of the model will be documented and assessed.