* 8554430
* Enhancing Interactive Teaching and Learning in the Pre-     college Classroom, 1986
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1986,11/30/1987
* William Lippincott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 11/30/1987
* USD 932,968.00

To continue its efforts in initiating and conducting programs to strengthen
science education, particularly chemical education, at all precollege levels,
the Institute for Chemical Education is offering a series of programs for
teachers during the summer of 1986. Different programs are offered to elementary
and middle school teachers of science and high school teachers of chemistry:
(A)Chemistry Update is a six-week content mastery program for chemistry
teachers. (B)Chemical Supplements for Pre-High School Classes is open to
elementary, middle, and high school teachers for two weeks. (E)Chemical
Instrumentation Update, for well-prepared high school teachers is offered for
two weeks. (F)Chemistry Can Be Fun Camp includes several one-week programs for
middle-school students. Participants in Programs A and, in particular, Program B
will work with the students in Program F and be provided the opportunity to work
directly with young students in the chemistry laboratory. The University of
Wisconsin-Madison will run all the programs, the University of California-
Berkeley will run programs A, and E, the University of Arizona will run programs
B, E, and F, and the University of Maryland will run programs A, B, and F. Three
hundred and sixty teachers from all parts of the United States will have an
opportunity to participate in the multi-faceted project. Participants will be
given a thorough content update, strategies for implementing more effective
science education, and training to help them in-service their colleagues upon
their return to their home schools. The multiplier effect is built into this
project as school systems are asked to take responsibility for partial support
of their teachers and to commit themselves to the outreach component of the
project.