* 0300235
* GOALI: NanoEngineering of Magnetic Interfaces for SpinElectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Boris Sinkovic, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 06/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Spin electronics is quickly becoming one of the new frontiers of 21st century
electronics. The central theme of this new technology is spin dependent
transport. One of the major current efforts is the development of materials with
very high (100%) degree of spin polarization for high performance spin-
electronics devices. Although a significant progress has been recently made in
showing that some transition metal oxides and some Hoysler alloys do exhibit a
high degree of spin polarization, the use of such material in room temperature
spin-electronics devices like magnetic tunneling junction (MTJ) have yielded
disappointing small effects. These results have reinforced the idea that the
performance of such devices is critically dependent on the spin-polarization at
the interfaces rather than in the bulk phase of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: We propose to launch a
concentrated effort to understand and to nanoengineer the magnetic interfaces
for spin electronics application though a GOALI collaboration between University
of Connecticut (UConn) and IBM. In particular we propose to directly measure the
electron spin polarization of electrons at the Fermi level by spin resolved
photoemission technique. The interface properties will be accessed by growth of
ultra-thin oxide and other tunneling barrier materials on top of the relevant
ferromagnetic films, which will be facilitated by short photoelectron escape
depth, being on the order of the barrier thickness. We propose to lunch a
systematic study of such structures fabricated mainly by S. S. P. Parkin
(IBM/Almaden) and Scott Chambers (PNNL). The spin-resolved experiments will be
performed PI's laboratory at UConn as well as at the U5UA beamline of the
National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS). Combination of PI's expertise in spin-
resolved photoemission with the expertise of participating laboratory in films
synthesis will provide unique synergy for the proposed task. The program is
expected to make significant contribution to understanding and nanoengineering
of optimum interfaces for MTJ application. Previous successful collaboration
between PI and Co-PI (S.S.P. Parkin) should aid in strong interaction between
the university and the industrial partner in this GOALI
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This program will contribute to
the future progress of the emerging spin-electronic technology by providing
invaluable information on the spin polarization at relevant magnetic interfaces.
Close collaboration between the university (UConn), the industry (IBM) and the
national labs (PNNL and NSLS) will provide an excellent setting for education
and training of graduate students in cutting-edge technology. In particular,
close ties with IBM though this GOALI initiative will provide students with
first-hand experience on the development of novel electronic technologies . The
outreach will include participation of undergraduate students in summer research
projects supported through NSF-funded REU program at UConn. Live lab
demonstrations and tutorials will be given to groups of K-12 students during
organized visits to UConn. The local K-12 science teachers already participating
in workshops at UConn. will be given tutorials of how the proposed research
impacts the development of new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;