* 0300529
* Randomness and Quasi-randomness of Graphs and Set Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Vojtech Rodl, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2009
* USD 354,980.00

Abstract for award of Rodl 0300529&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
aims at deepening our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;spontaneous order (studied in
Ramsey theory) and of random disorder&lt;br/&gt;(investigated by quasi-random
techniques). One of its goals is to&lt;br/&gt;design efficient methods for
finding and enumerating collections of&lt;br/&gt;specified sub-objects in
discrete structures. The project seeks&lt;br/&gt;further development of a
methodology - the Regularity Method - that&lt;br/&gt;has had a series of
striking successes over the past 25 years, and to&lt;br/&gt;apply the method to
a variety of problems in extremal combinatorics&lt;br/&gt;and Ramsey theory. In
the area of quasi-randomness, one of the PI's&lt;br/&gt;long-term projects is to
investigate the properties of quasi-random&lt;br/&gt;sparse graphs and uniform
hypergraphs. In particular, the PI is&lt;br/&gt;interested in extending the
applicability of the Regularity Method to&lt;br/&gt;these
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of discrete, combinatorial
structures is very&lt;br/&gt;important in modern science and technology. For
instance,&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic reasoning is crucial in the design of large
networks and&lt;br/&gt;of algorithms. In discrete mathematics, one of the most
successful&lt;br/&gt;techniques is the probabilistic method, which enables one
to prove&lt;br/&gt;results about deterministic objects. One of the more
recent&lt;br/&gt;techniques employs the idea of quasi-randomness. A quasi-
random&lt;br/&gt;object is an object that shares several properties with many
other&lt;br/&gt;objects of the same kind. Quasi-random properties that enable
one &lt;br/&gt;to find and enumerate sub-objects of a given type are of
particular&lt;br/&gt;interest. The main part of this proposal aims to extend
the&lt;br/&gt;applicability of the current techniques to a broader class of
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;structures. The results should lead to applications in
different&lt;br/&gt;areas, ranging from phase transition and game theory to
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;