* 0300014
* Design, Manufacturing and Optimization of Ferroelectric Polymer Based Nanocomposite Films Using Langmuir-Blodgett Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 05/31/2006
* USD 267,335.00

Nanostructured ferroelectrics are envisioned to possess novel and superior
functional properties, yet the apparent existence of a size limit under which
perovskites lose ferroelectricity severely limits the development of
ferroelectric nanostructures. To overcome the difficulty, this project seeks to
develop novel ferroelectric polymer based nanocomposite films using Langmuir-
Blodgett (LB) deposition. The multilayer composite films will be built up by
alternating at nanoscale the ferroelectric polymer films with other dielectric
or ferroelectric layers made by various methods including standard solvent-
deposition and nanoparticle dispersion techniques. The in-plane nanostructures
will be constructed based on the formation of positive and negative nanomesa
templates in LB films, with nanoparticles screen printed onto the substrate
between the nanomesas or in the nanoholes. As such, ferroelectric nanocomposite
films with one-, two- and three-dimensional heterogeneity will be fabricated.
The fabrication will be tightly coupled with our modeling effort, where the
microstructure evolution in ferroelectric nanocomposites will be simulated by
energy-minimization approach and phase field theory, and their macroscopic
properties will be analyzed by micromechanics models. The modeling of structure-
property relationship will lead to an optimization scheme for a series of
functional properties, including electrostriction and piezoelectric effect,
pyroelectric coefficients, and dielectric tunability, which will be applied to
guide the processing and fabrication of nanostructured ferroelectric
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge derived from this research will
enable the design and optimization of ferroelectric polymer based nanocomposite
films possessing novel and unique functional properties, with direct impact on
the manufacturing of nanostructured ferroelectric devices such as microsensors
and microactuators, infrared detectors and microwave devices. The project will
provide the opportunity to two graduate students to get involved in the
interdisciplinary research dealing with the modeling, fabrication, and
characterization of nanostructured ferroelectric polymer films. It will also
draw undergraduates into science and engineering via the unique interaction
between design, manufacturing, and characterization of ferroelectric
nanocomposites through the Undergraduate Creative Activities &amp; Research
Experiences program (UCARE) at University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Results from this
research will be incroporated in the content of an active materials course
developed by the PI, which currently addreses only bulk ferroelectric behavior.
Interactive, web-based tutorials and database will also be devoped to ensure
broad dissemination of our scientific and technological finding.&lt;br/&gt;