* 0300004
* NonLinear Equations of Monge-Ampere Type
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Cristian Gutierrez, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,000.00

PI: Cristian E. Gutierrez, Temple University DMS-0300004

ABSTRACT:

This mathematical research focuses on problems for nonlinear equations of Monge-
Ampere type and represents a natural continuation of the work done by the PI
under previous grants. The problems concentrate on the study of geometric and
regularity properties of solutions to Monge-Ampere type equations. In
particular, a question proposed is about the regularity of generalized solutions
for an equation that appears in geometric optics for the synthesis of reflector
antennae. A more general Monge-Ampere type equation that will be investigated
appears naturally from mass transportation problems. We propose to develop a
theory of generalized solutions and regularity for such equations. The general
methodology that we plan to use to solve this set of problems consists of
appropriate maximum principles for non-divergence form operators related to
vector fields are of interest due to the fact that standard methods do not
apply. We proposed a new approach based on integration by parts that we proved
successful in the model example of the Heisenberg group, which appears in the
applications to a model of human vision.

Broader impacts of the proposed problems include its connections and
applications within several areas in mathematics and outside. Mass
transportation problems are concerned with the optimal transport of masses from
one location to another, where the optimality depends upon the context of the
problem. The problems appear in several forms and in various areas of
mathematics and its applications: economics, probability theory, optimization,
meteorology, and computer graphics. In economics they appear in planning
problems at the level of an industry, a region, the whole national economy as
well as the analysis of the structure of economic indices. And several different
problems such as work distribution for equipment, the best use of sowing area,
use of complex resources, distribution of transport flows, have a similar
mathematical form. The understanding of the properties of optimal maps has also
possible implications in numerical computations. The work proposed involves
collaborations with mathematicians in the US and abroad, and it will contribute
a great deal to the training of graduate students.