* 0300044
* Fast Simulation Methods for Risk Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Paul Glasserman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Computer simulation is widely used in measuring and managing risk. The objective
of this project is to develop fast simulation methods for risk management,
focusing on three specific problems: (1) estimation of value-at-risk and related
measures of the risks resulting from changes in market prices; (2) estimation of
portfolio credit risk; and (3) estimation of ruin probabilities and insurance
risk. Each of these problems poses a computational challenge at least in part
because it involves aspects of rare event simulation. This project seeks to
develop variance reduction techniques, based primarily on importance sampling,
specifically designed to address the key sources of difficulty in each case.
From a methodological perspective, the research challenge lies primarily in two
issues: (a) these applications often require developing methods suitable for
heavy-tailed distributions to which traditional rare event simulation methods
are inapplicable; (b) the models used in these applications often involve
complex dependence between sources of risk, and this too complicates the
development of variance reduction techniques. Both issues are of central
importance in practice because risk management is necessarily concerned with
tail events and with the extent to which spreading risk reduces risk.

Sound risk management is essential to the stability of the nation's financial
system. Yet firms sometimes view it as a cost of complying with regulations
rather than as a source of competitive advantage and therefore underinvest in
developing the necessary tools. Funded academic research has an important role
to play in advancing risk management methods. The US is currently a world leader
in developing quantitative methods for the financial services industry. Its
success relies primarily on its educational base and supply of highly trained
individuals. With its proximity to one of the world's major financial centers,
Columbia University is particularly well positioned to be a leader in research
and education in this area. This project is part of a network of research and
educational activities at Columbia. In addition to supporting the PIs' research
it will support doctoral students and foster research interactions with
industry.

