* 0300071
* Importance Based Visualization of Energy Networks via Progressive Simplification
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Ali Abur, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 05/31/2006
* USD 208,716.00

Large scale power networks are controlled by a small number of regional
transmission organizations&lt;br/&gt;(RTO), which collect a vast amount of data
on line and try to filter the useful information out of them. One&lt;br/&gt;way
to do this filtering is by the use of Level of Detail (LOD) representation,
which is an important tool&lt;br/&gt;for real time rendering of complex
geometric environments. This proposal develops a method to utilize&lt;br/&gt;LOD
modelling in the efficient monitoring and operation of power networks. The
intellectual merit of&lt;br/&gt;this proposal is in the observation that the LOD
representations can not only be used to visualize the power&lt;br/&gt;networks
but also be applied to their efficient analysis, modeling and optimization. This
can be accomplished&lt;br/&gt;by customization of the network reduction based on
the specific characteristics of not only the network but&lt;br/&gt;also the
study of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project will
include the reduction of transmission costs via more efficient&lt;br/&gt;power
exchanges due to the facilitation of transmission relief procedures. Graduate
and undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students will be trained in one of the critical
infrastructure areas. The results of this research will be
made&lt;br/&gt;available on the web, also through papers in journals and
conferences. Finally, the integration of the most&lt;br/&gt;recent technical
innovations in computer graphics in the monitoring of nation's energy grid will
facilitate&lt;br/&gt;much needed technology transfer between these two technical
areas.