* 0300198
* Reliability Assessment of the Serviceability Performance of Geotechnical Structures Using Neural Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Charng Juang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2008
* USD 309,310.00

In this research project the feasibility of integrating finite element method
and neural network technologies in a reliability-based framework for assessing
serviceability reliability of geotechnical structures such as braced excavation
systems is explored. A deep braced excavation in an urban area is a complex
construction operation that often causes unacceptable ground movement and damage
to adjacent buildings. Reliability assessment of potential ground displacement
and damage to adjacent buildings aids in the safe design and construction of
such geotechnical structures. The framework and procedures for conducting
reliability assessment are established based on the results of reliability
analyses. Provisions for reliability updating using field monitoring/measurement
data are also established.

Intellectually, this research may lead to a significantly improved method for
design and construction of deep braced excavations that is both sound and safe
for the environment. The developed methodology, which integrates the finite
element method, neural networks, and the observational method into a
reliability-based framework, is considered innovative. This methodology, if
successfully developed, represents a significant breakthrough in assessing
reliability of complex geotechnical structures.

The broader impacts of the proposed research are also significant. First, this
research is likely to result in an improved method for design and construction
of deep braced excavation that is both sound and safe for the environment. The
results of the research may be adopted by the engineering community, and thus,
contribute in a significant way to protecting the public and their properties.
Second, the results of the research will be disseminated broadly through a
number of ways. Technology transfer, which is emphasized in this project, is an
important element in the overall objective of integrating research and
education. Third, the proposed research will enhance the infrastructure for
research at Clemson University through its strong national and international
collaboration. Fourth, the proposed research will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in a significant way, by participation of a female
engineering faculty from an undergraduate institution through a subcontract and
a female postdoctoral research assistant at Clemson University, and by
recruiting and mentoring graduate and undergraduate assistants from
underrepresented groups. Fifth and lastly, but equally important, the proposed
research will advance the state of knowledge while promoting teaching, training,
and learning by incorporating various activities that contribute to the overall
objective of research and education integration.