* 0300359
* Planning, Coordination, and Control of Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Caramanis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 362,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective of the
proposed work is to develop methodology that enables a practical and effective
framework for decentralized, yet coordinated, management and control of supply
chains. To that end, it is proposed to address a host of key challenges: (i)
model lead-times dynamically; (ii) provide Quality-of-Service (QoS) guarantees
to supply chain customers; (iii) model uncertainty accurately by adopting demand
and capacity stochastic models that capture strong temporal dependencies
inherent in these processes; and (iv) employ efficient resource allocation in
order to manage congestion. To meet these objectives the proposed work will draw
upon stochastic system theory, simulation, dynamic optimization, and optimal
control. To deal with computational complexities it is planned to exploit the
time scale decomposition among decisions with different scope and functionality,
and employ analytical approximations to estimate complex quantities of interest
(e.g., large deviations techniques). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will contribute to information and production systems engineering, and
their potential to enable significant productivity growth in the manufacturing
and distribution industries. It will lead to supply chains with significantly
reduced lead-times that employ inventory control algorithms able to guarantee
desirable service levels and minimize expected inventory costs. Moreover, the
research will make contributions to the scheduling and routing in stochastic
processing networks, leading to more streamlined operations at the various
stages of the supply chain. The proposed work will also: (i) contribute to the
training of graduate students and the enhancement of the graduate curriculum in
Manufacturing Engineering at Boston University (BU); and (ii) leverage an NSF
science ambassador award to BU to reach out to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, and in addition to the usual means of
disseminating the outcomes of the proposed work (publications, presentations at
conferences, invited lectures, etc.), the PIs plan to use their association with
the recently established BU Center for Information and Systems Engineering
(CISE) to work with affiliated companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;