* 0300293
* GOALI:     Understanding Laser and Electron Beam Chemical Vapor Deposition Processes from Macro to Nanoscales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Larry Fehrenbacher, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 01/31/2007
* USD 167,996.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project is to build an electron beam chemical vapor deposition system
and determine its feasibility for the fabrication of nanoscale materials and
devices. An electron beam has been shown to interact with chemicals that are
adsorbed onto the surface of a solid substrate causing a chemical reaction(s)
that leads to the deposition of a solid metal or ceramic onto the substrate. By
moving the beam relative to the substrate, 3-D structures and devices can be
fabricated. Since electron beams can be focused to spot sizes on the order of 1
nm, it should be possible to fabricate nanoscale devices. The aim will be to
determine how a commercially available electron microscope could be modified in
order to develop a reliable, yet versatile, electron beam chemical vapor
deposition (EB-CVD) system. Following this design task, the equipment will be
procured and further modified to permit EB-CVD experiments. The experiments will
permit determining the feasibility of the proposed EB-CVD process for the
deposition of silicon and for the fabrication of nanoscale structures. The
experiments will also permit developing an understanding of the mechanisms by
which the electron beam interacts with the adsorbed chemical(s) to form metal
and ceramic deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deposition with an electron beam
offers a new energy efficient manufacturing technique truly applicable at the
nano-level. In-situ examination of deposit nucleation and growth will greatly
enhance the understanding of these phenomena which are critical to control of
deposit geometry and properties. Since EB-CVD is applicable to a wide range of
metals and ceramics, the research will impact synthesis of critical materials
for current and future devices, sensors, and structures in areas as diverse as
electronics/photonics, MEMS, nanotechnology, and high temperature materials.
Interaction with industrial partners will permit development of a commercial EB-
CVD system that is appropriate for both research and manufacturing. The system
to be built at Georgia Tech will facilitate training of undergraduate and
graduate students, including underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;