* 0300526
* Scalable, Cellular Architectures, for Improving Solutions With Experience, in Combinatorially Complex Optimization Problems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Donald Wunsch, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2006
* USD 210,000.00

Scalable Cellular Architectures for Improving Solutions with Experience
in&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorially Complex Optimization
Problems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the general task of
solving optimization problems where the criterion to be optimized is a very
complicated, nonconvex function of the choices available to the user. As a
testbed example, it will focus on the classic Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
for which many practical applications and benchmarks are available. General-
purpose learning systems have never been able to perform as well as ad hoc,
problem-specific methods here; however, by using new learning approaches, this
PI has already achieved results much better than previous efforts of that type.
In this project, he plans to go further, by using more sophisticated neural
network designs motivated by recent work in intelligent control and
reinforcement learning. Better tools for learning-based optimization will be
important in the long-term as part of learning-based brain-like systems to make
decisions over time and to manage&lt;br/&gt;complex network
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also include collaboration with
K-12 and EPSCOR institutions, and will generate capstone engineering projects
for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;