* 0300609
* RUI: Coherent And Coincident Gravitational Wave Searches With LIGO And Other Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2006
* John Whelan, Loyola University New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 179,278.00

Gravitational wave physics is in a historically significant phase at the moment:
sensitive gravitational wave detectors such as LIGO inspire us with the prospect
of for the first direct detection of gravitational waves, before the decade is
out. Analysis of increasingly frequent gravitational wave observations in the
period to follow will provide an entirely new source of astrophysical and
cosmological information, supplementing the range of information available from
different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum and from cosmic ray and neutrino
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will develop and
implement gravitational wave data analysis, with the unifying theme of analyzing
data from different detectors either coherently (with multiple data streams
analyzed as a whole) or in coincidence (with each detector's data analyzed
separately and then conclusions drawn based on the combination of the results
from the different detectors). The research will focus on data from the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) sites in Livingston, LA
(LLO) and Hanford, WA (LHO) and the ALLEGRO resonant bar detector in Baton
Rouge, LA. The primary focus of the research is on a particular coherent
analysis, the search for a stochastic (random) background of gravitational waves
akin to the electromagnetic Cosmic Microwave&lt;br/&gt;Background.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad impact on the educational
environment at Loyola University New Orleans, a primarily undergraduate
university in Louisiana. It will do this directly by incorporating students into
the project as research assistants, and also by allowing the PI, as tenure-track
faculty member, to remain active in groundbreaking research.&lt;br/&gt;