* 0300125
* Reliability of MEMS in Liquid Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Susan Mantell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MEMS that interact with liquids are of great
interest in the biomedical, pharmaceutical, chemical, consumer product and
defense industries. MEMS operation in liquid environments is particularly
challenging because (1) significant driving forces are required to displace the
potentially large 'added mass' of fluid and (2) liquid viscosities damp
oscillatory motion. Also, chemical interaction between the liquid and MEMS
materials may lead to structural or electrical failure. For MEMS immersed in
flowing liquids, particles and bubbles may alter the device performance.
Consistent and predictable operation throughout the device lifetime
(reliability) is critical for commercializing MEMS. &lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of the proposed study is to investigate and understand the effects of
liquids and particle- or bubble-laden liquids on microdevice short- and long-
term performance. A second objective is to demonstrate effective designs and
design limitations for reliable performance in liquids. To achieve these goals,
the performance of oscillating micro-cantilever beams will be studied in liquid-
filled cavities and in flowing liquids. The beams will be constructed using
typical MEMS structural film materials and electrically insulating coatings. The
devices will be oscillated at their resonant frequency for up to 1010 cycles,
and any changes in performance will be noted. To isolate loss in performance
caused by structural failures from shorting failures, the effects of both
nonconducting and conducting liquid environments will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;The
study will incorporate experiments designed to quantify both structural and
fluid motion. In transparent liquids, beam resonant frequency, quality factor,
and displacement will be measured by laser vibrometry. Sensing elements integral
to the beams will be used to monitor resonant frequency in opaque, particle-
laden or bubbly liquids. The particle and bubble motion in flowing liquid
environments will be visualized through a microscope and recorded with a high-
resolution digital camera. Image processing will be used to determine liquid
velocity variations as well as particle and bubble velocities. Experimental
results will be compared with existing reliability studies in gaseous
environments to determine commonalities and differences in the factors affecting
device performance. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This is the first known
investigation of reliability for MEMS devices operating in liquid environments.
Since such devices are extremely desirable (and already under development) in a
variety of industries, the experimental data and analysis will be useful to
engineers in many applications. The results of this basic study can be
generalized to practical guidelines for MEMS structural materials and coatings
to ensure reliable, long-term operation in various liquid environments. The
proposed study will draw on the interdisciplinary expertise of the P.I.'s to
develop these guidelines. &lt;br/&gt;Broad impact: The significance of the
proposed work to industry is described above. Two Ph.D. students will be funded
by this project. Also, undergraduate researchers and high school physics
teachers will perform and participate in short-term investigations during the
summers. The teachers are expected to bring their experiences with cutting edge
measurement techniques and engineering applications back to the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;