* 0300209
* GOALI:  Si-doped Co/Pd Multilayers on ITO Seedlayers for Perpendicular Magnetic Recording Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Hal Rosen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 03/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal describes research and outreach involving a complementary team of
experimentalist, theorist, and industry liaison. The goal is to find a magnetic
medium that can reach the full potential of perpendicular recording and generate
opportunity for even higher density approaches such as heat-assisted magnetic
recording. For this purpose, this work proposes research on Co/Pd based
multilayer media, owing to their high interface-induced perpendicular
anisotropy, high coercivity and high squareness. Currently, industry focuses on
alloy based materials due to their lower noise; however, the multilayers appear
to offer the best chance of reaching extremely high density magnetic recording
with good thermal stability. Dissemination of the research experience and the
results of the research is another important aspect of this work. Both
undergraduates and graduate students will be involved in this media research,
and, through an REU program currently in place, local science teachers will have
the opportunity to be involved during their summer break. In line with IBM
expectations, time and budget allocations have been made to visit IBM both to
allow the PIs to better understand IBM testing results and to give IBM updates
on the current progress and directions. Disks of our media will be made
available to other companies as well: historically many companies have requested
materials from the PIs and, in at least three cases, returned detailed results
of their tests. Frequent visits to other industrial organizations by the PIs
will be continued, where they will report the results of this research. All of
this should greatly aid technology transfer. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Research&lt;br/&gt; The microstructure of Co/Pd multilayers, namely
grain size and magnetic separation between the grains, is extremely important in
reducing noise and achieving high recording densities. The proposed work will
use seedlayers and doping to control the microstructure, and therefore the
magnetic properties of the multilayers. In this study, 0-2nm of InSn alloys,
with altering degrees of oxygen content will be grown under varied experimental
conditions to determine the optimal crystal structure for seeding Co/Pd media.
Preliminary studies suggest that this will increase coercivity, relative to
alternate seed layers, without the grain-enlarging necessity of high temperature
deposition. The purpose of a dopant in these multilayers is two-fold. First, a
dopant that migrates to the grain boundary inhibits grain growth and, second, it
helps ensure a nonmagnetic grain boundary. In the proposed work, Si will be
closely examined owing to its theoretical segregation from Co and Pd.&lt;br/&gt;
The theoretical investigations will include interpretation of experimental data
and suggestion of new material approaches. Theory will play a particularly
prominent role in selecting the best disks for the industrial partner (IBM) to
finish and test on a spin stand, and in interpreting the ensuing data. New
material approaches or, as is more likely, modification of the proposed ones to
further improve performance will also stem directly from this theoretical work.
Particular effort will be made to isolate the effects of Si from the interface
and to consider alternate dopants such as Ge. &lt;br/&gt;