* 0300497
* GOALI: Dynamic Switching of Perpendicular Magnetic Nanostructures and Patterned Recording Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Ronald Indeck, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 05/31/2006
* USD 372,000.00

Conventional magnetic recording paradigms are approaching challenges that will
likely require significant shifts in recording technologies. Magnetodynamics is
the most critical aspect we face when designing advanced recording systems. As
the size of the recording bits shrink to allow more data stored per area, the
signal levels and thermal stability decrease approaching levels for which no
known solution is available. In addition to the long term thermal stability,
writing speeds appear to be reaching fundamental dynamic limits. Successful
development of new technologies will be hampered without further understanding
of magnetodynamics as applied to recording technologies.

Patterned film media for signal definition, stability, and tracking is gaining
acceptance as a viable recording scheme, especially with the recent advances in
imprint lithography. Switching of media for recording applications, whether
continuous, patterned, or particulate, is not fully understood. This knowledge
is critical to the successful design and analysis of future recording paradigms.
Through this proposed research, our complementary team will address this
important topic theoretically, experimentally, and through advanced magnetic
modeling. We will investigate high speed dynamic as well as quasi-static
switching behavior.

This research has as its goals the fundamental understanding of the switching of
magnetic nanostructures for use in memory storage devices and the development of
a practical manufacturing process to produce these materials at a low cost and
in large scale. While alternate approaches including interference lithography
and self ordered media have been considered, nanoimprint lithography has the
necessary resolution capacity and the ability to incorporate non-regular, non-
rectangular patterns such as those desired for tracking and sectoring.

This research will impact the understanding of magnetization dynamics and
stability crucial for the realization of practical applications. Realistic
modeling of magnetic structures will enable the design of these materials. This
technology will have wide applicability for many markets. We expect to impact
several areas and break new ground in making magnetic recording media and
devices.

The interaction and collaboration will provide new resources for the scientific
community. It will exploit both the existing expertise, and contribute to the
development of pertinent expertise in these institutions, and it will engender
in them an awareness of strategic national needs. Apart from the direct
scientific benefit, the program will be training multidisciplinary experts in an
area of national importance currently underrepresented in the curricula and
research pursued by traditional students.

