* 0300597
* Workshop on Nanoengineering Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* James Aylor, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2004
* USD 54,522.00

The objective of this proposed workshop is to develop potential approaches for
the introduction&lt;br/&gt;of nanoscale engineering into the undergraduate and
graduate engineering education process.&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing that nanoscale
engineering is a very interdisciplinary activity, the correct
approach&lt;br/&gt;to accomplish the education of future nanoelectronic
engineers is not clear. The primary goal of&lt;br/&gt;this effort is to hold a
workshop with a collection of individuals well versed in the
various&lt;br/&gt;technologies that are necessary to accomplish advances in
nanotechnology as well as individuals&lt;br/&gt;that have been instrumental in
developing roadmaps for new curricula. The attendees will be&lt;br/&gt;primarily
invited from the membership of the Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department&lt;br/&gt;Heads Association (ECEDHA). The co-located workshop will be
held during the first two days&lt;br/&gt;of the highly successful IEC DesignCon
conference, taking place January 27-30, 2003.&lt;br/&gt;DesignCon attracts more
than 6,000 design engineers and managers and is also a draw for
the&lt;br/&gt;academic community. The proposed program plan is to hold a one-day
tutorial on the general&lt;br/&gt;topic of nanoscience and engineering that both
the educators and the industrial participants of&lt;br/&gt;IEC DesignCon can
attend. The second day will be focused on the development of
an&lt;br/&gt;educational plan. The outcome of the workshop will be a report that
outlines the possible&lt;br/&gt;approaches that should be attempted to support
the development of the undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate nanoengineer. The
workshop will be organized by ECEDHA, with board members&lt;br/&gt;serving as
the organizers and workshop hosts.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity: This workshop will bring together for the first
time&lt;br/&gt;educators in the general areas of Electrical and Computer
Engineering with researchers in the&lt;br/&gt;areas of Nanoscience and
Engineering to address the critical issues of education and
workforce&lt;br/&gt;development relative to the emerging field of
nanotechnology. This workshop will provide a&lt;br/&gt;unique intellectual forum
to identify problems and bottlenecks in educating engineering
students&lt;br/&gt;in this multidisciplinary arena.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
Resulting from the Proposed Activity: The proposed activity represents only
the&lt;br/&gt;first step in a broader program seeking to impact the engineering
educational system in terms of&lt;br/&gt;new and emerging areas of science and
technology. Since nanoscience and engineering are&lt;br/&gt;broadly
interdisciplinary, the ideas relative to curriculum and education emerging from
this&lt;br/&gt;workshop are expected have much broader impact in approaches to
multidisciplinary education&lt;br/&gt;in other fields, such as information
technology.