* 0300419
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Public Support in the Aftermath of 9-11
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* George Marcus, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 10/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

This project investigates the emotional underpinnings of support for national
security policy in the period before, during, and after a major international
event, in this case the anticipated armed conflict with Iraq. Tremendous
uncertainty surrounds the threat posed by Iraq and the risks associated with
U.S. military action there. This uncertainty is very likely to rekindle and
intensify emotional reactions that were present in the aftermath of 9/11. Will
citizens rally behind the President as has happened in past conflicts? Or has
the landscape been altered by the events of 9/11, so that the potential risks of
military action now dominate public deliberation? Will those Americans whose
sense of security was shattered by 9/11 be reassured by talk of preemptive
strikes against Iraq, or will they feel even less secure? More generally, what
roles do the emotions play in public reactions to national security threats and
support or opposition for government policies in response to those threats?
Recent work in psychology and political science (Bargh and Chartrand, 1999;
Marcus, Neuman, and MacKuen, 2000; Marcus, 2002; Zajonc, 1998), especially when
coupled with the early findings from 9/11 research would suggest a central,
perhaps determinative, role for emotions when national security is on the line.
&lt;br/&gt;The Administration's increasingly intense campaign in support of
taking imminent &lt;br/&gt;action against Iraq makes it vital to understand the
public's deliberation on Iraq over the coming weeks. To capture the evolution of
public opinion in the midst of this major national security crisis, the
investigators add two additional waves to an existing national dataset collected
by researchers at Stony Brook in the months after 9/11 (Huddy, Feldman, Taber,
and Lahav, 2002); the second wave will be a re-interview of this sample (with
200 new respondents) to be conducted in October, 2002, and the third wave will
be split, with half re-interviewed immediately after hostilities begin and half
when things settle down. This design gives the investigators maximal purchase in
understanding how perceptions of risk, depression, anxiety, anger, and
reassurance shape public opinion with measures taken at three different time
points: before Iraq was on most people's radar (wave 1, post 9/11), in the midst
of public discussion of proposed military action against Iraq (wave 2, October
2002), in the immediate aftermath of military action (wave 3, split-half), and
after some time has passed (this last phase reflect the impact of the course of
military action (wave 3, split-half)). &lt;br/&gt;The broader focus of this
research is on the central role of emotion in shaping how people comprehend and
respond to major crises. Although concerned with the central role of emotion in
threat situations, the project also provides a test of the theory of affective
intelligence, a comprehensive theory that provides a taxonomy of preconscious
emotion appraisal systems and hypotheses about their various impacts on
cognition and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to a deeper
understanding of public support for US military &lt;br/&gt;engagement overseas,
and sheds light on public support for the war on terrorism. The Vietnam war,
military activity in Somalia, and other military engagements have highlighted
the power of public opinion to strengthen or weaken the ability of the US
government to send armed forces into combat, station troops overseas, and deploy
ground forces. This project helps to highlight the critical role of risk and
fear in explaining the dynamics of public support for military engagement. This
research has broad applicability to government agencies and other organizations
interested in public support of US foreign policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;