* 0300405
* Biomimetic Structured Porogen Freeform Fabrication System for Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Peter Lelkes, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2007
* USD 388,705.00

The research objective of this project is to integrate biomaterials research,
biomimetic modeling, solid freeform fabrication, systems and control, and tissue
engineering in one intelligent system for structured, highly porous
biomaterials, which will be applied to bone tissue engineering scaffolds. The
manufacturing system is based on the following principles: (1) A computer-aided
design model of bone is created based on images of computed tomography or
magnetic resonance imaging and internal structure modeling using reverse
engineering. (2) A specially designed sucrose material is used to build a
structured porogen, a skeleton that has the negative structure of bone extra-
cellular matrix voids, using Solid Freeform Fabrication technology. (3) A bio-
composite of polymer and ceramic is cast into the sucrose negative skeleton and
air-solidified. (4) The sucrose porogen is then removed using water; and the
bio-composite scaffold is sintered at a low temperature to improve its
mechanical integrity and strength. Biocompatibility will be tested in cell
culture assays.

Success in this project will enable tissue engineers to optimize mechanical,
transport, material, and biological properties of bone tissue engineering
scaffolds with a degree of structural control not currently available. Bone
tissue engineering may offer a less painful alternative to traditional bone
grafts in over 800,000 implants per year, with lower risk of infection. The new
biomimetic structured porogen freeform fabrication system will also have
application to scaffolds for other tissues, including vascularized tissue.
Broader benefits include training of two Ph.D. students, new course modules on
"Biomimetic Tissue Modeling and its Freeform Fabrication" and "Biomaterial
Mechanical Property Measurement," and a biomaterials biocompatibility case
study. The educational and research infrastructure can be enhanced by this
interdisciplinary collaboration, and by development of new cross-disciplinary
course modules for both College of Engineering and Biomedical Engineering School
at Drexel University. The project will also be used in outreach workshops for
local high school and community college students, including many
underrepresented minority students.