* 0300255
* A Further Development of the Theory of Bellman Functions and Applications to Estimates for Singular Integral Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Stefanie Petermichl, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,402.00

The method of Bellman functions originated in the theory of optimal control. In
recent years it has been applied to a surprising variety of problems in harmonic
analysis. The PI plans to further develop the applicability of the method of
Bellman functions to a broader range of problems and study its connection with
other common tools that appear in harmonic analysis. This method plays a crucial
role in the PI's work concerning singular integral operators in weighted and
unweighted spaces. The problems include sharp numerical bounds for the Beurling
operator in Lebesgue spaces (the famous p-1 problem) as well as suitable sharp
norm estimates for Riesz transforms in n dimensional weighted Lebesgue spaces,
preferrably independent of the dimension. A related direction the PI is
interested in is concerned with boundedness of a particular singular integral
operator such as the Hilbert transform if the source and the target space have a
different weight.

This project lies in harmonic analysis, which has been a central area of
mathematics for a long time. Many questions in other fields reduce to questions
best posed and solved in the framework of analysis. Such questions include the
existence of special building blocks of functions (wavelets) that are
particularly well-suited for applications in signal processing. Other questions
include the boundedness property of so-called singular integral operators, which
are of extreme importance in problems in partial differential equations, and
physics. The PI's work consists of studying the continuity properties of such
operators in detail.

We often study singular integral operators through their actions on the building
blocks, using a technique inherited and modified from stochastic optimal
control. This method, called method of Bellman functions, provides a simpler yet
often more powerful alternative to very involved tools in harmonic analysis. In
addition, through its relative simplicity still being accessible to those with
less specialized background knowledge, for example scientists in other fields.
As such it serves both as link to other scientific fields, furthering
interdisciplinary communication and provides a possibility of early involvement
of undergraduates or beginning graduate students into research.