* 0301022
* Novel Computational Intelligence Method of J* Surface Generation for Fast Optimal Decision/Control Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2006
* George Lendaris, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2006
* USD 308,743.00

The method known as Dynamic Programming has been known for over four decades to
be the only general approach for designing optimal procedures (policies) in non-
linear, stochastic decision/control con-texts. Virtually all computer decision
making and/or control procedures in real-world problems stand to benefit from
application of the Dynamic Programming methodology. Unfortunately, for direct
application to real-world problems, its computing requirements would outstrip
even present computer hardware capabilities. The good news is that in recent
years, computational intelligence methods known as Adaptive Critics have been
developed that implement good approximations of Dynamic Programming, and thus
significantly enhance the quality of decision and control policies that are
achievable in practice. This project will take the computational intelligence
approach to this task one step further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will try to
inject more human-like intelligence into the process. The context is as follows:
humans are known to be able to learn optimal solutions to complex
decision/control tasks; further, the more of these they learn, i.e., the more
'experience' they accumulate, then they are able to quickly come up with a
(nearly) optimal solution to a newly encountered problem, so long as it is
similar to ones they have experience with. The proposed project seeks to emulate
this capability. In particular, the project seeks to develop a computational
intelligence methodology that efficiently designs optimal controllers for
additional problems within an assumed problem context, based on knowledge of
existing designs in that context. The key ingredient of this methodology will be
a J* Surface Generator (J*SG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The J*SG is the device that
is to contain the equivalent of human 'experience', knowledge of optimal
policies for previously encountered decision/control problems, and the ability
to infer from them an (approximately) optimal policy when a similar problem is
encountered. The key research tasks include development of useful ways to
represent the problem specification to the J*SG, and the representation of the
J* surface to facilitate extraction of the associated (optimal) policy.
Computational intelligence methods (e.g., neural networks, Fuzzy logic, genetic
algorithms, etc.) are to be used a stools for this accomplishment, as well as
for implementation of the J*SG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The venue in which the
proposed research is to be performed is the NW Computational Intelligence
Laboratory (NWCIL) at Portland State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NWCIL
will expand by contributing to the training of teachers in the Oregon MESA
(Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement) program. This program is
designed to increase the numbers of African American, Hispanic, American Indian,
and women students in careers in the field of mathematics, science, and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;