* 0301460
* Multiphoton Confocal Microscope for Plant Cell Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Richard Cyr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 337,930.00

A grant has been awarded to Pennsylvania State University under the direction of
Dr. Simon Gilroy for the acquisition of multi-photon confocal microscope to be
housed in a multi-user microscopy imaging facility. The spectral resolving
detector and multi-photon capabilities of the microscope will provide new
imaging possibilities currently unavailable on the Penn State campus. The
microscope will be used and managed by 5 principal groups. Research projects
that will directly benefit from the use of these new imaging approaches fall
into the broad categories of: (1) investigating signal perception by plants and
(2) understanding the cellular basis of morphogenesis. Examples of specific
projects that will be possible due to access to the proposed microscope include:
(1) Hormonal-regulation of subnuclear dynamics in guard cells, (2) Detection of
G-protein activation in living plant cells, (3) Regulation of cytoskeletal
dynamics, (4) Control of mitotic progression by cytoskeletal motors, (5) Signal
transduction in plant gravity and touch perception, (6) Regulation of pollen
tube tip growth by phospholipase C, (7) Control of meiosis and flower
development, and (8) Regulation of cell morphogenesis by cell wall
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provision of a permanent imaging facility
at Penn State will greatly enhance the research infrastructure for biological
sciences at the University. In addition, the microscope will directly impact on
our efforts to provide collaborative and training opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral and faculty researchers in advanced
fluorescence microscopy. Thus, the microscope will be used to train a range of
undergraduate researchers and all our incoming plant biology program graduate
students. We will also maintain our commitment to providing research
opportunities for scientists from around the world to both learn confocal, and
now multi-photon, microscopy and to pursue their research using these tools
through collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;