* 0301740
* Development of ``Global" Feedback Control Strategies for Silencing Noise
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Atul Kelkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2008
* USD 270,029.00

The proposed research is motivated by the need for inventing new technologies
and devices that can drastically reduce noise in noisy environments. In
particular, the acoustic systems of interest are acoustic enclosures such as
passenger cabins in aerospace vehicles, industrial machinery, and household
appliances. The goal of the research is to advance the state-of-the-art in
active noise control (ANC) technology to a stage where it can lead to the
development of silencing devices; for example, a portable ``intelligent" cover
that can be snapped on a vacuum cleaner or a lawn mower for reducing the noise
by 80\%; small silencing hardware that can be placed in the family room for
reducing the effect of outside noise (e.g., jet aircraft flying overhead) by
two-thirds; and smart devices installed in the walls and the interior of an
aircraft cabin for making it quieter and more vibration-free than a luxury car.
Based on the analytical and experimental results obtained to date, such a
technology appears to be within the realm of possibility. Development of such
technology, if successful, will also have the added bonus of reducing the
outside (environmental) noise - an important problem identified by FAA with
regard to noise in the neighborhood of the airports. There are many possible
non-aerospace spinoffs such as those mentioned above. The technology may also
provide an effective solution to noise problems in spacecraft (such as those
recently reported by the Space Station crew).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research, with strong analytical and experimental foundation built over last few
years through NSF and NASA support, is aimed at enhancing the state-of-the-art
in ANC by addressing following key research issues:&lt;br/&gt;(a) for a given
reverberant acoustic enclosure what is the theoretical limit of performance for
ANC and what are the key design parameters that this limit depends on and how
one can optimize the choice of these parameters (such as, number and
configuration of actuators and sensors, shape of enclosure, etc.) to extend this
limit; &lt;br/&gt;(b) what are the inherent limitations of various robust
control design methodologies for acoustic systems; &lt;br/&gt;(c) what are the
conditions (analytical) under which a given feedback strategy can OR can not
achieve uniform reduction in acoustic pressure levels in space and frequency and
how to design controllers that can satisfy these conditions to achieve effective
noise reduction. These key research issues will be addressed through the
following list of research tasks:&lt;br/&gt; (1) Devise automated synthesis
techniques for passivity-based controllers, which have been proven to extract
energy from the system in the closed-loop configuration. These controllers have
ability to reduce noise not only at the sensor location and at isolated
frequencies but uniformly over the space and frequency.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Devise
integrated (structure + acoustic) control strategies that can effectively
minimize the cost which reflects the total acoustic energy of the system and not
the acoustic energy at a particular location in space or energy in the
particular mode of the system. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Develop control strategies that
are aimed at modifying boundary impedances of the enclosures to optimize noise
containment or noise transmission. The idea is to modify the structural geometry
(morphing) to change the impedance characteristics of the boundary so as to
minimize transmission of acoustic noise or achieve maximum acoustic dissipation.
&lt;br/&gt;(4) Develop and validate the concept of ``active silencing hood" that
can be used for commercial applications to curb noise pollution. &lt;br/&gt;(5)
Experimentally validate the new technology first on a specially built laboratory
apparatus followed by household appliances such as washer and vacuum cleaner and
full-scale aircraft fuselage model available at Acoustic Research Facility at
NASA LaRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop our understanding of the inherent limitations as
well as the benefits of potential ANC methodologies compared to the existing
technology. The proposed research has potential for development of number of
patents particularly in the design of silencing hoods for machineries and
appliances, and design of active control software and hardware for large
enclosed spaces. It will also develop scientific base for addressing several
unsolved problems in vibration isolation and active control of noise in open
field. To the best of P.I.'s knowledge, there doesn't exist an active control
technique that can guarantee broadband reduction of noise that is uniform in
space. The outcome of the proposed research will also provide the knowledge base
for innovative design of casings of machinery and appliances for quiet
operation. If successful, this research will also benefit the development of
technology that can alter the acoustic signature of submerged vehicles such as
submarines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
impact of the proposed research will involve: (a) advancement of discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning, (b) broadening of
participation of under-represented groups with special recruitment initiative
for minority students, (c) enhancement of infrastructure for research and
education, (d) economic boost to US industry, (e) broad dissemination of
information to enhance scientific and technological understanding, and (f)
benefit to society from reduced noise pollution and boost to US
industry.&lt;br/&gt;