* 0301786
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Jill Murray, Murray                  Jill
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2005
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
FY2003. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Social behavior and signaling in
attached bacteria". Experiments are testing mathematical models of bacterial
behavioral ecology. Some of the experimental questions being addressed are Can
related bacteria control their population density as a strategy to increase
group fitness? Can small groups of bacteria use signaling to regulate foraging
with extracellular enzymes? Also, gene expression studies in bacteria grown on
microcosm surfaces (biofilms) are used to assess signal and enzyme production by
individuals.