* 0301856
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Social Protection in the Informal Sector: The Links Between Social and Economical Insecurity in Urban India
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,07/31/2004
* Paula Kantor, Kantor                  Paula          L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2004
* USD 51,512.00

0301856 Kantor

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a seven month research fellowship by Dr. Paula L. Kantor to
work with Dr. Jeemol Unni of Gujarat Institute of Development Studies in
Ahmedabad, India.

This study will examine the links between social (i.e. Illness, floods, food
insecurity) and economic (i.e. irregular work, low skills) insecurities among
informal workers in urban India. It is set within a framework of social
protection programs for informal workers and aims to provide knowledge of the
range of economic and social insecurities faced by this group, their
interlinkages, and variations in both these things across work types and social
groups. Such knowledge will assist in developing social protection programs that
meet these workers' needs in the most effective manner. The PI will collect both
qualitative and quantitative data to evaluate the insecurities and their
linkages. Qualitative data will provide an in depth assessment of the
connections between the types of insecurities. This will be linked to more
generalized quantitative data on work characteristics, individual capacities,
access to support mechanisms and productive assets, living conditions, health
status, demographics and experiences of life cycle and crisis events. Individual
workers will be the units of analysis; they will be sampled to represent
prominent work types in the informal sector of a selected city. It is expected
that greater economic insecurity will increase experiences of social insecurity,
with more economically insecure work types, such as casual laborers and piece
rate workers, having greater difficulty meeting basic needs and being more
exposed to intermittent events that create setbacks. Social identity will
intervene in these experiences, with women and low caste workers experiencing
them more intensely. The results of this study will have a substantial impact on
policy and program development.