* 0301737
* Support for U.S. Consortium on MICE: The International Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Gail Hanson, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Joseph Reidy
* 07/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal requests support for a U.S. university-based contribution to the
Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment (MICE) being carried out at the Rutherford
Appleton Laboratory (RAL) in the U.K. Recent discoveries in the study of
neutrinos suggest that a very intense neutrino source, or "Neutrino Factory,"
might answer fundamental questions of particle physics and cosmology. This large
future scientific project could be sited at an existing U.S. laboratory. MICE is
an essential step towards this goal and will validate Neutrino Factory cost
estimates by confirming the feasibility and performance of the key "muon
cooling" technique.

Neutrinos were originally postulated as massless neutral particles emitted
during beta decay of radioactive nuclei. When they were found to come in two
(and, later, three) types, each type was assumed (based on observation) to be
immutable. However, recent experimental results indicate that over sufficiently
long distances, neutrinos oscillate from one kind into another. From this, it
follows that neutrinos have nonzero masses. This discovery raises fundamental
issues regarding the total amount of matter in the universe and the origin of
the excess of matter over antimatter, and places a high priority on studies to
deduce the parameters of neutrino oscillation, including possible Charge
conjugation-Parity (CP) violation in neutrino mixing. Although neutrino-
oscillation studies using accelerator-derived neutrino beams are now planned or
under way, recent world-wide R&D work points to a Neutrino Factory, producing a
novel neutrino beam via decay of an intense muon beam circulating in a storage
ring, as the ideal tool for neutrino oscillation and CP-violation studies. Such
a tool would permit sensitivity several orders of magnitude beyond that of
current and planned experiments. A Neutrino Factory would also be the first step
towards muon-muon colliders in the longer term, with unique potential for
studies of lepton collisions at the postulated Higgs resonance and the energy
frontier. Muon beams at the required intensity can only be produced into a large
phase space, but affordable existing acceleration technologies require a small
input beam. This mismatch could be alleviated by "cooling" the muon beam to
reduce its size. This is the goal of MICE and an international collaboration has
been organized to carry it out.

Broader impacts of this research include validation of an important new
technique applicable in a variety of scientific and technological areas,
including particle physics and cosmology; development of next-generation
instrumentation; collaboration of interdisciplinary and international university
and national-laboratory groups including accelerator and particle physicists and
engineers; training of graduate and undergraduate students including those from
community colleges and underrepresented minorities; and wide information
dissemination via outreach activities and public media.