* 0301190
* Hadron Physics from Covariant QCD Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Peter Tandy, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2006
* USD 255,000.00

Project Summary This proposal requests three yeas of support to continue a
research program involving one senior investigator, one postdoctoral fellow and
several students. The research will address hadrons and hadronic processes in
terms of the con.ned quarks and gluons of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)b y
joining recent advances in understanding the propagators and vertices involving
gluon, ghost and quark .elds with advances in covariant modeling of mesons, form
factors and interactions. The principal investigator has expertise in continuum
nonperturbative QCD modeling of hadrons and the subsequent description of
hadronic processes based on the Dyson-Schwinger equations of the theory.
Previous work has concentrated upon the solution of the Dyson- Schwinger
equation for the dressed quark propagator followed by the solution of the bound
state Bethe-Salpeter equation for mesons. The e.ective interaction that has
emerged preserves the perturbative short distance behavior of QCD while the
perturbative domain is described with two parameters. It generates the empirical
amount of dynamical chiral symmetry breaking and the closely related phenomena
of absolute quark con.nement is implemented. The evident success of this
approach for the ground state pseudoscalar and vector mesons of light quarks,
and for baryons, needs to be reconciled with recent advances by others that have
increased our understanding of the gauge boson sector of QCD. In particular, we
seek to replace the two parameters of the above-mentioned e.ective interaction
by results of independent studies of the more fundamental gauge boson sector of
QCD. There are available model solutions of the gauge sector Dyson-Schwinger
equations for at least the gluon and ghost dressed propagators that we wish to
connect to. Also there is available independent quality data from lattice
simulations of QCD for these quantities and for the important gluonquark vertex.
Thus the time is ripe for development of continuum models of hadronic processes
constrained by QCD data. These issues relate to the origin of quark con.nement
and dynamical chiral symmetry breaking. Information on how to move beyond the
ladder approximation is at hand and will be used. The consequences will be
subjected to an evaluation in terms of hadronic observables. This information is
needed to both advance our understanding of hadron physics and learn about the
physically relevant nonperturbative dynamics of the gauge sector of QCD. Our
combined approach will be an advance in continuum Poincare invariant
investigations of the dominant quark-gluon mechanisms underlying hadron physics.
Several activities within this project have broader impact. The research
undertaken with this grant helps to advance both nuclear and particle physics.
The quark-gluon basis of hadronic properties and processes is a focus area of
nuclear physics and theoretical progress contributes to the return on the
investment in the experimental facilities at JLab and RHIC. This work also
contributes to the integration of research and education through the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, and through the involvement of
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in undergraduate teaching. Also
students get the opportunity to participate in professional meetings. The
international collaborations with scientists at the University of Tuebingen,
Germany, needed to carry out parts of this project contribute to the nation's
infrastructure for research and education.