* 0301931
* IDEAS Approach to Process Network Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Vasilios Manousiouthakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2006
* USD 301,134.00

Intellectual Merit:

The goal of this project is to develop a globally optimum design methodology for
the synthesis of process networks. The task will be pursued within the "Infinite
DimEnsionAl State space" (IDEAS) framework that the PI has been working on in
recent years. The main advantage of the IDEAS approach is that it yields
optimization formulations with convex (linear) feasible regions.

Within the IDEAS framework, the synthesis of the overall network is decomposed
into the synthesis of an operator network (OP), where process technologies (unit
operations) and/or their aggregate effects are represented, and a distribution
network (DN), where mixing, splitting, recycling, and bypassing occur. The key
development behind IDEAS is the use of a process operator whose domain and range
lie in infinite (rather than finite) dimensional space. This process
representation allows both consideration of all possible process networks for an
a priori given set of technologies, and gives rise to a convex (linear) feasible
region. Consequently, when the objective function is convex, all locally optimal
solutions of the resulting process network synthesis problems are guaranteed to
be globally optimal. Large classes of commonly employed objectives (such as
utility cost, volume, area, yield, selectivity, etc.) give rise to linear
objective functions and thus infinite linear program IDEAS formulations.

In particular, research is planned in the following areas:

IDEAS approach to synthesis of process networks with MTAC properties Parallel
computing implementation of the IDEAS framework IDEAS approach to reactor
network synthesis IDEAS approach to reactor/separator network synthesis.

Broad Impact

The IDEAS framework is not limited to chemical engineering processes.
Applications from other engineering disciplines are well suited for the IDEAS
framework. Examples of such disciplines include, but are not limited to, water
resource engineering, pollution prevention and structural engineering.
Additionally, mathematical developments in numerical approximation of infinite
dimensional linear programs and parallelized solution of large-scale linear
programs will be beneficial to operations research.

The knowledge accrued from the project will also be disseminated to and help
train undergraduate students, since it will generate software and concepts that
will be used in capstone undergraduate design courses. The PI will pursue the
development and introduction of an IDEAS based software package for the
systematic construction of attainable regions to an undergraduate and graduate
course in pollution prevention. The software package will also be made available
to other undergraduate and graduate courses.