* 0301157
* Nanoscale Electromechanics for Interfacial Phenomena
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* James Boyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Nanoscale Electromechanics for Interfacial Phenomena &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Proposal 0301157&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: James G. Boyd
IV&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KeyWords:&lt;br/&gt;Interfacial
transport phenomena, electric double layers, Gouy-Chapman theory, liquid
electrolytes, dynamics, NEMS, supercapacitors, Atomic Force Microscopy
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four objectives to the proposed research: (1)
Develop an interface (2-D) theory for electromechanical phenomena in
electrolytes, with an emphasis on electric double layers; (2) Evaluate the
usefulness of the theory in applications that are now modeled using the 3-D
Gouy-Chapman theory; (3) Derive scaling laws for the dynamics of Nano
Electromechanical Systems (NEMS) in liquid electrolytes, including the maximum
theoretical energy and power density of nano-structured double layer
supercapacitors; and (4) Experimentally characterize the dynamics of NEMS in
liquid electrolytes and compare the experiments to theoretical predictions. The
deformable electrodes will consist of metallized Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)
tips, separated by 0 to 50 nanometers. Force, displacement, electric potential,
and electric current will be measured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of NEMS in liquid
electrolytes, including "pull-in" instabilities of parallel-plate capacitors and
actuators in the presence of ionic double layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
environmental impact includes improved supercapacitors, which are necessary to
provide high power in electric and hybrid-electric vehicles that reduce
greenhouse gases and air pollution. In heavy urban traffic more than half of the
total energy consumed is dissipated in the brakes. Therefore regenerative
braking, which recovers and stores the kinetic energy that is lost during
braking, will be included on electric and hybrid electric vehicles.
Supercapacitors can be charged fast enough to absorb regenerative braking power;
batteries cannot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Body fluids are 0.2M electrolytes, and
this research will enable new applications of NEMS in body fluids, including
valves, tweezers, scalpels, automated patch-clamp devices, actuators, optical
components, sensors, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach program includes
two high school students to work in the lab each summer. With help from the
Engineering Academic Programs Office, these students will be recruited from
schools in the Urban Systemic Initiatives/Programs and Rural Systemic
Initiatives. Each of these NSF-sponsored programs has working relationships with
the College of Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;