* 0301673
* An Isothermal Titration Calorimeter to Study Thermodynamics of Molecular Recognition and Function
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* James Jaynes, Thomas Jefferson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2005
* USD 55,650.00

This award supports the purchase of an Isothermal Titration Calorimeter (ITC) to
be used for experimental thermodynamic analyses of biomolecular recognition and
function. Calorimetric studies permit characterization of enzymatic reactions
and, as well, study of non-covalent interactions between proteins and various
other molecules, both large and small. The instrument will be placed in the
University's core facility for protein studies where it will be available to
faculty from throughout the institution. Initially, five investigators and
thirty to fifty trainees in their laboratories are expected to be the major
users. Planned studies that will use the instrument include the experimental
identification of substrates of nitrilase-related enzymes; analysis of dual
specificity tRNA synthetases; characterization of protein/DNA and
protein/protein interactions important for avidity; measurement of the binding
of small cyclic peptides and their cellular targets; and evaluation of the
thermodynamics interaction of T-cell receptors and their natural signaling
ligands. In addition to its use in research, the instrument will be used to
support a curriculum change in the University's graduate biophysics course that
will provide a new emphasis on calorimetric approaches to the study of molecular
interactions.