* 0301815
* The evolution of crushing in granular materials and its influence on their mechanical properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Luis Vallejo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2008
* USD 219,404.00

Granular materials forming part of the base of flexible pavements, rockfills,
highway embankments, and foundations experience crushing as a result of static
and dynamic loads. Very little is known about the effect that varying levels of
crushing have on the engineering properties of granular materials (i.e.
hydraulic conductivity, shear strength, and elastic moduli). Because of
sustained crushing, the original engineering properties with which a structure
(i.e. a pavement's granular base or a highway embankment) was designed will
change during its engineering life. Changes in the original engineering
properties could affect the stability of the structure and could make it unsafe.
Thus, there is a need to understand the evolution and the mechanics of crushing
in granular materials. To this effect we will: (1) conduct laboratory and
simulation investigations on the evolution of crushing in granular materials.
The laboratory investigation will involve tests that induce crushing in granular
materials (static and dynamic compression and shear tests). The evolution of
crushing in these tests will be evaluated by assessing the micro-structural
changes that take place in the samples and by comparing the grain size
distribution of the materials measured before and after the crushing tests.
Also, the Discrete Element Method (DEM) will be used to study the level and
distribution of the interparticle forces that cause crushing; and, (2) evaluate
the changes in engineering properties caused by the crushing process. The
engineering properties that will be evaluated before and after crushing are:
hydraulic conductivity, shear strength, and the elastic moduli of the granular
materials tested. The results of the research will be valuable to the
geotechnical engineering community, for the better design of civil engineering
structures such as flexible pavements and for a better understanding of the ways
the stability and settlement experienced by highway embankments evolve as a
result of crushing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;