* 0301034
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Acetate Biogeochemistry In Northern Wetlands:  Implications for Methane Formation During Climate Change
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Mark Hines, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2006
* USD 159,421.00

Abstract

Northern wetlands store large quantities of carbon and are significant sources
of atmospheric methane. Impending climatic changes may greatly affect the role
of these environments in the carbon cycle. Decomposition of organic matter
occurs anaerobically in these wetlands. However, recent findings suggest that
the terminal methanogenic step in northern wetlands is altered relative to more
southerly systems, with acetate acting as a terminal product even though methane
production continues via hydrogen utilization. If this phenomenon is ubiquitous,
then acetate is not a significant intermediate in northern wetlands, but serves
as a terminal product of decomposition; one that is ultimately degraded
aerobically to CO2 rather than methane. Acetate accumulation in northern
wetlands represents a paradigm shift in our understanding of anaerobic
decomposition. It is possible that warming in the north will shift this process
toward what occurs in more southerly wetlands. If so, then methane production in
the north will increase greatly over what might occur from warming alone.

This work will test the hypothesis that northern wetlands do not support
significant methanogenesis from acetate and that acetate formation and
accumulation is an important terminal step during anaerobic degradation of
organic matter. This phenomenon is being investigated by a multidisciplinary
team that will utilize field and laboratory investigations and microbiological,
molecular biology, geochemical, pedological, and stable isotope approaches.

The objectives of the project are: 1) assess the ubiquity of the acetate-
accumulating phenomenon by examining acetate concentrations and production
rates, geochemical conditions, and by applying isotopic and molecular techniques
to a variety of northern wetland types representative of the major circumpolar
arctic, subarctic and northern boreal environments; 2) Provide a temporal
framework for determining variations in controls on methanogenic pathways and
acetate cycling by conducting seasonal studies; 3) determine the effects of
physical and chemical parameters on terminal decomposition using laboratory
manipulations of incubation conditions; 4) determine if the bacterial
populations are distinct compared to other wetlands and other anaerobic
habitats.

Incubation assays, radiotracer analyses, stable isotopes and natural radiocarbon
abundances will be used to address pathways of decomposition in field and
laboratory experiments. Molecular approaches including PCR-DGGE and
hybridization probing will be used to determine bacterial diversity and
population structure.

A demonstration that biochemical pathways of methane formation in these wetlands
are unique compared to their more southerly counterparts, has tremendous
implications for our ability to predict the what the role of these wetlands will
be in contributing methane to the global atmosphere and in their ability to
degrade stored carbon. Acetate may serve as a primary organic end product, which
would thus constitute a separate terminal decomposition pathway occurring
simultaneously with methanogenesis. The multi-disciplinary study proposed here
will delineate the important details of these processes and will serve to
demonstrate their spatial significance.