* 0301280
* Geometric constructions over finite fields, elementary equivalence of finitely generated fields, and rational points on varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Bjorn Poonen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 375,426.00

DMS-0301280 Bjorn M. Poonen

The investigator proposes: 1) to use sieve methods to prove the existence of
various geometric objects and maps over finite fields. For many problems, the
standard dimension-based arguments work only over infinite fields; the idea is
to replace them by numerical counting. 2) to continue the study initiated by F.
Pop on the question of whether elementarily equivalent finitely generated fields
are necessarily isomorphic. 3) to write a graduate text highlighting the
application of schemes to the study of varieties over nonalgebraically closed
fields.

Originally, algebraic geometry was concerned with the real number solutions to
systems of polynomial equations, but the 20th century made it clear that it was
fruitful to generalize by considering fields (i.e., number systems) other than
the real numbers. For example, finite fields have proved invaluable in the
theory of error-correcting codes and cryptography. Unfortunately, many geometric
constructions are known to work only over infinite fields. The investigator's
first project is to use combinatorial techniques to adapt these constructions to
the finite field case. The investigator's second project concerns the
relationships between geometry over different fields; potentially it could allow
results over one field to be transferred to another field. Finally, the
investigator proposes to write a graduate text that will make newly developed
techniques in this area accessible to students.