* 0301643
* Similitude Modeling of Structural Damage by Fire
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Peter Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2006
* USD 363,105.00

Similitude Modeling of Structural Damage by Fire&lt;br/&gt;
0301643&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: James Quintiere, University of Maryland
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dimensionless modeling parameters are presented in order
to develop physical scale models to &lt;br/&gt;emulate and predict the behavior
of full-scale structures in fire with respect to their fire
&lt;br/&gt;characteristics and the effect of fire on the structure. Experiments
will be conducted at three scales to validate and assess the accuracy of the
scaling. Fire and structural collapse will be studied for a frame steel
construction of a compartment subject to a fully involved fire. The motivation
of the study is the collapse of the World Trade Center towers due to fire and
aircraft damage. Given appropriate accuracy of the scale model approach, the WTC
collapse can be demonstrated to be a valid modeling strategy. The scaling
approach has value in design and investigation as the WTC. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This is an interdisciplinary proposal between fire and structural
engineering. These two &lt;br/&gt;disciplines do not normally converse. Yet the
fire resistance of buildings has been based on input &lt;br/&gt;from both
practices. Admittedly, the WTC buildings were constructed with no direct
&lt;br/&gt;consideration of the actual fire effect other than the requirement in
the regulation. No design for &lt;br/&gt;fire was explicit. How can this better
be done? Scale modeling offers a viable, and perhaps a &lt;br/&gt;more accurate
approach than computer simulations. Scale modeling is a scientific approach, but
&lt;br/&gt;it should be validated. Even with no complete success, the results
can aid in validating &lt;br/&gt;computational modeling. The fire scaling can be
an input to computational structural modeling, &lt;br/&gt;and can serve to
validate computational fire models. This proposal is the first time a complete
&lt;br/&gt;combination of the fire and structural failure scaled experiment is
considered. If successful such &lt;br/&gt;scaling will aid in the understanding
of structural behavior in fire. Society will benefit from having safer and more
reliable buildings. &lt;br/&gt;