* 0301696
* Investigation of Large Coastal Bridge Performance in Hurricane Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Dimitris Nikitopoulos, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 06/30/2009
* USD 319,165.00

Investigation of Large Coastal Bridge Performance In
Hurricane&lt;br/&gt;Environment, CMS proposal 0301696&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Cai, Louisiana State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a hurricane strikes
the coast, the results are often devastating. Even as storm prediction and
tracking technologies improve, providing greater warning times, our nation is
still becoming ever more susceptible to the effects of hurricanes due to the
massive population growth in the south and southeast along the hurricane coast
from Texas to Florida to the Carolinas. As backbones of transportation lines,
coastal bridges are extremely important in supporting evacuations. In addition
to the general wind-&lt;br/&gt;induced problems, long-span large coastal bridges
on hurricane evacuation routes face the threats from the combination of
hurricane-induced winds, heavy traffic, and their interactions. The objectives
of the proposed study are: (1) to study the performance of large coastal bridges
under the action of strong winds as well as heavy traffic. This situation
happens in a scenario of hurricane evacuation; (2) to investigate the effect of
temporary mass dampers in ensuring bridge safety and/or reducing bridge
vibration. The temporary mass dampers can conveniently be driven on the bridge
when needed and be removed otherwise; and (3) to advance the state-of-the-art of
aerodynamic analysis of large bridges under strong winds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a typical aerodynamic analysis of long-span bridges, no
traffic load is considered by assuming that bridges will be closed to traffic at
high wind speeds. Therefore, bridges have been tested in the wind tunnel or
analyzed numerically based on the pure bridge section without vehicles on it.
However, during a hurricane evacuation, the bridges may be occupied by slowly
moving traffic. On one hand, vehicles affect the modal characteristics and
section shape of the bridge, which affects the aerodynamic behavior. On the
other hand, the same vehicles may act like mass dampers that may help damp out
some vibrations. The total effects of the traffic on bridge performance and also
bridge vibrations on vehicles are not clear and no studies have been reported.
While it is generally assumed (but still controversial) that turbulence helps
enhance bridge flutter velocity, the effects of hurricane-induced high
turbulence on bridge stability haven't been adequately studied. These issues
need to be addressed to ensure the safety of both bridge and vehicles during
hurricanes and evacuations. While the developed procedures are intended for
general coastal bridges, the Luling Bridge near New Orleans will be used as the
primary subject of study. Both wind tunnel testing and numerical simulations
will be conducted. The bridge performance will be investigated by arranging
different traffic patterns to find the worst case for safety assurance, and find
the optimal pattern that may be utilized for hazard mitigation (e.g., closing
certain lanes). Another alternative is to develop a movable TMD system that can
be driven on the bridges to act as a temporary vibration damper. The research
activities and results will be incorporated into the new education curriculum -
Hurricane Engineering developed at LSU with the NSF fund.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is to address the issue of how large
coastal bridges perform in hurricanes under evacuation conditions. The answer is
very important since thousands of lives potentially hinge on the decision of
when to close the evacuation routes too soon and people may be trapped in
coastal areas subject to storm surge, too late and people may be on the bridge
under unsafe conditions. The educational activities include high school
outreaching, minority students recruiting, and technical information
dissemination. These activities will promote minority participation, affect high
school students career path, and foster future engineers to develop more
systematical strategies in dealing with the most destructive hurricane hazards
for years to come. International collaboration with Tongji University, China,
will not only utilize the second largest boundary layer wind tunnel facility in
the world, but will also foster further research and collaboration, increase the
visibility of hurricane engineering in both countries, and combine the resources
to deal with the worldwide engineering challenge of the 21st century .
mitigating hurricane hazards. To achieve the research objectives, a unique team
of researchers is formed. This team consists of Dr. Cai (PI) who has extensive
expertise in wind vibration analyses, Dr. Levitan (co-PI), director of the LSU
Hurricane Center and an expert in wind loading, Dr. Nikitopoulos (co-PI) is the
Director of Wind Tunnel Laboratory with expertise in fluid dynamics and wind
tunnel simulation. &lt;br/&gt;