* 0301778
* Field Vibration Testing &amp; Analyses of an Existing RC Building
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Daniel Whang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 04/30/2006
* USD 201,111.00

The lack of adequately high spatial resolution data sets from field testing of
full-scale structures under&lt;br/&gt;dynamic loading conditions significantly
limits the ability of earthquake engineers to improve
their&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the seismic performance of structural and
geotechnical systems. For example, field&lt;br/&gt;observations of highly
nonlinear structural response following major seismic events have been
largely&lt;br/&gt;supported with qualitative observations. Instrument recordings
from buildings have been an invaluable&lt;br/&gt;resource over the past few
decades; however, the density of instruments (with ~12 per structure being
a&lt;br/&gt;common allocation) is too low to enable detailed evaluations of
system or component responses.&lt;br/&gt;To address this shortcoming, the Civil
Engineering Department at UCLA is in the process of
developing&lt;br/&gt;equipment to substantially enhance field testing
capabilities for forced-vibration testing as part of the NSF&lt;br/&gt;Network
for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) program. The project, entitled
Field Testing&lt;br/&gt;and Monitoring of Structural Performancece, was
initiated in January 2000 and continues through&lt;br/&gt;September 2004. Field
testing equipment being purchased consists of state-of-the-art vibration
sources&lt;br/&gt;(linear inertial and eccentric mass shakers), sensors and a
wireless data acquisition system&lt;br/&gt;(accelerometers, LVDTs, fiber optic
gage readout unit, digitizers, routers, workstations), a CPT truck
and&lt;br/&gt;in situ soil vibration sensors, and networking equipment (data
concentrator, satellite uplink station) to&lt;br/&gt;allow for real-time data
acquisition, processing, and world wide web broadcasting of experimental
results.&lt;br/&gt;The project involves only purchase and integration of the
equipment; no specific research activities are&lt;br/&gt;being conducted with
the project funds.&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration with a practitioner-based
Implementation Advisory Board (IAB) for the&lt;br/&gt;UCLA/NEES project, a four-
story office building in Los Angeles has been identified as a candidate
for&lt;br/&gt;forced vibration testing. The building is of general interest
because (1) it has a very common structural&lt;br/&gt;system consisting of a
perimeter moment frame and an interior post-tensioned slab-column frame, and
(2)&lt;br/&gt;it was significantly damaged during the Northridge earthquake,
causing it to be abandoned. Previous&lt;br/&gt;analysis-based post-earthquake
studies of the building have generally been unable to explain the
observed&lt;br/&gt;damage. The owners plan to demolish the structure; however,
for a variety of reasons, will not do so for&lt;br/&gt;approximately two years
and have granted the PIs permission to conduct testing.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research involves forced vibration testing of the building using the NEES
equipment as&lt;br/&gt;well as detailed system identification and numerical
modeling studies. Both earthquake-type and&lt;br/&gt;harmonic force histories
will be applied to the building at the roof level, and waveforms will be
recorded&lt;br/&gt;to enable evaluations of the complete structural system
response, structural component behavior (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;slab-column connections
and pile caps), and the response of non-structural components (e.g.,
partitions,&lt;br/&gt;piping systems) as well as the influence of these
components on the system response. A dense&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation array will
be utilized that will include accelerometers, displacement transducers,
and&lt;br/&gt;strain gauges. A wireless local area network will be installed to
acquire and record waveform data,. The&lt;br/&gt;detailed data set generated
from the tests will provide valuable insight into the performance of
this&lt;br/&gt;common type of structural system and the reasons for the poor
performance of the subject building during&lt;br/&gt;the Northridge earthquake.
The testing will also provide invaluable experience to the NEES program
with&lt;br/&gt;respect to equipment use protocols and data archiving models.
Gaining experience on these issues within&lt;br/&gt;the present funding period
is particularly useful as the NEES equipment development work is
ongoing,&lt;br/&gt;and lessons learned can be implemented prior to the NEES
system going online in 2004. Also relevant to&lt;br/&gt;the timeliness of this
proposal is the fact that this important building will be razed in two
years.&lt;br/&gt;