* 0301787
* Image-Based Control of Movement-Induced Vibration During High-Speed Operation of Scanning Probe Microscopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Santosh Devasia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 06/30/2007
* USD 207,929.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the critical problem of movement-
induced &lt;br/&gt;vibration that limits the operating speed of Scanning Probe
Microscopes &lt;br/&gt;(SPMs). It is noted that SPMs are key enabling tools in
the experimental &lt;br/&gt;investigation and manipulation of nano scale (and
sub-nano scale) phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;However, during high-speed operation of
SPMs, movement-induced vibration &lt;br/&gt;leads to damage of the sample and/or
probe as well as modification of the &lt;br/&gt;surface properties being
investigated. Therefore, current SPM systems are &lt;br/&gt;operated at low
speeds; for example, high-resolution SPM systems operate at &lt;br/&gt;around
1/100th of the lowest resonant frequency that excites significant
&lt;br/&gt;vibrations in the system. Thus, movement-induced vibration limits the
&lt;br/&gt;operating speed of current SPM systems. This work proposes to
compensate-for &lt;br/&gt;the movement-induced vibration and, thereby, to enable
high-speed operation &lt;br/&gt;of SPMs with sub-nanometer resolution, and
without adverse affects such as &lt;br/&gt;sample and probe damage. The novelty
of the proposed approach is that it &lt;br/&gt;will exploit the extant imaging
capability of the SPM to increase the &lt;br/&gt;operating speed. The proposed
research consists of following three tasks: &lt;br/&gt;(1) measure effects of
dynamics using SPM images; (2) compensate-for the SPM &lt;br/&gt;dynamics; and
(3) evaluate increase in operating speed using Scanning &lt;br/&gt;Tunneling
Microscope (STM). The proposed approach will be used to evaluate &lt;br/&gt;the
maximum speed at which a STM can image standard samples such as carbon
&lt;br/&gt;atoms in highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). The proposed
&lt;br/&gt;improvements of SPM, a key-enabling tool, will have a broad impact on
&lt;br/&gt;research and development in nanosciences and nanotechnologies. The
proposed &lt;br/&gt;work will also build the research and human resource
infrastructure needed &lt;br/&gt;to remain competitive in emerging
nanotechnology industries.&lt;br/&gt;