* 0301307
* International Research Fellowship: Application of Global Biophysical Fields Derived from Large-Swath Remote Sensing Data to the Detection and Categorization of Land-Cover Change
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Marc Linderman, Linderman               Marc           A
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2005
* USD 137,900.00

0301307 Linderman

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Marc Linderman
to work with Dr. Eric Lambin at Universite Catholique de Louvain, in Louvain-la-
Neuve, Belgium, on the application of global biophysical fields derived from
large-swath remote sensing data to the detection and categorization of land
cover-change.

The ability to accurately monitor changes to land cover and land use is crucial
for accurate assessments of the rates of impact, to model ecological systems,
and to effectively mitigate future losses of natural areas. As part of a new
European initiative (CYCLOPES), this project will examine methods to decouple
and categorize natural and human land-cover change. CYCLOPES will employ large-
swath remote sensing data and innovative methods such as the fusion of several
data sources and inversion of current radiative transfer models using artificial
neural networks to develop spatially and temporally consistent biophysical data.
The land-cover change detection approach will then compare seasonal development
curves for successive years of remotely-sensed land-cover indicators with
particular emphasis on comparing the utility of biophysical data to discriminate
between causes of land-cover change relative to commonly used vegetation
indices.

Collaboration with CYCLOPES and Dr. Lambin will provide opportunities for the PI
to examine broad-scale land-cover analyses, and gain additional experience in
data and algorithm development and global modeling. The methods developed here
will enable him to further examine human impacts on ecosystem processes from
local to global scales.