* 0301007
* Length Scales in Alloy Dissolution
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Karl Sieradzki, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 560,000.00

This grant involving Arizona State University (Sieradzki) and Virginia Tech.
(Corcoran) explores the fundamental physics and materials science of nanoporous
metal evolution via an alloy dissolution process known as dealloying. The
research aims to differentiate among several recent theories of dealloying by
examining the role of pre-existing length scale on porosity evolution and the
electrochemical parameters such as the critical potential, characterizing this
process. In order to access the role of pre-existing length scale in the pattern
formation process, the de-alloying behavior of fixed composition alloys with
artificially tailored and tunable microstructures will be studied. Two types of
microstructures will be examined: tunable spinodal microstructures (Ag-Ni and Au
Ni alloys) and compositionally modulated superlattices (Ag-Ni, Au-Ni and Au-Ag
alloys). These behaviors will be compared to that of single-phase solid solution
alloys (e.g., Ag-Au) that also have a pre-existing length scale (percolation
cluster structure) determined by alloy composition. In addition to standard
electrochemical, x-ray, and electron microscopy characterization, in situ small
angle neutron scattering (SANS) will be used to determine, in real time, the
evolution of the nanoporous microstructures. Measurements will be performed
using both the 8 and 30 meter long SANS instrument at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. The long-term goal of this effort is to use the
understanding of the underlying mechanisms to produce nanoporous metals in a
variety of forms compatible for example with thin film silicon-based
architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dealloying method for producing porous
metals is extremely versatile in that the size scale of the porosity can be
precisely tuned in the range of 3 nm to greater than 10 mm. The electrodes can
be produced in virtually any geometry including bulk and thin film form.
Multiple length scales and graded structures can be produced to precisely tailor
electrode performance depending upon the application. As such, the applications
of such materials are broad and encompass such areas as filtration, ultra-high
surface area electrodes for batteries and fuel cells, catalysts, and sensors,
particularly in biochemical applications. The proposed effort has broad impact
to the education of undergraduate and graduate students, development of
technology for use in such areas as medical technologies that will benefit
society at large, and development of basic science to impact the scientific
community across many fields of materials science.