* 0301835
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: Reflections of Success in Media Coverage
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* David Meyer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2004
* USD 6,058.00

The study addresses three research questions. First, when are social movement
organizations (SMOs) best able to garner media attention and get their preferred
messages covered? Second, what organizational, strategic, and institutional
factors influence SMOs' success in using the media over time? Third, how
successful are particular SMOs at using mass media to reach a broader audience?
This research focuses on three sets of factors (independent variables):
characteristics of social movement organizations; characteristics of media
organizations; and the social and political environment in which social movement
action is embedded. The research design triangulates the data through the use of
archival data analysis, the examination of historical accounts, and interviews.
Archival data and historical accounts will be used to examine how the SMOs are
structured, the resources (human and financial) each dedicates to garnering
media attention, and the strategies each uses to get its preferred messages in
media outlets. The researcher also will conduct interviews with past and current
activists to determine whether and how activists incorporate the lessons they
learn from interacting with journalists into their existing media strategy, as
well as how activists adjust their media strategies and messages in relation to
oppositional and allied SMOs. Because mass media consists of different types of
outlets that have different audiences and niches, the researcher will examine
how the resources, journalistic norms and routines, and the story production
process in a range of media organizations affect coverage. In order to analyze
these three factors, the researcher will conduct interviews with
journalists/reporters and editors/producers who consistently cover the abortion
issue. The dependent variable in the study is media success. In an effort to
expand the current literature by offering a more nuanced approach to measuring
media success, the researcher will employ a sampling strategy that is cognizant
of temporal and cross-sectional variation. First, she will sample critical
moments in the abortion debate from 1980 to 2000; these critical moments
represent times when it is more likely that SMOs will get media coverage.
Second, she will sample a cross section of media outlets, including the New York
Times, Time, Nation, National Review, Ms., Sojourners, and the national
broadcasts from ABC, CBS, and NBC. Different media outlets have different target
audiences and as such an SMO may get coverage in one outlet but not another.
Moreover, different outlets command different levels of audience attention. This
research contributes to broader knowledge in at least three ways. First, because
the research design employs a variety of methods and examines multiple levels of
analysis, the researcher can offer a detailed analysis of the interactions among
SMOs, media organizations, and the larger social and political environment. This
allows an examination of how these interactions affect media coverage. Second,
she will consider how SMOs adapt their media strategies and preferred messages
in relation to opponents and allied SMOs. Finally, she will examine the
relationships among SMOs, mass media outlets, and the larger social and
political environment over time. Analyzing these relationships over time allows
the researcher to compare the SMOs and their strategies in a larger social and
political context to determine whether and how an SMO incorporates the lessons
it learns from its interactions with journalists and reporters into its
strategies and structures, and to evaluate how effective media strategies and
messages are in a dynamic environment.