* 0301797
* Intelligent Sensor Motes for Vertical Seismic Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Steven Glaser, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2007
* USD 379,809.00

This action is to support the installation of a vertical seismic array on the UC
Berkeley campus. Two instrumented boreholes will be installed on either side of
the Hayward Fault. Each borehole will consist of 3-component accelerometer
units, a rate gyroscope, magnetometer, and pore pressure sensor. The sensors
will be an array of MEMS-based devices, including an all-digital 24-bit
accelerometer. The sensors will be incorporated into an intelligent networked
sensor Mote. An event driven TinyOS is used to multiplex the concurrent flows of
information across this single controller, which is connected to a transceiver,
a secondary storage device, a sensor oriented I/O system, and a power management
subsystem. The noise floor of the array is expected to be approximately 30
ng/root(Hz), and the cost about 2 magnitudes less than current vertical arrays.

In recent years, vertical arrays have come on-line in several sites in
California, Taiwan, and Japan. They are changing the understanding of seismic
ground motion by allowing for the 3-D evaluation of seismic wave propagation.
Downhole recordings of ground motion provide a glimpse of how waves are
propagating near the surface of the earth. By comparing multiple downhole
recordings and a related surface recording, it is possible to observe how the
waves change as they progress through the ground and are affected by materials
in the soil profile. The arrays allow the estimation of experimental Greens
functions for a site, with the estimation made using the rich field of system
identification. Perhaps most importantly, the project will also introduce civil
engineering students to new developments in sensor, communications, and
information technologies, and to help them to become familiar with multi-
disciplinary tools, and to become aware of the implications of advances in other
fields of engineering, and how these technologies might help them solve civil
engineering problems.