* 0301785
* Forced Vibration Tests of the Foundation and Surrounding Soil at the NEES Large High Performance Shake Table
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Joel Conte, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/29/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This action is to support forced vibration tests of the reinforced concrete
foundation block and of the soils in the vicinity of the National Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) Large High-Performance Shake Table at Camp
Elliott, University of California-San Diego. The objective is to obtain
fundamental information on the concept of using soil stiffness and radiation
damping to reduce the necessity for extremely massive and deeply embedded
foundations to resist dynamic and static loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tests
will be conducted upon completion of the excavation for the foundation and the
adjacent soil pits, and again, after completion of the reinforced concrete
foundation block. This will be done in collaboration with researchers associated
with the NEES Field Testing Facility at UCLA and with the Centro de
Investigacion Cientifica y de Educacion Superior de Ensenada (CICESE), Ensenada,
Mexico. In the initial tests, eccentric mass shakers will be placed at the
bottom of the excavations for the foundation block of the shake table and for
the foundation of the adjacent equipment building. Measurements will be made of
the dynamic response at dense arrays on the cavities for the foundations, on the
adjacent soil pit and on the ground surface up to a distance of 200 meters. The
tests will be repeated after the foundation block for the shake table and the
foundation for the equipment building have been
completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the project is to take
advantage of limited time-windows to obtain dynamic ground motion data and, by
inference, geotechnical data to be used in the development of a virtual model of
the complete NEES Large High-Performance Shake Table facility at Camp Elliott.
The second objective is to validate a new design approach for foundations
subjected to impact loads that use soil stiffness and radiation damping to
substitute for part of the foundation block, leading to a more economical
installation. If fully validated, this approach, which takes advantage of
advances in analysis of dynamic soil-foundation interaction, will result in
significant savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will play an important
role in efforts to model the seismic and vibration response of structures in
dense urban environments. The project will provide a unique training opportunity
for undergraduate and graduate. students, will be useful in integrating the
results of research into undergraduate and graduate courses on geotechnical and
earthquake engineering, and will test the tele-observation capabilities from the
UCSD NEES site at Camp Elliott.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;