* 0301115
* MODELING OF CONSOLIDATION OF NANO-SIZE POWDERS
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Eugene Olevsky, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2008
* USD 452,567.00

MODELING OF CONSOLIDATION OF NANO-SIZE POWDERS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Eugene A. Olevsky,
San Diego State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program is aimed at
the development of a generalized theory of consolidation of nano-powders. This
model approach takes into consideration the agglomeration phenomena, possible
in-situ damage development and instability of the grain growth typical for final
stages of the nano-powders sintering. Both deterministic (continuum mechanics)
and stochastic approaches are used for the analysis of the material behavior.
The experimental input is reduced to a minimal number of free sintering and
sinter-forging tests necessary to determine the constitutive properties of nano-
powders. The developed theoretical concepts will be verified by the experiments
conducted with three different types of nano-powder materials: metals, ceramics
and metal-ceramic composites. The developed computer codes will enable the
prediction and optimization of macroscopic shape distortions, density,
agglomerate characteristics, grain size and grain morphology spatial
distributions. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort includes the basis of an on-line
process (consolidation) control for a wide range of nano-powder component
designs, which are used in nano-materials related industries. Realization of the
project will provide an important insight on in-processing nano-structures
evolution and, from the practical point of view, will render a chance to lower
still high production costs due to the optimization of
consolidation.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program is expected to contribute to the
advancement of the Materials Engineering area of the general Mechanical
Engineering curriculum of the San Diego State University. A new graduate course
on Mechanics of Powder Processing will be developed. Both undergraduate and
graduate students will participate in the theoretical and experimental
investigations. Students will be involved in internships by local industries
collaborating with PI on optimization of nano-powder consolidation. The project
will contribute to the enhancement of the Joint Doctoral Program with University
of California, San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;