* 0302907
* The Math and Science Teacher Education Resource Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* James Kelley, Pellissippi State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2007
* USD 289,190.00

Proposal Number 0302907&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pellissippii State Technical
Community College&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Moss,
Meg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pellissippi State
Technical Community College (PSTCC) is creating Mathematics and Science Teacher
Education Resource (MASTER) Hubs at the main campus and a branch campus in an
Empowerment Zone. These MASTER Hubs are innovative learning environments
surrounding preservice and inservice teachers with fun and interesting
mathematics, science, and technology materials and experiences. The purpose of
the Hubs is to recruit, train, and support prospective teachers in a teacher
preparation project that is a collaboration among PSTCC, K-12 students and
teachers, four-year universities and local mathematics and science resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of articulation pathways are available to PSTCC
preservice teachers; however, the focus of the current project is a program in
which Tennessee Technological University (TTU) provides its four-year education
licensure program on the PSTCC campus. This program includes new reformed
science and mathematics courses developed and implemented by PSTCC faculty, as
well as upper level education courses offered by TTU faculty at the MASTER Hub
sites. The curriculum also includes an early exposure to the teaching profession
through a field experience course integrated with instructional
technology.&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment of new teachers is being addressed through
open houses at the MASTER Hubs, as well as recruiting visits to local area high
schools. The participation of underrepresented groups is being actively enlisted
through the MASTER Hub on a branch campus of PSTCC located in an Empowerment
Zone of Knoxville, TN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring teams composed of PSTCC
and TTU students, as well as K-12 teachers and K-12 pre-education students
provide collegial support among preservice and inservice teachers. These teams
also collaborate on curriculum development and applications that contain hands-
on, discovery-based pedagogy infused with technology applications. It is
expected that newly graduated teachers will continue to participate in mentoring
teams, resulting in continued support during their induction into the teaching
profession and increased rates of retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;