* 0302441
* U.S.-Czech Physics Research on Asymptotic Normalization Coefficients in Nuclear Astrophysics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Tribble, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 7,016.00

This US-Czech research project between Robert E. Tribble of Texas A&amp;M's
Cyclotron Institute with partner Vaclav Kroha at the Czech Nuclear Physics
Institute, Rez, will apply techniques they developed to determine the direct
capture contribution for a number of reactions that are important in the
hydrogen-burning phase of stellar evolution. We know that stars evolve by
burning their nuclear fuel through a sequence of reaction cycles and decays. The
US-Czech team uses a novel indirect method to determine astrophysical capture
reaction rates at stellar energies. Now published, that new approach, called the
Asymptotic Normalization Coefficients (ANCs) method, is widely used by
experimental groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This phase of the collaboration
involves further use of the ANCs method to study important stellar capture
reactions in the hot CNO cycle, with the goal of understanding the evolution of
supermassive stars. Both groups have core support from non-NSF sources. The NSF
award supports the participation of graduate and undergraduate students from
Texas A&amp;M who will travel to the Nuclear Physics Institute for joint
research and to learn about setup and operation of a gas cell at the Rez
facility. The knowledge gained will enable them to carry out precision studies
of ANCs with gas targets on the Texas MDM magnetic spectrometer and to perform
data analysis. At the undergraduate level, the experience will contribute to
work needed for completing an honors thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much new
information is now available from astronomical observations that require
modeling of nuclear processes to understand. The synergy between observation,
stellar modeling and nuclear physics that the US-Czech team brings to bear is
expected to advance our understanding of stellar evolution. This nuclear
astrophysics project thereby fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence.