* 0302612
* Center for the Advancement of Systems Security and Information Assurance (CASSIA)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Dale Henniger, Moraine Valley Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,214,972.00

This regional center for information technology (IT) security and data assurance
serves a five-state area of the Midwest and focuses on a field which is critical
to homeland security and which has a large demand for qualified workers. The
center builds on a previous Advanced Technological Education project at Moraine
Valley Community College, "Applied Internet Technology: Curriculum and Careers"
(NSF Award No. 9950037; see
http://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/servlet/showaward?award=9950037 and
http://www.morainevalley.edu/nsf/), which concluded in 2002. The following
educational institutions are collaborating in the operation of the
center:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Moraine Valley Community College (Palos Hills,
Illinois)&lt;br/&gt;* Rock Valley College (Rockford, Illinois)&lt;br/&gt;*
University of Illinois at Springfield (Springfield, Illinois)&lt;br/&gt;*
Lakeland Community College (Kirtland, Ohio)&lt;br/&gt;* Washtenaw Community
College (Ann Arbor, Michigan)&lt;br/&gt;* Inver Hills Community College (Grove
Heights, Minnesota)&lt;br/&gt;* Madison Area Technical College (Madison,
Wisconsin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other organizations from business, industry, and
government are also advising the center and participating in its
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center is collecting, adapting, and
enhancing curricula in cybersecurity, offering certificate and degree programs,
and providing professional development for college faculty in the region. In
particular, the center is establishing an A.A.S. degree and a certificate in IT
security and data assurance; a concentration in IT security and data assurance
within a B.S. degree program in computer science; an Internet-accessible
laboratory environment that demonstrates and simulates security technologies;
"train the trainer" summer workshops and externship opportunities for faculty
from regional community colleges and four-year institutions; an internship
program for students in the A.A.S. and B.S. degree programs; and a comprehensive
outreach and support program to increase the number of students from
underrepresented groups who pursue IT careers.