* 0302850
* Cal-OPTEC
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Larry DeShazer, San Jose City College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/2005
* USD 69,973.00

The project is for planning Cal-OPTEC (Optics and Photonics Technology Education
Center) as an ATE Regional Center, the purpose of which is to improve photonics
curriculum for community colleges as well as address critical long-term labor
shortages in the industry. To be launched by the California Photonics Consortium
(a group of community colleges, baccalaureate institutions, industry
representatives, a national laboratory, and workforce agencies), Cal-OPTEC works
under five goals: 1) To increase the number of students seeking postsecondary
education in photonics; 2) To enhance instructor knowledge of photonics; 3) To
improve curriculum in the areas of laser technology, precision optics
fabrication, and fiber optics technology; 4) to enrich the availability and
efficacy of photonics programs; and 5) to expand linkages among community
colleges, industry, high schools, and baccalaureate institutions.

Cal-OPTEC intends to accomplish these goals by exposing youth, parents,
counselors, and displaced workers to the opportunities and education needed in
the field; by providing professional development for high school and community
college instructors; by expanding, improving, reviewing, and packaging
curriculum in three photonics areas; by working with industry to monitor the
needs of the California photonics industry, and initiate new programs far enough
in advance to fill industry's needs for skilled workers; and by improving
communication among photonics interests in California. The results of these
efforts will lead to a well-developed curriculum in three technical areas that
is transportable and articulated with high schools and baccalaureate, an
educated pool of high school and community college instructors, and well-trained
workers in sufficient numbers to support the photonics industry's growth and
global competitiveness.

The planning project will bring together the partners in sessions to work out
the details of the way such a Regional Center should be constructed.