* 0302010
* Linking Rarity, Extinction Dynamics, and Life-History Traits: Across-Scale Investigations with Desert Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mazer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 137,433.00

William Fagan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEB
0075667&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extinction is one of
the most fundamental processes in ecology-it shapes evolution, community
structure, and patterns of biodiversity. Yet studies of extinction are scarce,
and studies involving hard data rather than theoretical models are almost
totally lacking. We will take advantage of an extraordinary database concerning
Sonoran Desert fishes to investigate relationships between extirpation and
patterns of rarity and life-history traits. Key to our project is the
development of new methods for quantifying patterns of rarity that are
independent of the spatial scale of analyses. Investigations of rarity are
important because most species are in some way rare. The details of how species
differ in the "way in which they are rare" (e.g., in numbers, in spatial
distribution) may be key to understanding a diversity of issues in ecology,
including the assembly of communities and how species persist in the face of
disturbances. &lt;br/&gt;Our unique database includes over 25,000 locality
records spanning 160 years of field research for all 50 known taxa of Sonoran
Desert fishes. These fishes collectively constitute a gravely endangered biota
for which data on the linkages among rarity, extinction-proneness, and life-
history traits are of critical conservation importance. The methods we apply are
modifications of Kunin's (1998) notion of "scale-area curves," which provide a
means of quantifying rarity patterns across spatial scales. Specifically, we
will examine how the patterns of rarity these fish exhibit relate to their
extinction dynamics (e.g., frequency and spatial pattern of extirpation events)
and current levels of endangerment. We will also determine the extent to which
patterns of rarity and extinction can be predicted by life-history attributes.
&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity databases are an untapped storehouse of information on
distributions of species. They allow us to ask questions at different scales and
with greater taxonomic breadth than any experiment or focused field study can.
They also allow us to ask altogether different questions-such as questions about
extinction. The research proposed here will explore linkages between rarity,
extinction risk, and life-history traits, along the way defining limits on how
existing databases can be used and clarifying how to improve development of new
databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;