* 0302417
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Race and Crime: Illuminating the Processes that Contribute to Crime Among and Between Whites and African-Americans
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Charles Tittle, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,483.00

Previous research on race and crime has typically been limited to the
demographic question of whether African-Americans are more likely to be involved
in crime than Whites. However, from a theoretical standpoint, a more significant
question is why this racial gap exists and whether criminological explanations
of rule-breaking account equally to both African-Americans and Whites. The
proposed study of race and crime will examine two fundamental theoretical
questions. First, if a racial gap in self-reported rates of rule-breaking exists
between African-Americans and Whites, and if so, to what extent can prominent
individual-level criminological theories explain this gap? Second, do prominent
individual-level criminological theories provide equally satisfactory
accountings of rule-breaking among African-Americans and Whites? This research
will assess the extent to which self-control, general strain, social bond, and
social learning theories answer these two questions and thereby this study will
offer the first comparative evaluation of these four standard theoretical
explanations of the race-crime association. Data for this study will be
collected from face-to-face interviews of a sample of Whites and African-
Americans who live in three census tracts in Wake County, North Carolina. The
research will contribute to social science understandings of the extent and
character of the link, if any, between race and crime by collecting a unique
dataset and by illuminating the processes that may contribute to crime among and
between African-Americans and Whites.