* 0302125
* Bridges to Secondary Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Phillip Huebner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2007
* USD 699,133.00

This project establishes the Bridges to Secondary Education (BSE) program,
infusing STEM knowledge into pre-service secondary education programs. The
project is strengthened by the PI's 12 years of experience working with American
Indian students in STEM programs, and the Co-PI's comprehensive experiences in
pre-service programs, combined with the extensive backgrounds of the BSE staff
in working with American Indian students. The project seeks to increase the
number of American Indian teachers with the STEM knowledge and leadership skills
by many orders of magnitude. The BSE program is recruiting over 30 American
Indian students each year and is planning to place its first graduates into
public schools by the third year of the program. Participating students complete
a secondary education program that encompasses extensive training and refinement
to prepare them to be lead STEM teachers in rural, economically-disadvantaged
schools in Arizona. An established infrastructure is in place to provide new
teachers with continuous support and induction activities beyond the BSE
program. Through the extensive collaborations with partners, schools, and
educational specialists working for the Arizona Rural Systemic Initiative (AZ-
RSI), students are gaining first-hand experience and participating in leading
educational reform efforts in assessment, pedagogy, equity, leadership, and the
use of technology in instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an educational
partnership between ASU East and Chandler Gilbert Community College, the project
is providing a teacher preparation program in secondary education that is built
around a self-contained two-year community college program offered through
summer enrichment programs that allow 4-year students to complete ASU East's
Secondary Education (Biology concentration) with additional certifications in
math, science, or technology -- all on the same campus. The BSE program also
targets A.A., A.A.S. and B.S. students who are involved in the BSE/ASU East
Secondary Education program. ASU East is seen as a polytechnic institute with
state-of-the-art mediated classrooms and STEM programs. The BSE program is
drawing on faculty and resources from the College of Technology and Applied
Sciences (CTAS). The participation of CTAS faculty is allowing the teaching of
research methodology in many areas of BSE instruction and is increasing the
technological competencies of the students. As these students move into teaching
positions, this has the effect of disseminating a research-rich curriculum to
public schools throughout Arizona (through the AZ-RSI) and brings technical
skills and competencies to these schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive collaborations built into the BSE program extend into
relationships with private industry in order to bring practicing mathematicians,
scientists, engineers and technology professionals together with master teachers
and BSE staff to maximize students' exposure to STEM knowledge. This
collaboration will increase the students' understanding and, most importantly,
build life-long relationships with these industrial mentors. Placement and
induction activities round out the BSE program. The program facilitates the
placement of students in tribal-serving secondary schools and provides induction
activities through the AZ-RSI that support and promote BSE graduates and their
schools. This program design lends itself to sustainability through building
interaction between university programs, collaboration with partners, continued
development of two-year pre-service programs at partnering community colleges,
and the summer enrichment programs. &lt;br/&gt;