* 0302703
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Hydro-Ecological Linkages in Urbanizing Watersheds:  A Process-Based Assessment of Land-Use Change Impact on Nitrogen Export
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Christina Tague, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The terrestrial-aquatic interface, in particular the riparian ecotone, plays an
important role in watershed nitrogen cycling. Because land-use change can
significantly alter its capacity to process or retain nitrogen, understanding
the linkages between upland nitrogen delivery and ecotone processing is crucial
for land-use change impact assessments. This doctoral dissertation research
project will address the role of the riparian zone and the stream in the
retention, transformation and mobilization of nitrogen. The student will examine
the role of riparian and in-stream processing, the effect of spatial arrangement
in land use, and the development of remote sensing-based aggregation procedures.
The research approach will combine hydro-ecological modeling with remote sensing
and field measurements, allowing for addressing relevant processes and related
patterns across a range of spatial and temporal scales. The regional hydro-
ecological simulation system (RHESSys), a hydro-ecological watershed model, will
be coupled within a geographic information system (GIS) to a flow and water
quality model for streams. The stream model will be enhanced to account for
stream-groundwater interactions and associated nitrogen processing in the
hyporheic zone, the subsurface flowpath where stream water mixes with subsurface
water. Model development and application will be based on an established RHESSys
application and on remote sensing data and field data collected as part of
activities at the Baltimore Ecosystem Study Long Term Ecological Research site
(BES-LTER). Additional field campaigns will be conducted in support of the
modeling activities, including field experiments and stream monitoring.

Understanding the linkages between hydrologic and biogeochemical cycling is an
important research challenge in global change science. Coupling hydrology and
biogeochemistry across multiple spatial-temporal scales is a key approach for
meeting this challenge. This study will help bridge this gap in scientific
understanding by providing a multidisciplinary, process-based approach for
investigating nitrogen export from watersheds. The study should enhance general
understanding of spatial-temporal linkages in the landscape between water and
biogeochemical cycling and their role in controlling human-induced impacts on
ecosystem functioning. The enhanced model should also be of direct value to
practitioners who might use it for water- and land-resource management. The
research will build on established research endeavors and will integrate with
educational and community outreach activities, including the use of high school
students and community members as volunteer data collectors. The doctoral
candidate will assist interested students in using data they and others collect
in science fair projects. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.