* 0302609
* DNA Repair of UV-irradiated G. lamblia Cysts Following Low and Medium Pressure UV Disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Karl Linden, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas D. Waite
* 07/31/2005
* USD 334,398.00

0302609 Shin Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation has recently gained considerable
attention as an alternative to conventional chemical disinfectants in water
treatment processes after the recent discovery of its remarkable inactivation
ability of the highly chlorine-resistant protozoan pathogens: Cryptosporidium
parvum oocysts and Giardia lamblia cysts and relatively low potential of
producing harmful disinfection byproducts (DBPs). In fact, UV disinfection is
one of the most promising candidate technologies for compliance with the Stage 2
Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproduct Rule (DBPR) and Long Term 2 Enhanced
Surface Water Treatment Rule (LT2ESWTR). Despite the recently recognized promise
of UV disinfection, however, there are still several issues that must be
addressed before widespread use of UV irradiation as a primary disinfectant to
achieve microbially-acceptable drinking water. One such issue is the ability of
UV-irradiated waterborne pathogens to repair their UV-damaged DNA. Recently, our
preliminary study indicates that G. lamblia cysts can restore their infectivity
when they were exposed to low doses of low pressure UV and subjected to certain
repair conditions. It is important to characterize the extent and kinetics of
DNA repair in UV-irradiated G. lamblia cysts and then identify the threshold UV
dosage for this microorganism in order to reduce the level of this important
waterborne microorganism in drinking water by an acceptable level. Therefore,
the objective of this proposed activity is to determine the kinetics and the
extent of the DNA repair capabilities of UV-irradiated G. lamblia cysts after
exposure to from low and medium pressure UV sources with both animal and
molecular biological assays order to identify required dosages (threshold
dosages) of both UV irradiation and thereby optimize UV disinfection processes
to inactivate this important waterborne microorganism by an appreciable and
acceptable level.&lt;br/&gt;This proposed activity is one of the rare studies on
DNA repair in protozoans and probably the first study to characterize the
mechanism and kinetics of UV inactivation and subsequent repair in these
microorganisms using various molecular biological methods. The information
gathered in this proposed activity will enable us to elucidate the different
mechanisms of UV damage and repair phenomenon in UV-irradiated G. lamblia after
low and medium pressure UV exposure. Furthermore, this information will help us
to determine the threshold UV dosages for control of G. lamblia cysts for both
LP and MP UV technology which will ensure low or no DNA repair of G. lamblia
cysts and thereby optimize the effective doses of UV irradiation to inactivate
this important waterborne microorganism to levels that will protect public
health. Information about the primary UV damage and repair mechanisms for each
type of UV lamps would make it possible to design current treatment facilities
and future UV technology for maximal inactivation and repair inhibition against
G. lamblia cysts and other waterborne protozoan parasites, and also would
provide another important selection criteria for UV lamp type in a water
treatment plant by comparing their potential advantages. Finally, the
information and experience gathered in this proposed activity with G. lamblia
cysts will be easily transferred to future studies on mechanisms of UV
inactivation and repair phenomena in other new and emerging waterborne protozoan
parasites.&lt;br/&gt;