* 0302515
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The End of Class Compromise? Globalization and Democracy in Affluent Capitalist Societies
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Richard Appelbaum, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Beth Rubin
* 04/30/2004
* USD 2,745.00

This dissertation analyzes the relationship between economic globalization and
democratic governance in affluent capitalist societies. The extant literature on
this subject yields contradictory hypotheses. Some scholars argue that
globalization, by undermining the autonomy of the nation-state and enhancing the
political power of transnational corporations, has weakened the ability of
national democratic systems to produce a genuine class compromise. Other
scholars disagree. They argue that, at least for the affluent capitalist
countries, the social and political effects of globalization have been
significantly overstated. Drawing on this debate and the literature on
comparative political systems and welfare states, this dissertation hypothesizes
that the structure of a country's political system, not its level of global
market integration, decisively affects many social and political patterns
associated with class compromise. A structural equation model, using six proxies
to measure democratic class compromise, and data from 16 OECD counties are used
to test this hypothesis and related propositions. The results will make two
important contributions to sociology. First, they will help clarify debates
within the globalization literature, and second they will demonstrate a novel
approach to studying political power within democratic societies.