* 0302169
* CAREER:  Broadcast and the Bits: Enhancing Educational Television with Digital Justification
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Brian Smith, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 284,763.00

This research focuses on children's television and how it can be enhanced with
digital technologies. We envision the convergence between television and
computing leading to new types of learning interactions between children and
parents around television content. In particular, we may be able to borrow
features from educational reform movements to develop novel, informal learning
around television. For instance, if we can model question-asking and inquiry
strategies to parents and children, they may be able to adopt and use them to
structure learning conversations in the home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We add a new
layer of digital information to the analog television experience, justification
structures that explain how and why a television program is intended to
facilitate learning. By providing additional meta-information about the
educational intentions of a program, we hope to engage parents and children in
critical reflection and inquiry around television content. The justification
structures are digitial design rationales, capturing elements of the production
process that would otherwise be hidden from viewers (e.g., historical
justifications for the inclusion of content, alternative viewpoints and
additional questions that were omitted from the final
program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop the justification structures, we will
examine how television producers currently design and develop their programming.
As we understand their practices and conceptions of learning, we will define
justification structures that make explicit the tacit assumptions underlying
their programming decisions. We will then design and deploy digital television
technologies to families in low-income housing projects with the goals
of:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Developing a theory of justification that describes
the content and rationale behind children's television
programming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Assessing the impact of justification
structures on parent-child interactions and learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o
Rethinking the content of educational television in light of these justification
structures