* 0302254
* Giant Magnetoelectric Effects in Ferromagnetic-Ferroelectric Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 240,733.00

This individual investigator award will support a project directed toward
fabrication and analysis of novel bulk and multilayer magnetoelectric (ME)
composites consisting of ferrites and lead zirconate titanate. The
electromagnetic coupling in the composites is mediated by mechanical stress. The
focus of the research will be on the origin of giant ME interactions. The
research will involve the following tasks. (i) Synthesis of bulk, bilayers and
multilayers by traditional sintering, hot pressing and microwave sintering. The
objective is to obtain composites with wide variations in of structural and
mechanical parameters at the interface. (ii) Measurements of low frequency giant
ME effects, theoretical analysis, and estimation of interface coupling. (iii)
Studies on microwave ME effects, at ferromagnetic resonance (9-10 GHz) for
ferrites. The planned studies are of fundamental and technological importance.
Anticipated impacts include research experience for graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students and collaboration with European scientists and industry
(Delphi Corporation). The layered materials are potential candidates for use as
magnetoelectric memory devices, smart sensors and actuators. There are also
possibilities for a new class of electrically controlled microwave magnetic
signal processing devices and magnetically controlled piezoelectric
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award supports a
research project involving the preparation and analysis of materials that are
capable of converting magnetic fields to electric fields. Materials of interest
are composites consisting of ferrites that respond to magnetic fields and lead
zirconate titanate that respond to electric fields. The ferrite deforms in a
magnetic field and the deformation in turn produces electricity in the titanate.
Both bulk and layered samples will be prepared. A variety of processing
techniques, including microwave heating, will be used to prepare samples with
the best field conversion efficiency. Sample properties will be studied over a
wide frequency range. Anticipated impacts of the research include the following.
(i) Hands-on research experience for graduate, undergraduate and high school
students. (ii) Collaboration with European scientists on theoretical aspects of
the research. (iii) New materials for use as multifunctional smart sensors and
transducers in communication and defense related systems. (iv) Collaboration
with Delphi Automotive Systems on the use of the composites for applications in
automotive industry. &lt;br/&gt;