* 0302347
* Correlated Quantum and Classical Systems; Dense Light Elements and Their Combinations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Neil Ashcroft, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 459,000.00

This grant supports theoretical studies of the light elements, including
hydrogen and also the light elements in combination, but placed under conditions
of high pressure and also of elevated temperature. The research also includes
studies of correlated quantum and classical systems under similar conditions,
but with particular emphasis on possible novel states of order. One topic of
growing prominence in such systems is the fundamental and increasingly pragmatic
area of superconductivity, impelled by the recent and quite dramatic discovery
of superconductivity occurring in compressed lithium with a transition
temperature of about 20K at 48Gpa, which if substantiated would be the highest
of any element. Previous studies had shown that these so-called simple elements
could adopt structures of considerable complexity at similar conditions.
Further, these elements were observed to take up structures exhibiting
incommensurabilities. And it is surely remarkable that the light elements in the
straightforward combination MgB2 have such a dramatic effect on the field of
superconductivity. %%% These theoretical studies will investigate the electronic
properties of the light elements, e.g., hydrogen, lithium, etc., under high
pressure and high temperatures. These so-called simple elements yield unexpected
rich structures including superconductivity. While the research is very basic,
the results will be very beneficial in understanding superconductivity which has
many potential applications. The project will support graduate students. ***