* 0302255
* SGER:    Exploratory Research to Diagnose Dementia from Vehicle Operation Data
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Roman Kuc, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 10/31/2005
* USD 106,000.00

0302255&lt;br/&gt;Kuc&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the feasibility of
diagnosing and monitoring an operator's state of dementia by characterizing on-
road operation of a vehicle. Five elements comprise the research plan: the human
transfer function, vehicle operation data, dementia modeling, measures extracted
from data that correlate with dementia model parameter values, and an
experimental means to assess the performance of the
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments involve normal volunteers
(engineering undergraduates who assist in the conduct of the research) drive an
electric scooter equipped with sensors to monitor vehicle location, speed,
acceleration, and direction; position of nearby objects; and, the driver's
actions in controlling the scooter joystick. The scooter can also be programmed
to modify the driver's actions, as if the driver had dementia. Signal processing
procedures extract features in the driving data that correlate with dementia,
which include slowed reaction speed, poor judgment and inappropriate actions. In
these experiments the "correct answer" is known because the "dementia simulator"
mimics slowed reaction speed by introducing a delay in the joystick control.
Similar random modifications in the joystick signals simulate poor judgment and
inappropriate actions. The vehicle then illustrates the degradation of driving
behavior as the degree of dementia increases. Preliminary scooter results and
computer simulations verify this claim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the
research are expected to be reported in the IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering and the IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation for the
engineering community, and the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society for
the clinical community. &lt;br/&gt;