* 0302173
* Albemarle AquaTech Project:  A Proposal for a Marine and Estuarine Technician Education Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Dana Newton, College of the Albemarle
* Standard Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 07/31/2006
* USD 153,155.00

College of The Albemarle, located in coastal Northeastern North Carolina, is
partnering with a regional public school system (Dare County Public Schools) and
a state university (Elizabeth City State University) to expand the number of
marine and estuarine technicians prepared in the region and improve the way in
which marine technology is taught at both the secondary and community college
levels. The Albemarle region is experiencing extraordinary growth in tourism and
home construction, creating pressure on ecosystems and the accelerated need for
more and better trained marine &amp; estuarine technicians. Up until the present
time, the three partnering education agencies have worked independently in
marine technician education. This is a first-time effort to work
together.&lt;br/&gt; The Albemarle AquaTech Project has a broad impact in
strengthening the alignment of marine technician high school and college
curricula on a regional (seven county) basis. It is now possible to use advanced
monitoring and testing equipment on a floating marine lab by high school and
college faculty and students. The particular focus of the project on training
marine technicians to work in the streams, rivers, and shallow coastal areas of
Northeastern North Carolina is much needed, not only for the immediate region,
but in the training of specialized marine technicians for work in similar
ecosystems, nationally.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of the project lies in
its ability to incorporate into all components (faculty training, curricular
development, and student coursework) experiences in current research on coastal
and estuarine ecosystems in the Albemarle, specifically as they apply to the
work of marine technicians. Three areas of scientific problems facing the region
are strongly emphasized: 1) the impact of algal bloom on area ecologies; 2)
preservation and restoration of indigenous endangered species, particularly
loggerhead, green and Kemp's Ridley turtles and 3) research on ways to
accurately and efficiently monitor water quality. Additional intellectual merit
is evident in the quality of partners committed to providing research and
training expertise for the project. These include the Marine Advanced Technology
Education Center at Monterey Peninsula College, the Academy of Natural Sciences
Estuarine Research Center (St. Leonard, Maryland), Sea Grant North Carolina, and
Bio-Link's Southeast Regional Center at Alamance College.&lt;br/&gt; The primary
audience in each year of the Albemarle AquaTech Project includes 282 high school
and college students, four COA faculty and eight public school science teachers.
Activities include: 1) Five days training for faculty and teachers; 2) Revision
of eight existing COA Marine Science courses; 3) Creation of a floating lab
configured with advanced marine technology equipment; 4) Recruitment,
registration and completion of marine technology coursework by 82 high school
and college students; 5) Field trips by 200 high school students using the
floating lab; 6) Articulation meetings by COA, ECSU and Dare County schools
officials; and 7) Evaluation and dissemination of the project's findings and
accomplishments to education, research and workforce development agencies across
the region and nation.&lt;br/&gt;