* 0302540
* IT@Sinclair: Improving Student Retention in IT Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* David Siefert, Sinclair Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 883,320.00

Building on the success of IT@Sinclair, Sinclair Community College addresses the
issue of student success and retention in information technology programs.
Retention in foundation IT courses is a national issue. The goal is to gain a
20% increase in student retention and success. Since retention is a complex
relationship among the student, the faculty and the course content, the college
and its educational and industrial partners develop instruments to assess
student readiness, instructor resource kits, and a faculty institute. The
readiness instrument addresses motivation, expectations, intent, capabilities,
goals, etc. and assists faculty advising students. The course content supporting
Information Services and Support, Network Systems, Programming and Software
Development, and Interactive Media is based upon itWORKS.OHIO. Instructor
Resource Kits, also based on itWORKS.OHIO competencies, assist especially part
time faculty develop the pedagogical content knowledge and skills to serve as
learning facilitators. A faculty professional development plan is developed.
Extensive evaluation of the instrument and the resource kits and the lessons
learned are to be widely disseminated through workshops in other regions of
Ohio. Special attention is paid to the retention of underserved minority
students.