* 0302971
* Residual Strength After Liquefaction: A Rheological Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Pedro de Alba, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2005
* USD 16,889.00

Predicting the residual strength available after liquefaction can be a major
factor in the design of tailings dams and hydraulic-fill dams for stability. As
strong-motion data accumulate in seismic areas, design acceleration levels tend
to become progressively higher. Consequently, dams must be periodically
reevaluated for safety, and remediation may become necessary. Analysis may show
that liquefaction of at least part of the dam is probable, and remediation
measures often hinge on the calculated stability of the structure assuming that
there are zones within the dam that liquefy and the strength reduces to a
residual value. In some cases, remedial measures may become so costly that the
dam is instead taken out of service, disrupting water supply, power generation
or mining operations. Thus, the prediction of residual strength can have an
important effect on dam safety and operation
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Residual strengths used in earthquake
engineering practice are basically values back calculated from a limited number
of case histories of liquefaction failures. There is considerable scatter in the
data, probably due to the unique features of each failed embankment. Laboratory
studies of residual strength after liquefaction are desirable to study this
behavior under controlled conditions, and a large number of studies have been
done. However, even for very similar materials, the values obtained vary widely,
and tend to be much higher than those back calculated from field cases. It is
very likely that the problem resides in the types of apparatus used, which
generally do not have the capability of applying shear strains at a rate
comparable to that of liquefaction slides, nor can they produce an amount of
strain comparable to that observed in field cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory project will test the basic idea using a different approach. Earth
scientists have for many years studied debris-flow slides in partly saturated
natural materials, with a wide range of particle sizes. They have concluded that
sliding behavior is a complex phenomenon controlled by particle/particle and
fluid/particle interactions that are best interpreted as a form of viscous flow.
However, a practical quantitative model of this behavior is still not available,
due to the many variables involved. In the earth dams of concern, the range of
particle sizes is generally smaller, and the material is saturated, which is a
somewhat simpler case. This study measures the stresses around a small sphere
pulled through liquefied soil, and analyzes the motion of the sphere in
liquefied sand to see if it can be interpreted using a viscous flow
(rheological) model. Both the rate of strain and the amount of relative strain
are controlled to more closely resemble field values than in previous
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this approach could lead to a
better understanding of liquefied sand behavior during flow sliding, and provide
a new experimental approach for studying the influence of different factors
(e.g. fines content) on sliding behavior. Residual strength would thus not be
modeled as a unique value, but would include a limiting threshold strength plus
the strength gain due to the speed of viscous flow.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;