* 0302194
* Prevalence and Preparedness for Conjoint Natural and Technological Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,09/30/2007
* laura Steinberg, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2007
* USD 210,008.00

There is growing evidence that technological disasters can be triggered by
natural disasters, and that these conjoint events ("na-techs") can pose
tremendous risks to regions which are unprepared for such disasters. Recent
examples include the catastrophic refinery fires at the Tupras oil refinery
following the August 1999 earthquake in Turkey, the releases of hazardous
materials which resulted from the 2001 Bhuj earthquake in India, and the damage
inflicted on industrial facilities during the European floods of 2002.
Recognizing the need to understand the risk posed by na-techs in the United
States, this project will generate and analyze the record of conjoint disasters
over the last twenty-two years in the United States. Using a variety of data
sources, including mail surveys of emergency managers, EPA and FEMA databases,
and telephone and on-site interviews, we will determine the incidence of na-
techs disasters over the twenty-two years, the types of natural hazards which
triggered them, the failure modes of the hazardous materials vessels/equipment,
the industries which have been vulnerable to these releases, and the on and off-
site consequences of the releases. From these data, we will construct
conditional probabilities of a technological disaster occurring, given that a
natural hazard occurs. For a selected subset of US counties, we will show how
these conditional probabilities can be used to construct probabilistic GIS-based
maps showing the total probability of na-techs occurring in specific counties.
In addition, case studies of individual na-techs in the United States will be
developed and the results synthesized so that general conclusions can be drawn
regarding vulnerability of hazardous materials to release as a result of natural
disasters, mitigation measures needed to prevent or minimize the impact of such
releases, and appropriate response measures in case of a release. These case
studies will also be useful as data from which expert judgment can made
regarding the potential for catastrophic technological disasters as a result of
natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;