* 0302618
* Development of a Mechanistic Model of Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) based on Equilibrium Thermodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Daniel Noguera, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 06/30/2007
* USD 438,188.00

0302618 Noguera Intellectual Merit: The main outcome of this research will be
the establishment of a mathematical methodology to facilitate the design of
probes for FISH. After a researcher has identified specific 16S rRNA sequences,
our model will assist with (1) checking the specific target sites for
accessibility using the unbiased map constructed in Task 2, (2) fine-tuning the
probes to achieve high intensity signals (e.g., adjusting probe length to
achieve .G 0 ov<-15 kcal/mol), (3) using site-specific m values (obtained during
Task 1) to generate theoretical denaturation curves for the target and non-
target microorganisms, and (4) designing probes with stable stem-loop structures
to increase target and non-target differentiation, following guidelines
developed during Task 3. Currently, none of these important evaluations are
possible. Moreover, due to the wide applicability of FISH and similar
hybridization methods, the outcome of this study is likely to cross
multidisciplinary boundaries. Broader Impacts: This project will contribute to
the education of two graduate students. One of them is Mr. Safak Yilmaz, a
third-year PhD student in Civil and Environmental Engineering. The second
graduate student will be recruited from the pool of applicants to the Civil and
Environmental Engineering program and special consideration will be given to
diversity applicants. The PI will use the existing infrastructure in the College
of Engineering and the UW to foster educational equity, such as the Graduate
Education Research Scholars Program, and the College of Engineering
Opportunities in Engineering Conference. In addition, during the duration of
this project, the PI will offer summer internships to diversity undergraduate
students through existing summer programs in biology and engineering (SRP-Bio
and SURE/REU). Finally, we plan to establish a website where users can access
the large databases generated in this project and use the model for the
mechanistic design of FISH protocols. The model itself, the generated 16S rRNA
maps (i.e., m values and inaccessibility), and the model applications will be
distributed to the scientific community in peer-review publications and the best
available electronic approach.