* 0302275
* Flow Induced Platelet Activation in Cardiovascular Pathologies and Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Jolyon Jesty, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2007
* USD 305,178.00

0302275&lt;br/&gt;Bluestein&lt;br/&gt;The advent of implantable blood
recirculating devices has provided life saving solutions to patients with severe
cardiovascular diseases and end stage heart disease. Left ventricular assist
devices were recently shown to be superior to drug therapy, the implantable
total artificial heart is showing promise, and prosthetic heart valves are
routinely used for replacing diseased heart valves. However, thromboembolism and
the attendant risk of cardioembolic stroke remains an impediment to these
devices. The mandatory life-long anticoagulant drug regimen they require does
not eliminate this risk. One of the major culprits is the emergence of
pathologic flow patterns that enhance the propensity to initiate
thromboembolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is
to develop state-of-the-art numerical and experimental tools in order to
elucidate flow-induced mechanisms leading to thromboembolism. Specifically,
transient and turbulent numerical simulations will be performed in 3D models of
arterial stenoses and blood recirculating devices. Flow patterns that induce
platelet activation and enhance platelet aggregation will be quantitatively
depicted. Stress histories that may bring platelets past their activation
threshold will be computed along pertinent trajectories. A model for platelet
activation that takes into account cumulative effects of stress history and
senescence will be developed. The model will be tested against in vitro platelet
activity measurements using an innovative platelet activity state (PAS) assay
that enables real time measurements of platelet hemostatic activity under flow
conditions. The PAS measurements will be performed in a system simulating
conditions of arterial stenosis and in a model of a cardiovascular device. The
first system is an innovative Dynamic Cell Shearing Device (DCSD) capable of
reproducing the dynamic aspects of normal and pathologic arterial waveforms with
great accuracy. Experiments in the DCSD will be performed in the absence of
arterial wall, and in the presence of intact and damaged blood vessel wall,
applying shear stress waveforms obtained from the CFD simulations. The second
system is a Left Ventricular Assist Device model with two interchangeable
mechanical heart valves.