* 0302243
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Non-Marital Fertility among Mexican Origin Women: Exploring the Role of Social Context
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* R Kelly Raley, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 6,575.00

The rise in non-marital fertility rates, and the persistent race/ethnic
differential, is one of the most important changes in the family over the last
several decades, raising concern in the political and academic arenas. This
project proposes to look at race/ethnic differences in non-marital fertility and
at the role that geo-social context plays in this relationship, paying
particular attention to the surprisingly high levels of non-marital fertility
among Mexican Origin women, a large and rapidly growing segment of the
population. Drawing from theory based on black-white differences, this project
will look at the role that structural and economic factors, normative beliefs,
and race/ethnic segregation at the macro level play in maintaining group
differences in non-marital fertility. Additionally, it will explore whether a
more familistic culture among Mexican Americans protects them from the
deleterious effects of neighborhood disadvantage. The 1995 wave of the National
Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) and the 1995 NSFG contextual data file will be
used in a multi-level study to explore whether theories of family formation,
developed on the basis of black-white differences, hold when Mexican Americans
are included in the analysis. Importantly, this research will distinguish
between the native and foreign born Mexican American populations in order to
more fully explore this question as well as give us insight into how well this
population is doing within the context of the United States. This research will
contribute to social science and policy researchers by filling an important gap
in the family literature by extending research on race/ethnic differences in
non-marital fertility by including Mexican Americans. This, in turn, will
contribute to the refinement of theory, which is largely based on black-white
differences in family formation processes.