* 0302715
* Conference on Conflict of Interest, Carnegie Mellon University in September, 2003
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Don Moore, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2004
* USD 42,280.00

&lt;br/&gt;Recent financial scandals, from fraudulent accounting at Enron and
WorldCom to stock analysts on Wall Street, all involve conflicts of interest of
some type. Conflicts of interest can introduce a host of corruptions, biases and
inefficiencies into the market. Preventing or reducing these negative effects
depends crucially on understanding how conflicts of interest operate. We propose
a conference that attracts scholars from a wide variety of disciplines and
backgrounds, all of whom are doing research on conflict of interest. The
potential contribution of the conference is great, given the breadth and
importance of the topic, the interest in the topic in diverse scholarly domains,
and the opportunity to connect people across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this conference are (1) to bring
together people working on conflict of interest in a forum that fosters the
efficient synthesis of a new body of knowledge; (2) to showcase research on
conflicts of interest; (3) to define future research areas on the topic; and (4)
to disseminate research findings about conflicts of interest, their dangers, and
their solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will be held at Carnegie
Mellon University in September, 2003. The organizers plan to publish the papers
presented at the conference in a special edited book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;