* 0302679
* Planning Grant: Rural Education Advanced Learning in Geographic Information Systems (REAL GIS)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Lynn Onken, San Juan College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 04/30/2005
* USD 92,084.00

This project allows San Juan College to plan and design a certificate, transfer
degree and training program in Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for the
region that it serves. Rich in natural resources, but sparse population, there
is a need for the GIS technology to meet a current and projected shortage of
faculty and highly skilled technicians. This multifaceted effort to meet
academic and workforce needs is centered at San Juan College with support from
educational, business and industry partnerships. The project develops a program
for rural education of undergraduate students, current workers, future
technicians and teachers. Planning for training experienced instructors, the
technical and transfer program, and utilizing practicing scientists and
technicians as advisors, the project assists San Juan College in addressing the
intellectual challenge of providing quality student learning. Important science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) principles, integrating the tools
and concepts of GIS, and providing a means to technical education currently
available only at great distance and expense are supported by this project. The
intellectual merit of a systematic plan for developing faculty technological
skills and gathering appropriate curricular materials creates a program of
academic and outcome skills with relevant assessment across disciplines,
application of practical skills and a problem solving focus that improves both
student involvement and interest in learning with effective use of technology.
Project outcomes are the effective planning for a new program and learning
experiences of community college faculty, coordination of interdisciplinary GIS
activities, partnership development with university programs, and providing
collaboration among agencies and private industry for educational resources. The
broader impact of this project includes a model project for professional and
program development provided to other institutions for the integration of GIS
and other technology across disciplines. Evaluation of project goals and
documentation of institutional change is disseminated to state and national GIS
educators providing relevant materials for planning GIS education. Technology
utilized with both asynchronous and synchronous distance learning improves
technological education available to educators who prepare undergraduate and
secondary school minority students and the education of technicians who drive
the economy.