* 0302044
* Stress and Structure Evolution During Formation of Polycrystalline Metallic Films: From Adatoms to Coalescence
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Carl Thompson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2007
* USD 575,000.00

The grant explores a clear understanding of the atomic processes involved in
film formation. New stress measurement capabilities allow studies of adatom-
substrate interactions, as well as adatom-adatom interactions in the sub-
monolayer regime. An objective of the proposed study is to correlate in-situ
measurements of stress evolution during growth and during growth interruptions
with ex-situ STM, ex-situ TEM, and in-situ TEM observations of structure
evolution. Experiments involving both epitaxial and polycrystalline film growth
will be conducted. Detailed effects of populations of adatoms will be simulated
using molecular dynamics and ab-initio approaches. Simulation results will be
compared with measured forces in epitaxial systems. Through these studies, the
separate effects of changing adatom concentrations and cluster formation will be
determined. Experimental studies of later stages of growth will allow separate
characterization of the effects of cluster coarsening, growth, and coalescence.
Measurements of stress evolution, when correlated with studies of structure
evolution, will provide a powerful tool for in-situ real-time kinetic analyses
of the various atomistic processes involved in the earliest stages of film
formation. %%% The study will have applications in a wide array of micro and
nano-devices and systems including microelectronic, nanomagnetic, and micro- and
nanoelectromechanical systems where the properties, performance, and reliability
of nanocrystalline metallic structures are strongly affected by their stress
state and defect structures. Results from this and related studies will be
disseminated through a variety of graduate and undergraduate courses within the
parent institution, as well as through partnerships with other universities and
through summer courses for professional engineers. The research will be carried
out with collaborators at MIT and in Singapore, and will indirectly support the
research activities of the research groups of the faculty involved. Research
results will be disseminated through publications and presentations, as well as
via the Internet, and will be incorporated in software tools that are used
directly by engineers. ***