* 0302944
* Establishing a Chemical Laboratory Technician Program at Mt. San Antonio College
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Eileen DiMauro, Mount San Antonio College
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 568,791.00

This project establishes a Chemical Laboratory Technician (CLT) Program leading
to an Associate of Arts degree at Mt. San Antonio College (Mt SAC). To
accomplish this goal the program is developing four new courses, is purchasing
an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer and a Gas Chromatograph, and is conducting
instructional summer workshops. The proposed new course work was recommended by
the project's Advisory Council Members and selected local industry
representatives as necessary for Chemical Laboratory Technicians. The requested
instrumentation is being used to support student education and laboratory
activities. To promote the program, summer workshops are offered to potential
new students and local high school faculty. These workshops are advertised to
local high schools and an active student recruitment program is being pursued.
Graduates from this CLT program will be sufficiently trained to pursue careers
in a variety of scientific industries. For those persons wishing to continue
their education, an articulation agreement exists with California Polytechnic
University at Pomona and provides a seamless transition for Mt SAC students to
pursue a baccalaureate degree. Articulation agreements with other local
California State Universities and the University of California at Riverside are
under discussion. Mt SAC is a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with an
enrollment of over 40,000 students. Mt SAC's size and student population allows
the unique opportunity to provide a science education to people of color, assist
in improving local living standards and increase the numbers of underrepresented
Hispanics in scientific careers.