* 0302085
* International Research Fellowship Program:  How Patterns of Synaptic Connectivity Affect Network Activity in a Model of Mammalian Pre-Frontal Cortex
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Alexander Roxin, Roxin, Alexander C
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2005
* USD 134,900.00

0302085 Roxin

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Alexander C.
Roxin to work with Dr. Nicolas Brunel at University Rene Descartes in Paris,
France. Support is provided by the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate's
Office of Multi-disciplinary Activities.

Computational models of neural systems, based on differential equations
describing the electrophysiological properties of neurons, have become an
important tool in understanding the central nervous system. A major thrust of
work on large-scale neural networks in recent years has been on working memory
in mammalian pre-frontal cortex (PFC). Working memory, the ability to hold
information for just long enough to complete a related task, is evidenced in the
brain of live monkeys by an elevated firing rate of some neurons in the PFC. One
of the great unknowns in the cerebral cortex is the actual distribution of
functional synaptic connections and the role that various distributions might
play. The goal of this project is to study and understand the role of different
synaptic distributions in a model of working memory by means of analytical and
numerical methods. A systematic characterization of the emerging activity in a
network of spiking neurons as a function of excitatory and inhibitory
connections will prove important not only for PFC, but other regions of the
cerebral cortex as well. The work proposed here will address activity in the PFC
which has implications for the higher-order processing common to advanced
primates. Ultimately, it is a necessary step in beginning to understand the
neural correlate of intelligent animal behavior.