* 0302516
* 2003 Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications; July 9-12, 2003; Washington, DC
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Neil Hindman, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2004
* USD 19,885.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0302516&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Neil Hindman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2003 Summer Conference on
Topology and its Applications will&lt;br/&gt;be held July 9-12, 2003, at Howard
University, Washington, DC.&lt;br/&gt;It will be the 18th in a series of
conferences begun at City&lt;br/&gt;College of New York in 1984 and held
recently at Miami&lt;br/&gt;University, Oxford, Ohio, in 2000, at City College
of New York in&lt;br/&gt;2001, and at the University of Auckland, New Zealand,
in&lt;br/&gt;2002. There will be six invited plenary speakers:
Vitaly&lt;br/&gt;Bergelson of Ohio State, W. Wistar Comfort of
Wesleyan&lt;br/&gt;University, Niky Kamran of McGill University, Jan van Mill
of&lt;br/&gt;Vrije Universitaat, Peter Olver of the University of
Minnesota,&lt;br/&gt;and Alex Simpson of the University of Edinburgh. There will
be a&lt;br/&gt;workshop in Set Theoretic Topology led by Stevo Todorcevic of
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Toronto. All of the plenary speakers
are&lt;br/&gt;recognized authorities in their fields, and Todorcevic is
widely&lt;br/&gt;recognized as one of the two best set theorists in the world.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition, six special sessions are planned: Set
Theoretic&lt;br/&gt;Topology, Topological Dynamics and Ergodic Theory,
Topological&lt;br/&gt;Groupoids and Their Applications, Topological Groups
and&lt;br/&gt;Semigroups, Topology and Computer Science, and a session in
honor&lt;br/&gt;of W. Wistar Comfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
conference, and of the entire series are: (1)&lt;br/&gt;bring to the
participants the leading researchers and the latest&lt;br/&gt;developments in
topology and related areas; (2) foster&lt;br/&gt;applications of topology to
these related areas; (3) expose&lt;br/&gt;graduate students to the excitement
and intense research activity&lt;br/&gt;of such a conference and help train them
to do work in&lt;br/&gt;applications of topology; and (4) facilitate
communication and&lt;br/&gt;collaboration among topologists from a wide
geographic area, both&lt;br/&gt;from this country and overseas, at a time of
year which is&lt;br/&gt;convenient to many faculty members. As is witnessed by
the&lt;br/&gt;special session on Topology and Computer Science, applications
of&lt;br/&gt;general topology have been growing in recent years. A
particular&lt;br/&gt;benefit of this conference series has been the extent to
which it&lt;br/&gt;has successfully encouraged the participation of women
and&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities. (Three of the most
recent&lt;br/&gt;Ph.D. graduates from Howard university, all black females,
each&lt;br/&gt;attended and presented talks at at least one of the
conferences&lt;br/&gt;in the series.) The location of this conference at
Howard&lt;br/&gt;University will make it convenient for the active
participation&lt;br/&gt;of several black graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;