* 0302163
* NUE:  Creating Baccalaureate Level Nanotechnology Minors with Pathways From Existing Associate Degree Programs in Nanofabrication
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Paul Hallacher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) program entitled, "Creating
Baccalaureate Level Nanotechnology Minors with Pathways From Existing Associate
Degree Programs in Nanofabrication," at Pennsylvania State University, under the
direction of Dr. Stephen J. Fonash, is jointly funded by the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG), Division of Electrical and Communications Systems (ECS) and
Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE).
The project will build upon the Pennsylvania Nanofabrication Manufacturing
Technology (NMT) Partnership initiated in 1998 by the state of Pennsylvania. The
objective of this program is create baccalaureate degree pathways for students
holding community college associate degrees in nanofabrication and to give PSU
undergraduate students the opportunity to fashion nanotechnology minors or
concentrations in their last two years. An integrated effort is proposed to
develop laboratory-intensive, upper division undergraduate courses to support
options, minors, or concentrations in nanotechnology within existing
baccalaureate degree programs at PSU and other baccalaureate degree granting
institutions participating in the NMT Partnership. This effort will be achieved
by engaging faculty members and administrators within PSU and other institutions
in a process for joint development of upper division NUE courses; jointly design
upper level undergraduate nanotechnolgoy courses with significant hands-on
laboratory components to be offered within PSU and by other participating
institutions; and create a "two-plus-three" bacalaureate degree program through
which qualified gradutes of community college associated degree programs in
nanofabrication can complete a Penn State B.S. in engineering with a minor in
nanotechnology in three years.