* 0302013
* Dissertation Research: The Influence of Immigration on Local Community Structure: Experimental Tests of Theory in Two Beetle Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,08/31/2004
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2004
* USD 6,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the mechanisms that structure local communities is a
fundamental goal of community&lt;br/&gt;ecology. Historically, ecologists
invoked local processes to explain community structure, but&lt;br/&gt;equivocal
evidence has broadened debate to include the potential importance of
regional&lt;br/&gt;processes in structuring communities. Though experimentation
has proven critical in resolving&lt;br/&gt;issues in ecology, theoretical and
observational studies have, thus far, been the primary tools used&lt;br/&gt;to
examine the effects of regional processes. I propose a series of novel
experiments to test&lt;br/&gt;theories that span the range between local and
regional control of diversity. Local process,&lt;br/&gt;metapopulation
competition, and neutral community theories make predictions about the
effects&lt;br/&gt;of immigration that are qualitatively different, mutually
exclusive, and testable in the same&lt;br/&gt;immigration experiments. Using a
laboratory system of Tribolium flour beetles and a field system&lt;br/&gt;of
Cecropia petiole beetles, I will experimentally test these theories by
simultaneously&lt;br/&gt;manipulating immigration regime and interaction
strength (lab), and exposure to immigration and&lt;br/&gt;distance from
colonization source (field). Though recently developed theory suggests
regional&lt;br/&gt;processes can have a dominant effect on community structure,
the theory must first be confirmed&lt;br/&gt;empirically if community ecology is
to gain insight from the regional process perspective.