* 0302836
* GET SMART - Get an Education and Teach - Science and Math Articulations on the Right Track
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Alice Sessions, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 05/31/2008
* USD 299,963.00

In response to the critical shortage of qualified science and mathematics
teachers in Texas, Austin Community College (ACC) is developing a teacher
education program, entitled Get an Education and Teach: Science and Math
Articulation on the Right Track (GET SMART). The program also involves
articulation partnerships with area universities, including the University of
Texas, Southwest Texas State University and the University of North Texas, Texas
A&M University, and St. Edward's University. The GET SMART program offers an
Associate of Arts degree for pre-service teachers of high school biology,
chemistry or mathematics or middle school mathematics. In addition to the core
requirements for the major, students take three innovative education courses.
The first, EDUC 1301, focuses on educational pedagogy and use of technology in
the classroom. The second educational course is split for prospective science
teachers or mathematics teachers. The science II course focuses on preparing,
conducting and assessing both laboratory experiments and field trips, as well as
exploring the use of computer-assisted labs and virtual labs, especially for
technologically advanced labs. The mathematics II course, modeled on a
mathematics course developed for the University of Texas (UT) Uteach program,
focuses on pre-calculus level functions and modeling from many perspectives.
Students are exposed to several mathematical software applications and websites,
as well as hand-held technology including data collection devices and graphing
calculators. In the third course, students come together again to practice and
improve on skills learned in the first two courses. Students in the GET SMART
program serve as teaching assistants in university labs and as peer mentors in
area high schools and middle schools. These activities also have the advantage
of serving as recruiting tools for future students of the GET SMART program.

Potential students are drawn from the 26 surrounding school districts, with
particular attention to reaching non-traditional and underrepresented students.
Recruitment strategies for K-12 students include school visits, establishment of
Future Teachers of America clubs, and a recruitment video and brochure.
Community college students are recruited from ACC science and mathematics
classes. GET SMART works with the ACC Alternative Teacher Certification program
to recruit teachers from the technology industry. Students are supported
throughout their tenure at ACC both academically, through the strong ACC
tutoring program and preparatory coursework, and financially, through
scholarships and stipends.

