* 0302328
* Enhancing the Resource Center Role of the National Center for Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2009
* Monica Pfarr, Sinclair Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 05/31/2009
* USD 1,501,999.00

The National Center for Manufacturing Education at Sinclair Community College
(Dayton, OH) and its academic and industry partners are expanding upon their
Resource Center and Technical Assistance roles. The goals of the Resource Center
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) To be a clearinghouse of readily accessible
resources for improving manufacturing education. The steps that are being
undertaken to satisfy this goal include:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Establishing a process
and the criteria for determining center-approved&lt;br/&gt;resources to be
included in the database.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Classifying center-approved resources to
facilitate efficient access.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Developing and maintaining a website
as the primary means of user access.&lt;br/&gt;(d) Developing links to other
organizations and entities that provide information or materials relevant to
manufacturing education.&lt;br/&gt;(e) Developing and implementing a
clearinghouse dissemination strategy that includes the use of brochures,
abstracts, how-to-find flyers, and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;(f) Obtaining periodic
feedback from existing and potential users as to the scope of materials and the
features of the clearinghouse, for continuous
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To provide support services for
stakeholders on the effective use of the Resource Center and the implementation
of its products by:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Developing and offering services that provide
professional development opportunities on manufacturing related subject
topics.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Developing and offering services that provide assistance
to institutions and their faculty that wish to start or improve manufacturing
technology programs.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Assessing the services related to
manufacturing education on a periodic basis for the purpose of continuous
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is developing
a national clearinghouse of manufacturing education instructional materials. The
Center uses its web site as a primary national clearinghouse for exemplary
manufacturing education materials. Materials are being selected by peer review,
categorized, and incorporated into a searchable database. The site has other
information and links to other Internet sites. Center staff continue to provide
professional development/consulting in faculty professional development;
adapting and adopting new manufacturing curricula and course materials; and
starting and improving manufacturing technology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is disseminating
effective models and pedagogical approaches in technical science, technical
mathematics, and manufacturing education. The peer reviewed instructional
materials focus on integrating research activities into classroom teaching of
manufacturing at the undergraduate level. Faculty are using the materials
resulting in improved student learning. This project involves collaboration
between disciplines (technical mathematics, technical science, and manufacturing
technology) and several types of institutions including colleges, universities,
industry, and professional associations to improve manufacturing education. The
project is disseminating exemplary learning materials and providing technical
assistance to community college faculty and administrators. &lt;br/&gt;