* 0303435
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration: Designing Acrylic Coatings Using Mechanistic Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Linda Broadbelt, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration research project is carried out by
Linda Broadbelt, Northwestern University, and Robin Hutchinson, Queen's
University, Canada. The long-term objective of this research is to improve
industrial polymerization processes and to contribute to the design of new
polymeric materials by developing a deeper understanding of free-radical
polymerization kinetics and capturing that knowledge in modeling-based tools.
The production of solvent-borne acrylic resins for the coatings industry has
been chosen as a focal point for the effort. Acrylic resins, the base polymer
for many coatings, are now produced with lower solvent levels and at higher
temperatures than before. Little is known about the high-temperature secondary
reactions that play an important role in controlling rate and molecular
structure, which in turn determines the end-use properties and product value of
the polymers produced. This research provides a methodology to estimate the
kinetic parameters required to apply the model to a broad range of
polymerization systems where the complete set of rate coefficients may not have
been determined experimentally. To this end, this project uses a collaborative,
three-pronged approach requiring the expertise of both groups at Queen's and
Northwestern Universities. First, a detailed examination of poly(butyl acrylate)
structure, synthesized under carefully controlled conditions, will be carried
out (Queen's University). These results are combined with mathematical modeling
to refine the mechanistic pathway and quantify the kinetics of these secondary
reactions (Queen's University and Northwestern University). Second, a general
model applicable for high-temperature synthesis of free-radical copolymers is
constructed (Queen's University and Northwestern University) and tested against
lab scale experimental data (Queen's University) for a
styrene/acrylate/methacrylate terpolymer. Finally, molecular modeling is
examined as a tool for the a priori prediction of relative rate coefficients
(Northwestern University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of the
proposed research on industrial formulation and production of coatings is high.
This work, if successful, will provide the methodology of how to populate
databases of rate coefficients for a suite of potential monomers used in acrylic
coatings. Coatings are a major cost in the automotive sector and other
industries, and any advancement that can reduce costs or improve performance has
an impact. The education value of the proposed international collaboration is
also high. The graduate students involved in this work are exposed to a wide
range of experimental techniques involving polymer synthesis and
characterization, become proficient in critical data analysis and in the
development and application of fundamental models to interpret experimental data
and to improve manufacturing processes, and develop expertise in the application
of computational chemistry tools. Through the collaboration with investigators
in Canada, students interact with international experts in polymerization,
including industrial scientists, and develop improved communication skills. This
award is supported by the Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Chemical and Transport Systems, the Office of International Science and
Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;