* 0303592
* RI:  An Integrated Multi-Layer Wireless LAN Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Emmanuel Agu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 284,342.00

With this project the Center for Wireless Information Network Studies (CWINS) at
the Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) aims to significantly enhance their
research activities in wireless networks for multi-media applications with the
support of an experimental wireless LAN testbed that will be used to construct a
test environment for multi-layer design and performance monitoring. In this
testbed, researchers working at all layers of the network will conduct their
research to evaluate the impact of the wireless broadband access on the design
and performance analysis. Multimedia services such as voice, text and image
streams will be provided to terminals dispersed over the geographical area
covered by the testbed. The requested equipment includes wireless access points,
a central router and switch, a network management and monitoring software,
laptop computers, PDAs, wireless LAN IP phones, and head mounted displays. Other
requested equipment includes network analyzer, spectrum analyzer, and RF power
meter for physical layer scenario development as well as traffic generator and
protocol analyzers for packet generation and performance monitoring, the
wireless LAN Network Interface Cards (NIC) include IEEE 802.11 as well as
Bluetooth NIC cards for both laptop computers and
PDAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With acquisition of this instrumentation we further
current research and make the following intellectual
contributions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Development of analytical and simulation
models and benchmarks for multi-layer performance evaluation of multi-media
location-aware wireless networks using various wireless LAN technologies and
different interference scenarios.&lt;br/&gt; Design of distributed architectures
to support interactive location-aware networked 3D graphics applications.
Emphasis would be on the development of power efficient 3D graphics for mobile
users with low precision displays, limited storage and CPU capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt; Integration of existing ad-hoc network solutions that have been
proposed at the ETSI MANET group, to understand and model their behavior in real
network scenarios. &lt;br/&gt; Study of the performance of the emerging wireless
network security protocols, specifically, to understand the impact of the
wireless medium on the newly adopted Advanced Encryption Standard, which will
replace the old Data Encryption Standard in all government, corporate and
individual communications. &lt;br/&gt; Development and analysis of audio and
video streaming protocols using wireless medium in specific emerging
applications such as home networking where streaming is challenging. &lt;br/&gt;
Development of radio propagation model for indoor positioning and UWB
communications using frequencies up to several tens of GHz.&lt;br/&gt;
Development, testing and demonstration of a software radio platform for various
modulation techniques for educational purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Several faculty members, graduate students and senior undergraduates in
the ECE and CS departments at the CWINS will share the use of this equipment
with others involved in the Computer Communication Networks (CCN) program to
develop, examine and implement the above seven research and educational
projects. &lt;br/&gt;