* 0303955
* NER:  Multiscale Modeling of Strengthening and Deformation Mechanisms in Aluminum-Based Amorphous Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Lizhi Sun, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2005
* USD 80,367.00

NER: Multiscale Modeling of Strengthening and Deformation&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms
in Aluminum-Based Amorphous Nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lizhi Sun, The
University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocomposites are a
special class of composite materials with one or more phases on the nanometer
scale, resulting in unique mechanical properties and having wide application
potential in diverse areas. Developing a multiscale constitutive model for
nanocomposites is essential to obtain a fundamental understanding of their
nanostructure - macro-property relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this proposal is to explore the overall constitutive relationship of a-Al-
reinforced amorphous nanocomposites in terms of a multiscale approach starting
from the microstructure at nanoscale. The overall strengthening and deforming
behavior of the nanocomposites will be investigated from nanomechanics framework
and homogenization procedures. Specifically, the dependence of overall
mechanical properties on nanoparticle sizes will be particularly emphasized.
Further effects of the nanoparticle concentration, local particle interaction,
and interfacial debonding will be formulated. The proposed multiscale model is
valid for general three-dimensional loading conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research effort would provide direct determination of the intrinsic
mechanisms of material structure-property relationship at the nanoscale.
Furthermore, it would provide an opportunity for performing interdisciplinary
research and cross-disciplinary education in the emerging field of
nanostructured materials. This multidisciplinary nature of the project requires
fundamental changes in how students are educated and trained for careers in
these fields.&lt;br/&gt;