* 0303195
* Collaborative Research:  Enhancing Diversity in Geosciences in North Carolina
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2007
* David Haase, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2007
* USD 459,591.00

ABSTRACT Collaborative Research: Enhancing Diversity in Geosciences in North
Carolina This project is a collaborative effort between North Carolina State
University (NCSU), a Research I University, North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University (NC A&T), an Historically Black University, and
Robeson Community College (RCC), a community college serving a predominantly
minority student body. This project will develop and enhance geoscience
education and research capabilities at two participating minority serving
institutions, enabling them to collaborate with a major research university to
expand opportunities for students from underrepresented groups to participate in
geoscience education and research through geoscience course study, structured
undergraduate research training, and academic and professional support
activities. NCSU has existing bachelors, masters and doctoral programs in
geosciences, while neither NC A&T nor RCC has geoscience degree programs. The
objective of this program is to provide an opportunity for the minority student
populations at NC A&T and RCC to become geoscientists by adding introductory
level courses at RCC and by adding a geophysics concentration to the physics
program at NC A&T, and by enhancing research infrastructure and undergraduate
research training in geosciences at NC A&T and RCC. The program will emphasize
undergraduate research, will include geoscience curriculum enhancement and
comprehensive support activities to maximize retention and graduation, and has
assessment elements to evaluate each program element.

