* 0303138
* Geoscience Alliance to Enhance Minority Participation
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2010
* Ray Ferrell, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,210,069.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOSCIENCE ALLIANCE TO
ENHANCE MINORITY PARTICIPATION&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY
(GAEMP)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louisiana State
University Department of Geology &amp; Geophysics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and nine
minority serving institutions (MSIs) are linked in a 5-year research and
education venture that provides an opportunity to increase under-represented
minority participation in geoscience. Partners in GAEMP include: Southern
University Baton Rouge, Southern University New Orleans, Dillard University,
Xavier University, Grambling State University, University of Houston Downtown,
Jackson State University, Texas Southern University, and University of Texas San
Antonio. Seven of the universities are Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) and two are Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). The
program targets junior-year degree candidates (16 students/year) in chemistry,
physics, life science, or environmental sciences and provides an advanced,
content-rich, field and research-oriented introduction to geoscience during a
six-week summer course. The course is offered four times during the period of
NSF funding thus having a direct impact on a total of 64 undergraduates. After
the summer course and during their senior year, the students undertake an
individual research project to conduct in their home institution with support
from LSU faculty and their local mentor. The participants are given an
opportunity to learn about geoscience career opportunities in government,
industry, and academia and to present their research results. The special
mentoring approach emphasizes individual and collaborative development of
academic skills and guides the students in applying for admission to graduate
school through a structured, highly personal program. GAEMP will support four
students in an M.S. program and two to obtain a Ph.D. Other students will be
encouraged to seek admission to graduate programs in geoscience at other
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;