* 0303656
* UMEB:  Undergraduate Mentoring in Wetland Science with a Focus on Underrepresented Groups
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Frank Day, Society of Wetland Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 42,000.00

NSF funding will support the participation of 10 undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in annual meetings of the Society of Wetland Scientists
(SWS). SWS was established in 1980 to allow and promote the exchange of
information related to wetlands. SWS is unique among scientific societies in
that its members, from the academic, government and private consulting sectors,
represent a variety of perspectives on wetland science. Attendance of a select
group of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups at an annual
scientific meeting can provide each student with a perspective on, and exposure
to, the breadth and depth of wetland science that cannot be obtained at a single
academic home institution. The annual meeting of the Society includes at least
four concurrent sessions over four days, along with plenary and poster sessions.
Because SWS spans academic, government and private consulting sectors,
individual students will be able to tailor their daily activities to their own
personal interests in wetland science. By pairing undergraduate students with
graduate student or faculty mentors at the annual meeting, and by providing
workshops and symposia specifically geared toward undergraduate students
(including those from underrepresented groups), SWS will foster active
participation and discussion, each a key component of advancing science and
promoting intellectual development of undergraduate student scientists.

SWS recognizes the need to reach out to underrepresented groups to provide
intellectual opportunities for personal growth and development. Attendance at a
scientific meeting often can provide the intellectual spark, along with the
opportunities to make contacts for the future, that encourage undergraduate
students to continue their professional education beyond the Bachelor's degree
level. Our goal is to open doors for undergraduate students in underrepresented
groups. Each student participant will be assigned a mentor, who will function in
many ways, including as a bridge-builder, introducing each student to SWS
members whose professional interests are in line with those of the undergraduate
student. The activities proposed here will complement existing SWS activities
including its "Teach the Teachers" program and its newly launched Human
Diversity Initiative. We have devised a variety of strategies (workshops,
symposia, social events, field trips, mentoring, follow-up) to ensure that
undergraduate students will get the most out of their week-long SWS annual
meeting experience.

This activity is funded by the National Science Foundation Undergraduate
Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB) Program.