* 0303492
* Inter-Americas Collaboration in Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Winston Soboyejo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2009
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed program will work to strengthen
emerging collaborations between Africa and the Americas in the area of
infrastructure materials research and education. It will be directed by Prof.
Wole Soboyejo at Princeton University. The program will provide a Princeton-
based setting for transforming materials research and education in
infrastructure materials design, synthesis and characterization. At Princeton,
the&lt;br/&gt;program will combine forces with the Princeton Materials Institute
(PMI), the Institute for Advanced Studies (the workplace of Albert Einstein),
the U.S./Africa Materials Institute, the Carl Fields Center and the Graduate
School to provide a first- rate environment for Visiting materials scientists
and students. Beyond Princeton, the Institute will coordinate interactions
between 6 universities in the U.S. These include: Harvard, Northwestern
University, U. of California-Santa Barbara (UCSB), the Ohio State U., Rutgers
University and Iowa State University. A total of 5 South American scientists
will be supported (per year) to spend nine weeks of each year working with their
counterparts in the U.S. from Brazil and Colombia. The program will focus on
infrastructure materials research that can lead to more affordable housing in
the Americas. In particular, the reinforcement of cementitious materials with
natural cellulose fibers and industrial wastes will be explored within a
combined theoretical and experimental framework. Composite mechanics concepts
will be used to guide the design of infrastructure materials that can be used to
provide more affordable housing in the Americas and the global environment.
Joint workshops will be used to facilitate the collaboration and dissemination
of information from the program. The project is funded jointly by the
Engineering Directorate and the Division of International
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;