* 0303122
* Keyah Math: Place-Based, Culturally-Responsive, Technology-Intensive, Quantitative Modules for Introductory Undergraduate Geoscience
* GEO,GEO
* 05/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Steven Semken, Dine College
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 01/31/2004
* USD 119,262.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keyah Math: a Place-Based, Culturally-Responsive,
Technology-Intensive Quantitative Modules in Introductory Undergraduate
Geoscience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year Keyah Math project will produce a
series of versatile, place-based, culturally-responsive, and technology-
intensive modules in mathematical geoscience to enhance introductory
undergraduate geoscience courses for Native American and other minority
students. Quantitative activities such as these are absent from nearly all
introductory geoscience textbooks and virtually nonexistent. Modules will draw
data-rich examples from Native American lands in the Southwest, and incorporate
empirical Native knowledge and terminology about the Earth and issues of
interest to Native people. The central importance of these components is
reflected in the name Keyah, the Dine (Navajo) term for homelands and
environment. Versatile Keyah Math modules will allow an instructor to introduce
place-based mathematical geoscience into courses regardless of textbook, and
will introduce students to quantitative methods in geoscience at an early stage
in their education. Their local and cultural relevance will stimulate the
interest of Native American students while strengthening their quantitative
skills, thus better preparing them for more advanced studies in geoscience.
Mathematical applications will be organized into twelve modules based on common
topics presented in introductory courses, and organized according to Dine
educational philosophy. Guided inquiry-based, data-rich mathematical
applications will be incorporated into cross-platform software designed to do
calculations. The modules will be tested by geology instructors at selected
regional and Tribal colleges, and disseminated via the World-Wide Web and on
compact discs. &lt;br/&gt;