* 0303142
* Spatial Solitons and Their Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 358,096.00

The PI proposes to explore, experimentally and theoretically, several completely
new ideas related to optical spatial solitons. All of the proposed research
topics challenge basic fundamental questions with some having direct
implications in other fields beyond optics. Some of the proposed research topics
offer exiting new applications that cannot be otherwise
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One proposed research objective is an
investigation of discrete solitons in 2D systems. Recently, the group has found
how to induce, in real time, arrays of closely-spaced 2D nonlinear waveguides.
The PIs propose to demonstrate (2+1)D discrete solitons in these systems,
collisions between such solitons (including when the input discrete solitons
carry angular momentum), show all-optical switching with them, and demonstrate
2D diffraction management (negative diffraction) with them. A somewhat related
idea has to do with launching Gap (or Bragg) solitons in a periodically-
modulated 2D nonlinear waveguide induced by a photorefractive soliton. This new
way to realize Gap solitons could lead to the first observation of interactions
between Gap solitons, to slowing down (to very low values) of the velocity of
such a spatio-temporal pulse, and to all-optical switching of these
solitons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another proposed research direction is on
incoherent cavity solitons and cavity pattern formation in nonlinear weakly-
correlated wave-systems. The ideas emerged from their discovery of incoherent
solitons and of incoherent modulation instability. Here they propose to build on
these discoveries and study the creation of incoherent cavity solitons and the
emergence of intricate patterns upon incoherent wave-fronts in cavities. A
second related idea is on the clustering and aggregation of solitons in
nonlinear weakly-&lt;br/&gt;correlated wave-systems that carry angular momentum.
the group has shown (2001) that solitons can cluster together and form
aggregates of fine-scale structures, while leaving behind them voids of empty
space. These patterns evolve naturally (through the incoherent modulation
instability process) from a uniform but partially-incoherent wavefront launched
into a non-instantaneous nonlinear medium. They expect that if the input
wavefront carries angular momentum (topological charge), the resultant clusters
of&lt;br/&gt;solitons will form galaxy-like structures. Here too they plan to
study these soliton clustering processes in
cavities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another objective is to investigate a new type of
a soliton: the holographic soliton, which is a soliton composed of two symbiotic
fields and is supported solely by the grating they induce. Finally, they propose
to study solitons that are made of two counter-propagating optical fields, and
their interaction collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical spatial solitons
exhibit particle-like behavior in their interactions and stability properties,
conserving energy and momentum. The fascinating results obtained with spatial
solitons have major consequences in many non-optical systems that can support
solitons. Incoherent pattern formation has broad implications on dynamics and
solitons in Bose-Einstein Condensates, the fractional quantum Hall effect, and
on several other nonlinear many-particle systems, including stripe-formation in
granular materials (sand). These incoherent pattern formation effects are
directly linked to (order-disorder) phase-&lt;br/&gt;transition phenomena, in
both classical (phase-independent, thus incoherent) and quantum-mechanic-like
(phase-dependent, coherent) systems. they propose to study phase-transition
effects during pattern formation in systems of varying coherence, explore the
manifestation of the Curie-Weiss Law, Critical Slowing Down, and other features
of phase transitions. Solitons have been the subject of intense
study&lt;br/&gt;over the last three decades. In the 90's, optical spatial
solitons have strongly influenced this field and have stimulated considerable
research within nonlinear sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goal of
the program is to produce graduates that are fully prepared to drive the
advancement of photonics and optical communications. They will accomplish this
goal by utilizing their laser facilities and research on waveguides and solitons
as novel tools for education. Imagine a sequence of courses that already exists
at each university involved in this proposal. To increase diversity in the
program, Arkansas is current working together with the University of Arkansas at
Pine Bluff on a new&lt;br/&gt;idea called "Path Way In Science and Engineering"
or Path WISE.&lt;br/&gt;