* 0303801
* NER:     Fully Self-assembled Nanowire Based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Norman Birge, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Nanowires are formed by self-assembly during growth of rare earth metal
silicides on the silicon (001) surface. They have nanometer scale lateral
dimension, show metallic conduction, and survive exposure to air after growth in
ultra high vacuum (UHV). They can be grown in parallel arrays, or simple crossed
grids. Junctions between nanowires of a variety of geometries spontaneously
arise. The objective of this project is to fast track the development of
epitaxial nanowire junctions as devices. Electrically
addressable&lt;br/&gt;nanowires and nanowire junctions will be fabricated and
evaluated as to their usefulness as nanowire based devices. In particular, the
hope is to develop a fully self-assembled device, from the nanometer scale
active area all the way to macroscopic contact pads without the need for
manipulation of individual elements. The specific goal will be to demonstrate
that it is possible to make a fully self-assembled nanowire based device, and to
have electrical measurements on at least one such device within the grant
period. There are formidable technical hurdles to be surmounted, foremost among
which is the fact that all fabrication steps must be compatible with the UHV
processing that is dictated by the nanowire growth step. Growth of the nanowires
and in-situ atomic resolution studies will be ongoing. Methods for fabricating
electrical contacts, both UHV and non-UHV based, will be explored. Electrical
measurements will be done ex-situ on both individual nanowires and nanowire
junctions, using a combination of liquid helium cryostats and a new cryogenic
probing station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of their education and outreach
activities, all members involved in developing nanotechnology related teaching
materials at different levels that will be appropriate for K-12, as well as
undergraduate and graduate education. Concepts for displays suitable for very
young schoolchildren will be developed in collaboration with a science museum in
Lansing. All of the education and outreach activity is intended to raise the
general awareness of nanotechnology at all stages of the educational process.
This proposal addresses issues in the area of Nanoscale Structures, Novel
Phenomena, and Quantum Control.&lt;br/&gt;