* 0303746
* NIRT -- Hierarchical Assembly of Interconnects for Molecular Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2008
* Christopher Gorman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 10/31/2008
* USD 1,330,000.00

This research will tackle two critical issues in future materials for advanced
molecule-based information processing: 1) how to assemble and attach single
molecules to electronic contacts; and 2) how to create electronic gain (the
fundamental operating principle of a transistor) at the molecular level. To do
this, however, this project will address three major unsolved challenges: (1)
Synthesis of new molecules with functionality that allows them to act as
nonlinear electronic elements and to chemically attach to silicon-based contact
structures (2) Bridging the molecular (created via bottom-up fabrication) with
the lithographic (created via top-down fabrication) length scales for device
construction and (3) definition of new lithographic approaches that accommodate
molecular installation during processing. The approach we propose addresses
these issues and, in addition is designed to demonstrate the important concept
of Gain at the molecular level as the result of a state change within the
molecular architecture rather than as the response of a molecule to a change in
bias of an underlying (macroscopic) gate electrode. The advancement of the field
of molecular electronics also is fundamentally changing how the next generation
of technically saavy students is educated. Under this work, we propose several
activities. Graduate students will do Ph. D. degrees that involve both
traditional science, engineering and technology development aspects and
emphasize state-of-the-art research approaches. In addition, we describe the
expansion of existing, interdisciplinary courses suited to developing critical
understanding of the field of nanotechnology and an outreach program for women
and minorities to expand the diversity of participation in this new,
interdisciplinary paradigm.

%%%

Miniaturizing electronic devices to the molecular scale is the next major step
in the electronics revolution. The results of this project will help ensure that
better techniques for information processing will be available to keep our
economy growing stronger with smaller, faster, lighter electronics. While this
type of research will ultimately be performed by corporate research and
development, today there are fundamental, unsolved issues that must be addressed
before such entities can assume the risk of such research. These issues, if
addressed using federal funds to universities will make possible the next phase
of electronics development, particularly in the United States. The advancement
of the field of molecular electronics also is fundamentally changing how the
next generation of technically saavy students is educated. Under this work, we
propose several activities. Graduate students will do Ph. D. degrees that
involve both traditional science, engineering and technology development aspects
and emphasize state-of-the-art research approaches. In addition, we describe the
expansion of existing, interdisciplinary courses suited to developing critical
understanding of the field of nanotechnology and an outreach program for women
and minorities to expand the diversity of participation in this new,
interdisciplinary paradigm.

