* 0303539
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:    Mexico/United States
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2009
* Curtis Frank, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 12/31/2009
* USD 120,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration brings together groups led by Curtis
Frank, Stanford University, and Craig Hawker, IBM-Almaden, at the Center for
Polymer Interfaces and Macromolecular Assemblies (CPIMA) in the US, and A.
Licea-Claverie, Instituto Tecnologico de Tijuana (ITT), and J. Cornejo-Bravo,
Universidad Autonoma de Baja California (BAJA), in Mexico. The project aims to
develop new synthetic approaches and characterization techniques for the
preparation and study of well-defined smart materials. Living free radical
polymerization techniques are developed as a platform for the synthesis of
polymers with controlled structure and architecture that respond to two
different stimuli: temperature and pH. Structural features, such as the
separation of the responsive units via the formation of block copolymers, and
the nature of the chain architectures (linear, grafted, stars, and networks) are
explored in detail. Furthermore, the reversible temperature- or pH-driven
formation of supramolecular structures in solution from the linear, grafted, and
star architectures are studied. A more fundamental challenge is to understand
the relationships among structure, property, and function for these stimuli-
responsive materials. Based on this understanding, the controlled release of
drugs and other small molecules from gels, stars, polymer-drug complexes, or
supramolecular structures (e.g. polymeric micelles) is examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vigorous and interdisciplinary teaching and outreach
program is a critical feature of this project and significantly extends the
collaborative relationships built on these scientific foundations. Educational
and teaching expertise in polymer chemistry and materials research that has been
developed in CPIMA is transferred to both ITT and BAJA, while the exposure of
undergraduates, graduates, and post-doctoral scholars to research at all three
institutions establishes a unique collaborative environment. In addition,
exposure of undergraduates and graduates to a combined international academic-
academic and industrial-academic setting provides an invigorating research
experience. This award is supported by the Division of Materials Research, the
Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;