* 0303183
* The Arecibo Geoscience Diversity Program: Enhancing the Education of Hispanics through Research Experiences
* GEO,GEO
* 05/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Sixto Gonzalez, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2006
* USD 596,836.00

ABSTRACT

Arecibo Geoscience Diversity Program (AGEOP) National Astronomy & Ionosphere
Center (NAIC) and the University of Puerto Rico at Arecibo (UPRA), will
establish the Arecibo Geoscience Diversity Program (AGEOP). The program provides
a research experience in the geosciences to groups of Hispanic educators and
students in the northwestern region of Puerto Rico. Atmospheric research focuses
on studies of the upper atmosphere at the Arecibo Observatory using the 305 m
radio telescope. The study of the karst region focuses on the Cano Tiburones
tropical wetland, and is conducted at UPRA. Participants are engaged in the
design and the execution of an environmental monitoring program that assesses
the physical and biological profile of the wetland. The AGEOP targets fifteen
free high schools in the Arecibo School District, and undergraduate science
majors at UPRA. Five different schools will participate every year in this
three-year effort with each school providing a team of four students and a
teacher; UPRA will contribute eight undergraduates every year. The interaction
of high school students, teachers, and UPRA undergraduates, establishes a bridge
to help increase numbers of students that reach the college level, and that
eventually graduate. The AGEOP provides up to 200 hours of geoscience training
to each participant (students, teachers, undergraduates) through the following
activities: a ten-day summer institute at the Arecibo Observatory to introduce
the content matter and develop the research skills; sixteen days of a geoscience
academy during the school year for field measurements and data analysis; and a
geoscience congress in which participants present their research projects.

