* 0303574
* NER:  Acoustic Spintronics for Applications in Quantum Optics and Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Godfrey Gumbs, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2004
* USD 47,100.00

This award for Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) is a result of a proposal
submitted to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative. The award is
funded jointly Divisions of Materials Research and Computer Communications
Research. Working closely with experimental groups, this theoretical research
will study novel acoustic nanocircuits in which semiconductor quasi-one-
dimensional channels serve as wires through which powerful surface acoustic
waves transport single electrons along the channels. The possibility of
controlling the electron spin in such circuits is explored. This "acoustic
spintronics" may find applications in quantum optics and quantum computing. The
nanocircuits comprise a network of semiconductor channels along which charge is
transported by a sliding, partially modulated, electrostatic potential created
with the help of a surface acoustic wave. The charge is transported in the form
of the submicron-sized packets (residing in the minima of the moving potential)
so that the packets can be thought of as moving quantum dots. The regime of
operation when each moving dot carries just one electron will be thoroughly
investigated. Viability of this regime stems from recent experiments of the
single electron transport by surface acoustic waves in a one-dimensional GaAs-
AlGaAs semiconductor channel. The main objective of this research is to analyze
one specific nanocircuit that comprises all the basic elements necessary for
control, entanglement and measurement of the electron spin states in the moving
dots. The circuit should be applicable to quantum computation with a qubit
encoded by the electron spin. The proposed scheme has important advantages as
compared with other proposals employing semiconductor quantum dots because the
ability to move dots around a circuit offers simple technical solutions for
single-, two-qubit, and read-out operations. The proposed nanocircuit includes
an optoelectronic component in which transport of single electrons from n- to
p-type two-dimensional conductive areas takes place. In the p-region the
electrons recombine with the holes thus emitting photons. Single photon sources
and sources of entangled photon pairs with a well-defined generation time can be
realized within the suggested scheme.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award for
Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) is a result of a proposal submitted to the
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative. The award is funded jointly
Divisions of Materials Research and Computer Communications Research. Working
closely with experimental groups, this theoretical research will study novel
acoustic nanocircuits in which semiconductor quasi-one-dimensional channels
serve as wires through which powerful surface acoustic waves transport single
electrons along the channels. The possibility of controlling the electron spin
in such circuits is explored. This "acoustic spintronics" may find applications
in quantum optics and quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;