* 0303986
* NUE: Development of a Nanotechnology Laboratory Course for First-Year Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Jay Burns, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 07/31/2006
* USD 106,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) program entitled, "Development
of a Nanotechnology Laboratory Course for First-Year Undergraduates," at Florida
Institute of Technology (FIT), under the direction of Dr. James G. Mantovani, is
funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the
Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is the development of a new course designed for first-year undergraduate
students at Florida Tech that will contribute to the training of future nanotech
workers in the U.S. The resulting course will offer a uniquely practical
laboratory experience to first-year students of science and engineering, and can
potentially influence the career choices of participating students who discover
that nanotechnology interests them. The four goals of the new laboratory course
are: 1) to introduce experimental techniques used in nanotechnology today; 2) to
motivate students early in their academic careers to take technical elective
courses in materials science and engineering when they are juniors and seniors;
3) to reduce the amount of time needed to train an undergraduate student into
becoming a productive research assistant in faculty-mentored research projects;
and 4) to contribute to the nation's goal of developing a more productive
workforce that is literate in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;