* 0303337
* Alaska Natives in Geosciences: Opportunity in the Last Frontier
* GEO,GEO
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Catherine Hanks, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 03/31/2007
* USD 457,956.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaska Natives in Geosciences: Opportunity in the
Last Frontier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project broadens
the participation of Alaska Natives in the geosciences at both the professional
level and the community level, by increasing geoscience literacy amongst the
next generation of Alaska Native leaders. It also increases the awareness of
local geoscience issues in Alaska Native
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaska Natives in Geosciences is a project
with an integrated, intergenerational approach designed to attract young Alaska
Natives to the geosciences as a career and to encourage declared Alaska Natives
geoscience majors to continue their studies. A college-level, field-intensive,
introductory geoscience course is designed specifically for the high school
juniors and seniors enrolled at the Rural Alaska Honors Institute (RAHI). This
is followed by a community-based one-week field course open to RAHI graduates as
well as other Alaska Native geoscience students. Both classes will introduce
Alaska Native students to the geologic issues and concerns relevant to Alaska
Natives and their communities. Alaska Native undergraduate geology majors from
the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) work with geoscience faculty as
teaching assistants and mentors to the RAHI students, providing an additional
opportunity for undergraduate geology majors to interact with faculty on an
individual basis and explore geology as a profession. This program works with
the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP) to provide cohort
registration, student advising, tutoring and scholarship support for Alaska
Native undergraduate students currently in or entering into the UAF geoscience
program. Geology majors work with teaching and research faculty to present
geologic concepts to high school juniors and seniors in a context that is
relevant to the students, promoting a team atmosphere within the student body,
while providing mentoring opportunities both to and by the undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;