* 0303784
* U.S.-Brazil Joint Workshop/Seminar in PDE's and Several Complex Variables; Negra, Brazil, August 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Gerardo Mendoza, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/2004
* USD 15,000.00

The Americas Program of the Office of International Science and Engineering
provides Gerardo Mendoza of Temple University support for a week-long workshop
on recent progress in the fields of several complex variables and partial
differential equations to be held in Serra Negra, Brazil, in August 2003. Topics
to be covered include 1) local solvability in locally integrable structures; 2)
mappings in CR geometry; 3) solvability in L^p of vector fields; and 4) analytic
hypoellipticity and the Treves Conjecture. Current research trends will be the
focus of three mini courses designed primarily for graduate students and recent
Ph.D.s on the topics of solvability in locally integrable structures, vector
bundles in partial differential equations, and equivalences in CR geometry. Co-
sponsoring organizers in Brazil are Jorge Hounie from Universidade do Sao Carlos
and Paulo Cordaro of Universidade do Sao Paulo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brazil has
a very strong group of researchers in the areas of focus for the workshop, and
leading researchers from the U.S. and Europe will join them for this meeting.
Brazil has hosted similar workshops every two years, and these have led to
fruitful collaborations between Brazilian and U.S. researchers, as evidenced by
joint publications in leading journals. Graduate students and those at the
beginning of their career will have an opportunity to learn from and exchange
ideas with many leading researchers in the topical areas of the workshop.
Invitees from the U.S. include several members from groups that are
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;