* 0303645
* NER:    New Fuel Cell Electrodes from Carbon Aerogels with Internally Grafted Fluoropolymer Electrolytes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Stephen Creager, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 93,471.00

This one-year exploratory research project proposes to develop a new family of
carbon-aerogel-based nanomaterials for use as electrodes in high-performance
proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell power sources. The proposed materials
consist of electrically conductive mesoporous carbon aerogel supports having
internal porosity of nanoscopic dimensions, with fluorinated polymeric
electrolytes grafted onto the interior surface of the aerogel mesopores. The
high surface area and high porosity of aerogel materials are desirable in fuel
cell electrodes because they allow for dispersion of a maximum amount of
catalyst particles per unit volume of support while also providing sufficient
physical structure in the support to allow for access of fluoropolymer
electrolyte to catalyst particles without also blocking transport of fuel,
oxidant, and water to and from catalyst particles. Fluorinated electrolytes are
essential in fuel cell electrodes because only fluorinated materials can provide
the needed long-term chemical stability for a practical device. Grafting of
fluoropolymer electrolytes inside of carbon aerogel mesopores has never been
attempted but will be essential to operation of a PEM fuel cell electrode since
it offers the only means for making robust electrodes that provide for
electrolyte access to catalyst particles anchored inside the aerogel mesopores.
Electrode materials designed with these considerations in mind are expected to
exhibit maximum activity for fuel cell reactions (e.g., electrochemical oxygen
reduction, hydrogen oxidation, methanol oxidation) and could form the basis of a
new generation of power sources exhibiting much higher performance than existing
devices.

The specific scientific objectives of the proposed research are twofold: (1)
explore methods for synthesizing carbon aerogels with grafted fluoropolymer
electrolytes and dispersed nanoparticulate catalysts in the pores, with
particular focus on methods amenable to eventual high-volume manufacturing; and
(2) characterize the resulting materials to demonstrate their potential utility
in PEM fuel cell technology. In addition to the interdisciplinary training of
graduate students, this project will have broad impacts in several areas of
importance to the national interest. It will contribute to making more effective
utilization of energy resources, minimizing long-term environmental problems
associated with depletion of fossil fuels, helping to make more viable a
sustainable energy economy based on hydrogen gas as an energy carrier, and
helping to make our nation more secure by providing our military forces with
more options for lightweight portable electric power.

