* 0303863
* NIRT: Reversible and Directional Self-Assembly of Bio-Molecular Templates for Nanotechnology Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Pierre Deymier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,284,618.00

This proposal focuses on the use of microtubules (MT) as templates for
fabricating nanoscale interconnects, interconnect arrays, and networks. MTs are
self-assembling, dynamic, and tubular shaped biomolecules with nanometer size
diameters and large aspect ratios, made from polymerized tubulin proteins. Their
ends are polarized in that each one exhibits unique and specific biochemical
moieties. The objectives of the proposed work include establishing the
scientific and technical basis for making nano-interconnects from MTs by
developing end-specific capping agents to attach to the ends of the MTs, via
creation of a combinatorial/phage library. Also, specific ligands to be attached
to functionalized metal pads will be identified and synthesized. Attachment
control and selectivity will be achieved by creating complementary molecular
patterns on the ends of the ligands and capping agents using affinity group -
bifunctional reagent complexes and recombinant peptide stretches. Metallization
research will provide key insights into the little known area of metal
biomolecular interactions with the goal of depositing thin Cu and Au coatings on
the interior and/or exterior surfaces of the MTs to improve conductivity.
Multiscale modeling and computer simulations will be used to guide research on
molecular recognition at the ligand/cap interface and on the effects of
geometric and chemical factors on the controlled assembly and disassembly of MT
nano-interconnects. The objective of the educational component of the proposed
NIRT is to promote the rapid insertion of individuals from under-represented
groups into nanotechnology businesses. This objective will be met through the
NanoTechnology Track (NTT), a course of study that integrates the scientific,
engineering, and business aspects of nanotechnology. This integration emphasizes
the transition between research idea and consumer product through a focus on
entrepreneurship as taught by the University of Arizona's nationally renowned
Berger Entrepreneurship Program. The objectives of the NIRT will be met by
completion of a series of planned tasks with measurable outcomes distributed
amongst the members of a highly interactive, interdisciplinary team of
investigators. This team includes: J. Hoying (cell biology and biomolecular
arrays, Biomedical Engineering (BME)), I. Jongewaard (phage display, peptide
chemistry, Arizona Health Science Center (AHSC)), R. Guzman (polymer/biomolecule
interactions, Chemical and Environmental Engr.), S. Raghavan (surface chemistry,
electrochemistry, Materials Science and Engr. (MSE)), B. Zelinski (sol/gel
chemistry, MSE), O. Palusinski (microelectronics, packaging and
interconnections, Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)), P. Deymier
(modeling and simulation, MSE) and L. Adamowicz (quantum and computational
chemistry, Chemistry). This team will create a virtual education and research
unit without traditional departmental boundaries, whose focus is to train
diverse undergraduate and graduate students in the scientific and technical
multi-linguism needed in today's rapidly evolving field of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the
proposed activity: The broader impacts of this program revolve around moving
biomolecules into the engineering arena. Natural and engineered biomolecules,
including proteins, possess properties that add a new dimension to the
structure/ processing/ manufacturing/ utilization paradigm, giving them a
fabulous long-term potential in a vast range of engineering applications.
Through this paradigm, the proposed activity will help enable the electronics
industry to push feature sizes down to the nanoscale. Also, this program will
establish a new educational initiative, the nanotechnology track (NTT) that will
serve as a model for integrating the scientific, engineering, societal and
business aspects of nanotechnology into economically sound
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;