* 0303774
* NIRT:  Nanomagnetism in Complex Magnetic Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Angelica Stacy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,457,259.00

This NIRT proposal focuses on the development of new complex materials for the
study of surface and interface magnetism at the nanoscale in spin polarized
structures. The nature of magnetism at boundaries of spin polarized materials is
a fundamental issue that has yet to be fully understood. Nanoscale control of
such boundaries may facilitate the implementation and improve performance of
spin polarized devices in memory and logic applications. Thus far spin polarized
devices that are based on simple materials systems have been instrumental in
providing a basic understanding of this class of devices. In order to develop a
full understanding of such structures and to improve device performance, we must
study devices based on complex materials in which we can tune several properties
at the same time through chemical and structural degrees of
freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed program on magnetic oxide and
chalcogenide materials and devices will have significant intellectual impact in
the areas of solid state chemistry, materials science as well as device physics
and engineering and more specifically magnetism at the boundaries of spin
polarized materials. We have assembled a team of five PI's that will provide an
integrated approach to understanding magnetism at boundaries: (i) synthesis and
development of novel bulk oxide and chalcogenide materials and their thin film
counterparts, (ii) fabrication of mesoscale and nanoscale spin polarized device
structures, (iii) local electronic and magnetic characterization of the surfaces
and interfaces of the spin polarized materials, and (iv) theoretical modeling of
spin polarized structures. Our interdisciplinary team, of four experimentalists
and a theorist from the fields of materials science and engineering, chemistry
and condensed matter physics, is well positioned to study spin transport in
devices based on complex materials whose magnetic and electronic properties can
be controlled through structure and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary research program includes a strong educational component that
will have broad impact on undergraduate, graduate as well as high school
students. It not only will introduce students with a variety of backgrounds and
interests to the technologically vibrant field of magnetics but also will
provide experimental and analytical skills for future careers of the graduate
and undergraduate students. Moreover, since we believe that outreach to high
school students is an important vehicle for educating and motivating students
for future scientific pursuits, we will provide summer internship opportunities
and tours in the five research groups as well as develop an engineering module
to enhance an existing inquiry-based learning program for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;