* 0303923
* UMEB - An Integrative Research Experience in Undergraduate Education
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Jerry Wolff, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Funding from NSF will support an Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental
Biology (UMEB) program at the University of Memphis. We propose to actively
involve students from underrepresented ethnic groups in environmental research,
thus encouraging them to pursue professions in environmental biology as viable
career choices. We plan to use research facilities at The University of Memphis
and the Meeman Biological Field Station to provide a unique learning experience
for participating undergraduate students. Our goals are to teach the scientific
method, critical thinking, data analysis, and writing skills by directly
involving students in the development and testing of hypotheses centered on
environmental biology. Seven professors from a variety of science and math
fields will recruit and mentor minority students from their sophomore-senior
years. We have a plan to attract underrepresented students in the sciences and
present them with specialty skills-oriented courses, field and laboratory
research experiences, and exposure to minority role models to prepare them for
professional careers in environmental biology. We have partnered with numerous
private and government agencies and potential employment institutions to expose
students to academic and professional role models and employment opportunities.
Assessment of our program and dissemination of information will include
professional presentations and manuscripts, Internet links from the University,
and the use of our participants as recruiters for additional candidates. We
believe that our UMEB program will nurture excitement for scientific inquiry,
increase minority participation in careers in environmental biology, and provide
a model for other urban institutions to increase the number of underrepresented
groups actively involved in environmental research. This collaborative effort
will reinforce the commitment of the mentors and the educational philosophy of
our institution to NSF-funded research and education of students who are
underrepresented in environmental biology.