* 0304968
* The Fate of Carbon in Polymer-Derived High-Temperature Stable Amorphous SiCO
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Yigal Blum, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 322,000.00

This proposal is a collaborative research effort between Hans-Joachim Kleebe,
Colorado School of Mines and Yigal D. Blum, SRI International. The research will
focus on the fundamental understanding of the fate of carbon during the
pyrolysis and post-pyrolysis heat treatment of polymeric precursors to silicon
oxycarbide (SiOC). The effort will combine unique synthetic and compositional
control capability of preceramic polymers, with state-of-the-art
characterization methodology. The proposed research will enhance the overall
understanding of the relationships between synthesis, molecular content,
molecular structure and nanostructure of polymeric precursors and the subsequent
evolution of SiOC glasses, followed by the formation of nanosize crystallites
and nanocomposite features at elevated temperatures. In contrast to previously
studied sol-gel derived SiOC glasses, this project will emphasize the use of a
different polymeric route based on the use of curable polyhydridomethyl-siloxane
(PHMS) as a versatile and very effective precursor, and high-carbon content
SiOCs. These PHMS-based materials contain very high molar ratio of carbon but
exhibit unexpectedly much higher stability as solid solutions at temperatures
exceeding 1400 degrees C. The overall understanding of the relationship between
molecular and nanostructure of these preceramic polymers, the formation of the
SiOC's vitreous network (glass architecture), the final composition, and the
evolution of the polymer-derived ceramic nanostructure upon processing
(crosslinking and subsequent low-temperature pyrolysis) is an essential aspect
of the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will
have a broader impact for several growing fields in science involving materials
synthesis through pyrolytic processes and R&amp;D of organic-inorganic hybrids,
nano- composites and nanophases. There will be an integrated effort to mitigate
between the disciplines of organic and organometallic synthesis chemistry and
solid-state ceramics. The project will provide both chemists and ceramists
better guidelines in designing the properties materialss to meet specific
application requirements. This scientifically based practicality will lead to a
broad range of applications aiding national goals to enhance efficiency in
engines and power production in a cleaner environment. Project activities will
be disseminated in local newspapers, radio stations etc. in order to inform the
general public of our work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded with
AFOSR (6.1).&lt;br/&gt;