* 0304811
* 2003 Solid State Chemistry II Gordon Conference;  Oxford, UK;  September 14-18, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Nathaniel Brese, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2004
* USD 17,250.00

Interest in solid state chemistry has undergone explosive growth in recent years
due to the broadly based recognition of the technological importance and
scientific challenges involved in the discovery and study of new materials, and
due to the influx of scientists from other disciplines who see the opportunities
for performing exciting research in this area. The 2003 Solid State Chemistry
Gordon Research Conference will be held at Queens College, Oxford, England,
September 14 - 18, 2003. The goal of the conference is to facilitate
international collaboration and information exchange across a broad spectrum of
researchers with interests in solid-state chemistry areas that include new
concepts for design and synthesis of novel functional materials, fundamental
studies in structure, theory and modeling, and related areas of materials
nanoscience and engineering. The NSF funds will be used to support the
attendance of young American scientists as well as senior U.S. session chairs
and invited speakers.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The Solid State Chemistry
community continues to have direct impact on technological advances of high
significance to society by designing new materials for energy, electronics and
photonics, including the design and construction of novel 'biosolids' such as
biomolecules in sol-gels as sensor materials.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;