* 0304738
* Nanosegregation, Microtexture and the Control of Brittle Failure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* David Williams, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 610,002.00

This grant uses a novel combination of experimental techniques to determine the
interplay between local microtexture and nanometer-scale segregation of
impurities to grain boundaries, which may cause brittle failure. This inter-
relationship has not been examined to date, but X-ray mapping in the analytical
electron microscope offers both the high spatial resolution and atomic-level
detection necessary for quantitative analysis of multiple, undisturbed
boundaries (i.e. not fractured prior to study) in the same specimen. Automated
crystallography for the transmission electron microscope can determine the
misorientation across the same boundaries. The hypothesis is that local texture
can control the amount and degree of segregation or, conversely, that
segregation can control the local microtexture. The understanding obtained via
these new techniques would permit development of new thermo mechanical
treatments to mitigate the deleterious effects of segregants and this is a
primary aim of the research. The change in segregant distribution will be
measured in specific textures produced either via thin film formation on
tailored substrates or via grain boundary engineering which creates a high
fraction of low energy boundaries to which segregation is minimized. Ideal
segregating systems in Cu and Fe will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;A
broader impact of the research is that, if successful, it may offer an
alternative method of the current (and expensive) practice of reducing
undesirable trace elements to levels where segregation does not cause
embrittlement. If segregation can be minimized by grain boundary engineering,
then the very thermo-mechanical treatments used to develop desirable properties
may be modified to suppress segregation simultaneously, to levels where the
connectivity of brittle boundaries is lowered sufficiently to prevent crack
propagation leading to brittle failure. The techniques developed will be
incorporated into classroom teaching material, a 2nd edition of a major textbook
and Lehigh's annual microscopy courses for industrial and government
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;