* 0304960
* Electronic Properties of Thin Film Organic Superconductors Studied Using Synchrotron Radiation-Based Soft X-Ray Spectroscopies
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2007
* Kevin Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 299,999.00

The project aims to synthesize thin films of organic superconductors and to
study their electronic properties using a powerful combination of high
resolution synchrotron radiation-based soft x-ray spectroscopies. A major goal
is to solve the beam damage and surface problems associated with earlier studies
of single crystals by growing thin films of these materials in-situ, and
continuously translating the films in front of the synchrotron radiation beam as
spectra are recorded. Organic molecular beam deposition methods will be
developed for the in-situ synthesis of ordered thin films of organic
superconductors. Definitive measurements will be made of the density of states,
band structure, Fermi surfaces, and orbital bonding of thin film organic
superconductors. This project will have a significant impact on the education of
students and postdoctoral research associates by exposing them to a highly
collaborative research environment at national user facilities. They will be
educated in the chemistry and physics of novel organic materials, and in the
application of synchrotron radiation spectroscopies in their study. This is an
ambitious program that aims to produce definitive measurements of surface and
bulk electronic structure of organic
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors are fascinating
materials that, under appropriate conditions, can carry an electrical current
with no resistance. While most superconductors are inorganic materials such as
metals, there are some that are organic, i.e., carbon-based. These organic
superconductors are complex materials whose properties are not well understood.
Thin films of organic superconductors have not been routinely synthesized, and
this will be a major challenge. The basic electronic properties of these
materials will be studied using two probes: photoemission spectroscopy and x-ray
emission spectroscopy. These probes involve the excitation of the electrons in
the material by illumination with intense x-rays and measuring their response.
This combination of spectroscopies will provide a comprehensive understanding of
the electronic and chemical properties of these complex materials. This program
will also educate postdoctoral research associates, graduate and undergraduate
students in the physics and chemistry of organic superconductors, and the
application of state of the art spectroscopic probes in their study. This class
of electronic materials is of high interest to industry, and students trained in
these areas will be very competitive in the job market. &lt;br/&gt;