* 0304421
* NUE:     Development of a Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education Global Network
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER.: 0304421&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: NANOTECHNOLOGY UNDERGRAD
EDUCATION&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hersam, Mark C.&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
TITLE: NUE: Development of a Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education Global
Network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is part
of the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, NSF 02-148, within the
Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) Category and is administered by the
Design Automation for Micro and Nano Systems Program. Led by Professor Mark
Hersam of the Materials Science and Engineering Department at Northwestern
University, this program entitled "NUE: Development of a Nanotechnology
Undergraduate Education Global Network" is developing an internet infrastructure
for the worldwide exchange and dissemination of nanotechnology undergraduate
educational ideas and materials. Initially, a pre-existing course in
nanomaterials at Northwestern University will be used as a prototype for
developing modules on the NUE Global Network in collaboration with the
International Virtual Institute led by Professor Robert Chang. The nanomaterials
course employs novel pedagogical techniques, including interdisciplinary
problem-based learning and peer assessment, that are well-suited for
undergraduate teaching and learning in the emerging field of nanotechnology.
Once the web-based interface has been formalized for this course, the NUE Global
Network will be expanded to other courses at Northwestern University and other
institutions of higher learning. Ultimately, the NUE Global Network is designed
to evolve into a nanotechnology educational forum that will allow educators,
students, government, and industry to interact in a truly global
sense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;