* 0304209
* NIRT: Functionalized Nanowires for Electromechanical and Optical Detection of Biomolecules with Ultrahigh Sensitivity and Specificity
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Roger Howe, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 850,001.00

Nano-electromechanical systems (NEMS) are emerging as a most promising
technology to realize new devices to sense and control our physical and chemical
environment with unprecedented sensitivity. However, NEMS also present engineers
with unprecedented challenges in materials processing, device design,
fabrication and integration. This research project aims to present an innovative
solution to the challenges of batch fabrication of mechanical and optical
devices at the nanoscale and interfacing with external probes. It will realize
addressable arrays of nanowire-based resonant devices by employing the Vapor-
Liquid-Solid method of nanowire, selective catalyst nanocluster deposition
methods, novel nanogap device design based on spacer lithography, and novel
coupling architectures to excite and detect the fundamental modes of the
nanowires. These nanodevices will offer bifunctional detection of chemical
species both through the effect of the adsorbed mass on the resonance frequency
and through the optical detection of the chemical signature in surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy.

Upon successful completion, the project will have demonstrated a new paradigm
for batch fabrication at the nanoscale. The research will have immediate impact
on the emerging field of NEMS and furthermore enable a new generation of devices
to be designed to probe the properties of materials at the nanoscale. The
nanowire sensing structures proposed may represent the first example of a
nanodevice capable of extracting mass signal and chemical bonding signal
simultaneously so that the real-time and parallel deterministic monitoring of
multiple species will be possible. Such devices might significantly impact
fields ranging as far as drug discovery, medical diagnosis, proteomics and
environmental detection of biological agents. This research grant will provide
funds to support the education of a new generation of nanoscale manufacturing
engineers.