* 0304391
* NIRT:  FRG:  Structure of Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Michael Thorpe, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,350,000.00

This NSE Nanoscience Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) focuses on one of
the central problems in nanoscience research: How to determine the atomic
structure within nanosize particles. This is an important issue because
conventional crystallographic techniques are often rendered useless by the
nanometer range of the atomic order. This project will develop novel approaches,
particularly the atomic pair distribution function (PDF) method, for the study
of nano-scale structure. These methods will be integrated with modern x-ray and
neutron facilities via fast computer algorithms. The techniques will be applied
to nanocrystalline materials, many of which have potential for technological
applications. A goal of the project is to use the structure data in a kind of
feedback loop involving modeling and synthesis to improve the properties of the
materials under study. These include V2O5 xerogels and nanotubes, MoS2 and WS2
nanotubes and nanocrystals, passivated gold nanoclusters in dense forms and
synthesized in biomimetic scaffolds, mechanically prepared GdAl2 nanomagnets,
pharmaceutical drugs in amorphous and nanocrystalline form, alkali metal
catalyzed nanocrystalline carbon and electronic nano-phase-separation in
correlated-electron oxides. Facilities and software will be developed and made
available via workshops to the broad community with interests in the structural
properties of nanoparticles. The research is integrated with education, from
undergraduate to post-doctoral level. This training includes laboratory research
as well as sophisticated on-site experiments at national user facilities for
synchrotron x-ray and neutron research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSE
Nanoscience Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) focuses on one of the central
problems in nanoscience research: How to determine the atomic structure within
complex, nanosize particles and materials. Here, conventional tools for
measuring atomic structure, x-ray and neutron crystallography, often fail. This
project will address this shortcoming by developing novel methods that make use
of modern national facilities and advanced high-speed computing to to determine
atomic arrangements in nano-materials. The national facilities provide the
unprecedented power of x-rays and neutrons that is required. This NIRT combines
researchers with the expertise in novel structure determination methods with
synthetic chemists and chemical engineers. Knowledge gained from the structural
studies will be fed back into the sample synthesis steps to engineer
nanostructured materials that have improved functionalities. An important aspect
of the project is to create infrastructure in the form of dedicated facilities
and software that can be used by others who wish to carry out similar
investigations. New researchers will be trained through hands-on workshops,
collaboration on specific projects, and by training graduates and
undergraduates. The students will broaden their research experience by spending
periods working in different investigators' laboratories and collaborating on
experiments at national facilities. This will prepare them for careers in
nanoscience and engineering in academe, industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;