* 0304807
* Multiply Bound Polymer Chains: Novel Chemistry for Improved Interfacial Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Rigoberto Advincula, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,863,000.00

Mark D. Dadmun, Department of Chemistry, University of Tennessee, Rigoberto C.
Advincula, Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, S. Michael Kilbey,
Department of Chemistry, Clemson University, Jimmy W Mays, University of
Tennessee and Grant D. Smith, University of Utah, are funded with an award from
the Collaborative Research in Chemistry Program with funds provided by the
Division of Chemistry, the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. This multifaceted team will investigate a novel
chemical process to modify and control interfaces; multiply bound polymer chains
(MBPCs). Well-defined polymers of various architectures will be synthesized, and
theory, simulation and experimental techniques utilized to investigate the
kinetics of assembly, surface organization, layer structure, and properties of
MBPCs made from these materials. Additionally, the use of MBPCs in a number of
macroscopic applications will be examined.

This multiinstitution, multidisciplinary research will produce surfaces with
bound loops that have desired structural features and/or confer useful
properties on solid interfaces. Technological impacts, including the modifation
of interfaces to promote or prevent adhesion, stabilization of colloid
particles, improvement of multi-component polymer systems, and altered the wear
characteristics of surfaces, will result from this research. This research
program will also provide an interdisciplinary training ground for undergraduate
and graduate students, and will use student exchanges to expose the students to
socially and culturally diverse environments. Also, a number of experiments will
be carried out at National Laboratories, including the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Sandia National
Laboratory. Students will acquire hands-on experience in a multi-user facility
and develop the next-generation of neutron users. The participation of under-
represented groups in polymer research will take place through the Engineering
in Diversity Program, the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation, and the Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities Program.
Further, science teachers from public high schools and junior colleges will
spend four weeks in research laboratories contributing to this project,
providing exposure to polymers and polymer research. Finally, a website for
polymer interfaces will be developed.