* 0304101
* NUE:     Teaching the Elements of Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Science Courses
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Leonard Fine, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Leonard
W. Fine of Columbia University is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry
and the Directorate for Biological Sciences. The award supports the development
of three interactive, visual, teaching and learning modules for a General
Chemistry course and a General Science course. The modules integrate science,
engineering, and medicine through applications in the nanosciences and
nanotechnology and include materials for lectures, student-driven. recitations,
and laboratory experiments. Modules will be structured in a "layered"
arrangement with the introductory outer layers featuring basic scientific
concepts in context with issues of societal interest needed to build an
understanding of nanotechnology appropriate for a General Science course. The
inner layers will be higher level discussions in greater depth, appropriate for
the General Chemistry course, exploring more fundamental themes and concepts
within the three topic modules. The emphasis is integrative, taking advantage of
the interdisciplinary nature of nanotechnology, and connecting to the interest
of all science, engineering, and pre-medical students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected outcomes of this project include: 1) A reformed chemistry curriculum
that demonstrates the benefits of integration of the physical and biological
sciences, mathematics, engineering, and technology, through their applications
in nanotechnology; 2) The demonstration of the importance of nanotechnology as a
central thematic focus of a core science course for liberal arts students; and
3) A unification of research and teaching, with current research results in
nanotechnology integrated into the teaching of fundamental scientific concepts.
The evaluation of the project will assess the effectiveness of the proposed
instructional materials in developing an integrative understanding of
fundamental concepts, and the effectiveness of using examples from the
interdisciplinary of nanotechnology in demonstrating the relevance of
fundamental scientific concepts to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
program announcement, NSF 02-148, category NUE. The project develops teaching
modules focused on nanoscience and nanotechnology that will enable instructors
and students to relate and connect fundamental concepts with issues of current
science, technological, and societal interests. The project involves faculty at
Norfolk State University, an historically black university, who will also
incorporate the modules into their chemistry and materials science courses.
&lt;br/&gt;