* 0304650
* NIRT: Three-Dimensional Nanomanufacturing Processes for Nanophotonic Devices and Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Bart Van Zeghbroeck, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,238,913.00

The primary objective of this Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT)
project is to establish an interdisciplinary research and education program in a
new area of nanomanufacturing involving scalable processes for the fabrication
of wide-band gap three-dimensional (3D) photonic crystals (PC) possessing
engineered defects and their integration into photonic devices and systems. New
approaches are needed for the miniaturization and integration of optical
components into compact functional systems capable of generating, processing,
and detecting light signals. PCs have been recognized as one of the most
promising technologies for this goal. However, the fabrication of 3D photonic
ban gap (PBG) structures for the visible and IR spectrum remains a considerable
challenge. This proposal presents techniques to fully realize the potential of
the PC paradigm for industrial application and commercialization. The building
blocks will be coated nanospheres. Periodic arrays of such metal-dielectric
nanospheres present a wide, robust, and complete PBG. Traditionally unrelated
techniques will be used to fabricate and integrate the PCs: atomic layer
deposition (ALD), self-assembly of colloidal nanospheres, 3D femtosecond
nanomachining, and lithographic processing. Self-assembly will be combined with
anisotropic etching to pattern the PC on silicon wafers with controlled shape,
thickness, orientation and location relative to other opt electronic components.
Ultra short laser pulse nanomachining will be used to create well-defined
defects. Several characterization techniques will be implemented to analyze the
composition, structure, and optical properties of the PC, and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a fundamental
understanding of basic manufacturing processes and, if successful, will
establish an unprecedented large-scale integrated-nanophotonics fabrication
technology. Partnerships have been established with the National Institute of
Standards and Technologies and with Agilent technologies laboratories. Another
objective of this project is to educate graduate and undergraduate students as
well as the general public in the area of nanomanufacturing of photonic systems
and its implications for society. The project will integrate education and
outreach with research in nanomanufacturing processes to create the human
infrastructure required for the development of nanophotonics technologies in the
years to come. The program proposes the following specific activities: (1) to
incorporate the outcome of research into graduate and undergraduate courses; (2)
to coordinate a new interdisciplinary nanomanufacturing seminar series; (3) to
organize outreach activities with graduate student participation, (d) to
generate and maintain a dedicated website for the general public; (4) to
interact with industry and national labs; and (5) to make available the
developed infrastructure to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;