* 0304922
* Semiparametric Regression Modeling for Longitudinal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Yanqing Sun, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 145,334.00

In this proposal, the investigator proposes a semiparametric method for joint
modeling of longitudinal responses and measurement times. The semiparametric
varying-coefficient regression model postulates that the influences of some
covariates vary nonparametrically with time while the effects of the remaining
covariates follow certain parametric functions of time. The measurement times of
responses are modeled by Cox's proportional model for conditional mean rate. The
modeling by Aalen's additive model will also be studied. The investigator
employs the approach of Lin and Ying (2001) to estimate the nonparametric
regression coefficients. The parametric components are estimated by a weighted
least squares method. More efficient smoothing techniques are used for response
processes. The investigator proposes a data-driven bandwidth selection criterion
based on the sum of squares of residuals. This selection method will be further
studied and tested empirically through simulations. Constructions of confidence
bands for the parametric components, nonparametric regression coefficient
functions and their cumulatives are proposed. Goodness-of-fit test procedures
are proposed to check whether some regression coefficient functions follow
certain parametric forms by comparing the nonparametric estimators and the
corresponding estimators of the cumulative regression coefficient functions
under the null hypothesis. A preliminary simulation study demonstrates that the
proposed estimation and hypothesis testing methods are promising. The
investigator will study the asymptotic properties, such as consistency, weak
convergence and consistency of the estimators of the asymptotic variances, for
all the proposed estimators. Finite sample properties of the proposed estimation
methods and goodness-of-fit tests will be evaluated through extensive numerical
simulation studies. The investigator also proposes to study related problems in
optimal choice of the weight function, optimal design of measurement times and
informative censoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes to seek
statistical models with a physical or biological basis and biologically
interpretable parameters and to develop statistically efficient methods to
better understand linear or nonlinear behavior of response process. The proposed
semiparametric varying-coefficient regression model allows for additional
flexibility to explore how covariate effects change over time and provides a
base to test whether simpler models with scientific relevance hold. The proposed
research when carried out would help to enrich a collection of statistical tools
which have important impact on the analysis of longitudinal data. Giudelines for
practical applications will be developed. The methods will be used to analyze
longitudinal data in AIDS related medical research to develop more effective
treatments and to other real examples in medical studies. The research of the
problems proposed here will also generate many research topics at different
levels suitable for graduate and undergraduate studies, therefore promotes
involvement of students in current scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;