* 0304694
* Theory of Electron Transfer Reactions in Liquid Crystalline Media
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Dmitry Matyushov, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 07/31/2006
* USD 294,000.00

Professor Dmitry Matyushov, of Arizona State University, is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop and apply
computational theories amenable to the study of electron transfer reactions in
liquid crystalline media. The research deals with predicting how the structural
properties of molecules change during electron transfer reactions. The research
is relevant to the area of molecular electronics, optoelectronics, liquid
crystals and related orientational order in films, photosynthesis and
spontaneous neutral-ion phase transitions in molecular charge-transfer
processes. The theoretical approach relies on microscopic modeling of electric
potential fluctuations, a phenomenological macroscopic theory of electron
transfer reactions and computer simulations of donor-acceptor complexes in
liquid crystal solvents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to externally and
remotely control the structure of molecular constituents in solution or crystals
has many useful applications in technology and to society. Such control may be
indirectly accomplished by subjecting the system to low levels of laser light
that is tuned to rearrange the electrons within molecules. The resulting
electronic rearrangement may then promote structural changes of the molecules
that can change the properties of the material. Theoretical and computational
methods are developed that enable the prediction and optimization of such
structural changes. Potential technological impacts are numerous and include
artificial assembled retinas, the understanding of photosynthesis, and improved
flat panel displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;