* 0304246
* NIRT: Tough Nanocomposite Coatings using New Self-Organized Carbon Forms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Gregory Crawford, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

Tough Nanocomposite Coatings using New Self-Organized Carbon Forms
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;W. A. Curtin, B. W. Sheldon, R. Hurt, and G.
Crawford&lt;br/&gt;Division of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI
02912&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Y.-T. Cheng&lt;br/&gt;General Motors Research and
Development, Warren, MI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advent of high modulus and strength carbon nanotubes (CNT) has sparked
tremendous interest in nanotube-based materials and related new forms of carbon.
We propose to develop novel carbon-nanofiber-reinforced ceramics and metals as
tough, damage-tolerant coatings for contact and wear applications to replace
traditional hard coatings. Nanocomposites containing new engineered carbon
nanofibers will be fabricated, evaluated, and optimized to trigger nanoscale
toughening. We propose to (i) synthesize a set of wholly new nanocomposite
materials using discotic self-assembly routes unique to Brown, and CVD methods
to control the structure/properties of the nanofibrous reinforcements and
resulting nanocomposites, (ii) demonstrate toughness and damage tolerance in
these composite systems, (iii) elucidate toughening mechanisms in these
nanocomposites, (iv) investigate a range of fabrication routes for these
materials, and (v) evaluate the new materials under realistic wear conditions
for aluminum and steel alloys used in automotive components and machining.
&lt;br/&gt;We focus on carbon-based reinforcements in nanocomposite coatings due
to our recent observations of toughening mechanisms in CNT/ceramic composites
and because of the myriad ways in which we can produce and control carbon
structures to engineer anisotropic properties. Because conventional CNTs may not
be necessary to achieve nanoscale toughening, we will develop composites
containing an entirely new classes of nanoscale carbon fiberous bodies
synthesized by surface-mediated, low-temperature assembly of low-cost
polyaromatic mesogenic precursors, which allows molecular engineering of
anisotropy in properties, and of the surfaces that control fiber/matrix bonding.
The overall synthesis of carbon/ceramic nanocomposites will involve our novel
directed polyaromatic assembly and several deposition approaches for forming
fiberous carbon materials in nanochannel alumina array templates so as to
generate an array of nanoceramic composites with varying fiberous structure
(nanotubes, solid graphitic fibrils, "open" structure fibrils and tubes),
fiberous dimensions, interfacial adhesion, residual stresses, anisotropic
thermal/elastic/strength properties, friction coefficients, and geometric order.
Fabrication of nanometal-matrix composites will be performed by metal deposition
into free-standing fiberous structures formed via CVD or via etching of the
template ceramic matrix. Focused mechanical testing will measure toughness and
damage resistance, and analysis will determine the toughening mechanisms and
identify how structural/chemical details at multiple scales control enhanced
toughness and wear performance. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs are dedicated to enhancing
the impact of the technical work through integration of research and education,
industrial outreach, and human resource development. The project will enhance
the infrastructure for science and education by training graduate students, by
establishing a summer internship program targeted at under-represented groups,
by integrating innovative research activities into the curriculum, and by
providing opportunities for graduate students to work at GM R&amp;D. We will
cooperate with local chapters of the Women in Science and Engineering, National
Society for Black Engineers, and New Scientist Program to broadly disseminate
the science and application of nanotechnology and to recruit active researchers.
We will integrate nanotechnology concepts into existing NSF MRSEC programs and
our entrepreneurship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;