* 0304909
* Determining Species-Specific Seed Shadows Using Molecular Genetic Methods
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Bette Loiselle, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2004
* USD 38,789.00

Intellectual Merit: Measuring and analyzing seed dissemination into the
environment is considered a major limitation in seed dispersal and plant
recruitment studies. To date, seed shadows have been based on data collected
from radio-tracked animals or from seed traps. In the former method, seed
shadows are probalistic as dissemination is based on average gut passage times
and distance moved during some time period, but data do not provide a means to
evaluate species-specific differences in animal-generated seed shadows. In the
latter case, seed rain provides a direct measure of seed arrival into
microenvironments, although the contribution of different animal dispersers is
not possible to discern. Dissecting out individual ecological roles of animal
dispersers is necessary to understand the evolutionary impacts of seed
dispersers on plant demography. This SGER proposal investigates a new method for
directly measuring species-specific seed dissemination by birds using molecular
markers and fecal samples. Fresh bird droppings that contain seeds are readily
found in forest environments or collected in seed traps. In this exploratory
research project we will collect fecal samples containing seeds from known
species of birds (i.e., captured birds) and conduct genetic analyses on the bird
dropping to get a "species signal". This preliminary work is necessary to test
the ability of detecting microsatellite markers from bird droppings. Without
sufficient evidence that this novel technique will function, any proposal
relying&lt;br/&gt;on this method to examine interspecific differences in seed
dispersal function by birds is unlikely to be successful. If successful, this
technique could revolutionize our studies on seed-dispersal efficiency in
tropical lowland forests as it would provide a means to directly study seed
dissemination into microenvironments that differ in seed and seedling
establishment conditions. The application of this novel technique would allow
us, for the first time, to develop the critical link between seed disperser
behavior and plant demography, and thus, provide the key empirical data to
determine the influence of animals on plant demography.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The proposed research effectively combines the
ecological,&lt;br/&gt;behavioral, and molecular genetic expertise of the
principal investigators and provides an avenue for new collaborative research
that will enhance research programs of each senior investigator. If we can
successfully develop the methods to obtain species signals using molecular
genetic data from bird fecal samples, this method will likely become adopted by
many researchers and applied to a wide range of ecological, population, and
behavioral studies. Field and laboratory components of the research program will
also provide key opportunities for a student from UM-St. Louis and from Latin
America to gain research experience.&lt;br/&gt;