* 0304280
* Nonselfadjoint Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Rudi Weikard, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 118,609.00

Direct and inverse spectral and scattering problems of selfadjoint Sturm-
Liouville operators are among the most studied subjects in mathematics. The
status of nonselfadjoint Sturm-Liouville operators is by far not as complete
even though they are currently under intensive investigation by a number of
people. The present research project aspires to make a contribution in this
area, in particular with regard to inverse problems. The main tool which sets
the treatment of selfadjoint problems apart from others is the spectral theorem.
The dire consequences of its absence can sometimes be overcome when it is
assumed that the di.erential equation has (or its solutions have) certain
structural properties. For example, Floquet theory guarantees a certain
structure for the solutions of periodic equations, which in turn allows to draw
conclusions for the spectrum which are very similar to the selfadjoint case
(intervals become analytic arcs). Another class of such potentials are the so
called algebro-geometric potentials which have been intensively investigated in
the past few decades by many people including the PI. It is planned to apply the
expertise gathered to obtain results for this kind of potentials and certain
perturbations of them. In particular, recovery of the potential of a Schrodinger
equation from the location of eigenvalues and resonances will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical laws are encoded by differential
equations. The problem of obtaining solutions (or at least some of their
properties) knowing the coefficients of the differential equation is usually
called a direct problem. The inverse problem, on the other hand, is the problem
of obtaining the coefficients from a certain knowledge about the solutions
(often knowledge about spectral properties). The goal of the project is to
investigate certain aspects of such problems. The differential equations
investigated have widespread applications in physics and engineering, e.g.
recovering material properties inside an object from measurements on the outside
of the object. The solution of inverse problems is at the heart of medical and
industrial imaging, mineral exploration, and earth quake studies to name a few.