* 0304789
* Combinatorics in Cohomology and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Ezra Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 85,090.00

This research plan is divided into three projects, each of
which&lt;br/&gt;combines combinatorics with cohomology and computation in some
way.&lt;br/&gt;The first project deals with certain systems of partial
differential &lt;br/&gt;equations defined by a combination of discrete convex
polyhedral data &lt;br/&gt;and continuous parameters. These `hypergeometric
systems' provide a &lt;br/&gt;fertile source of examples for the more general
theory of holonomic &lt;br/&gt;systems, and the goal is to shed light on how
their solution spaces &lt;br/&gt;vary in continuous families, using the
algebraic theory of local cohomology. &lt;br/&gt;The second project applies a
computational perspective to the homological &lt;br/&gt;algebra of injective
resolutions. It aims to demonstrate that exerting &lt;br/&gt;sufficient
combinatorial control over the maps in injective resolutions &lt;br/&gt;of
finitely generated modules over polynomial rings can make
effective&lt;br/&gt;computation and storage of these resolutions possible, even
though&lt;br/&gt;injective modules are themselves seemingly intractable. The
final&lt;br/&gt;project places summands in combinatorial formulae for
certain&lt;br/&gt;universal cohomology classes in bijection with components
in&lt;br/&gt;Grobner degenerations of orbit closures for algebraic groups.
This&lt;br/&gt;degeneration technique should provide a geometrically
positive&lt;br/&gt;proof of the Buch-Fulton conjecture for quiver coefficients,
which&lt;br/&gt;generalize the famous Littlewood-Richardson
coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorics, the study of discrete
structures, arises as an&lt;br/&gt;organizing principle in widely varying
contexts throughout the&lt;br/&gt;sciences, including mathematics, computer
science, physics, and&lt;br/&gt;biology. Applications of combinatorics occur not
only when the&lt;br/&gt;original problem is itself discrete, but frequently also
when the&lt;br/&gt;original problem deals with continuous phenomena. For
instance, it&lt;br/&gt;can happen that a single type of discrete structure can
be imposed&lt;br/&gt;universally upon a variety of continuous systems. This kind
of&lt;br/&gt;framework often lends deep insight into the nature of such
systems&lt;br/&gt;and their interconnections. Combinatorial frameworks can
also&lt;br/&gt;endow certain special systems with enough order to bring
previously&lt;br/&gt;intractable problems within grasp, conceptually or
computationally.&lt;br/&gt;Conversely, within many fields, understanding certain
special&lt;br/&gt;systems whose parameters are defined in a combinatorial
context can&lt;br/&gt;lead to methods applicable in general. The projects
outlined here&lt;br/&gt;will broaden the understanding of how discrete
structures arising&lt;br/&gt;in these ways can control phenomena in the areas of
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations, homological algebra, and algebraic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;