* 0304028
* NER:      Shaping and Assembly of Hybrid Architechtures by Nanotemplating
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Ganpati Ramanath, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 90,000.00

This research effort will explore a completely new approach for creating
architectures comprised of uniquely shaped, multiple nanoscale units by
combining two recently developed methods for nanofabrication. We will employ
glancing angle deposition (GLAD) to create nanotemplates for subsequent
multidirectional assembly of highly oriented nanotubes (MAHON), bent into
predefined shapes and placed in unique configurations, which is unachievable by
conventional techniques currently available. This hybrid approach will provide a
potentially revolutionary strategy to assemble and integrate one-dimensional
nanoscale units into micro- and larger length-scale architectures for
applications in nanoelectronics, sensors, and micro/nano-electromechanical
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAHON is based on a substrate-selective growth
technique that creates vertically oriented carbon nanotubes (CNTs) on chemically
preselected surfaces. In this project we will use GLAD architectures comprised
of nanopillars and nanoorifices with controllable shapes and periodicities to
guide CNT growth by MAHON to control the shape and placement of nanotube
bundles, and ultimately individual nanotubes. We will create three test
architectures to explore the wide potential of the hybrid GLAD-MAHON technique.
Specifically, we will (a) force CNTs to grow zig-zag shaped nanospring arrays
with expected extraordinary mechanical properties useful for nanoactuators and
molecular sieving. &lt;br/&gt;(b) create arrays of aligned individual nanotubes
on a Si-chip through nanoscale orifices. Such architectures will revolutionize
field emitter technology.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Create interconnected three-dimensional
structures comprised of silicon-based materials and CNTs for nanoscale
transistors and scaffolds for assembling biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;Engineering
such organized architectures will pave the way for future smart devices,
sensors, and microprocessors. The inherently interdisciplinary nature of the
tasks in this project will provide a fertile ground for training graduate and
undergraduate students in new manufacturing methods in nanotechnology. In
particular, the students will be exposed to nanostructure growth,
nanofabrication, and characterization equipping them with a unique background
and toolset for them to evolve into innovative scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;