* 0304568
* NIRT:  Nanoengineered Responsive Polymer Surfaces for Micro/Nanofluidic Bioanalytical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Qiao Lin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,029,603.00

NIRT: Nanoengineered Responsive Polymer Surfaces for
Micro/Nanofluidic&lt;br/&gt;Bioanalytical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
We propose to explore nanoengineered stimulus-responsive&lt;br/&gt;polymer
nanolayers as an innovative platform for surface modification
of&lt;br/&gt;micro/nanofluidics-based bioanalytical systems. Surface-grafted
polymers&lt;br/&gt;that exhibit large changes in swelling and wettability
properties in&lt;br/&gt;response to external stimuli (e.g. temperature) will be
synthesized and&lt;br/&gt;characterized. Microfabrication techniques for
generation of patterned&lt;br/&gt;responsive polymer nanolayers will be
developed to enable functional&lt;br/&gt;micro/nanofluidic bioanalytical
devices. The utility and impact of this&lt;br/&gt;responsive polymer-based
surface modification technique will be&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated by its application
to micro/nanofluidic manipulation and&lt;br/&gt;control. Specifically, we will
explore thermally responsive polymer&lt;br/&gt;nanolayers for generation,
splitting, merging, mixing, and transport of&lt;br/&gt;femtoliter-volume
droplets. Thermally responsive polymers will also be&lt;br/&gt;used for
microchip chromatography, where sequence-specific separation of&lt;br/&gt;DNA
oligomers will be achieved using specialized surfactants. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed
NIRT will be integrated with graduate and undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;education, and
will be actively involved in outreach events in the&lt;br/&gt;Pittsburgh area.