* 0304345
* NER:  Stepwise Contraction Adsorption Nanolithography, SCAN:   A New Approach Towards Simple, Inexpensive and High Throughput Nanofabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The overall objective is to develop a new lithographic technique, referred to as
"stepwise contraction adsorption nanolithography (SCAN)." In the first step, a
polymer stamp is stretched and micropatterns of proteins are produced on the
surface of the stamp. When the tensile force is removed, the stamps will relax
to their initial size, and therefore the micropatterns will contract to a
smaller size. A second stamp is then stretched and placed in contact with the
first one to transfer the pattern. Repeating these steps multiple times should,
in principle, produce structures with proportionally reduced dimensions. In the
final step the rubber stamp is pressed against a designated surface, such as a
glass slide, and the material defined by the nanostructures is then adsorbed
onto the final surface. Combining technical expertise of polymer synthesis and
micro- and nanolithography, the two co-PIs plan to (1) develop advanced surface
treatment methods to prepare polymer surfaces for protein adhesion and stamping;
(2) to optimize experimental parameters for minimizing lateral diffusion and
increasing material transfer efficiency; and (3) to implement a simple SCAN
experiment within the freshmen lecture and laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
developed successfully, SCAN will have the advantages of the high throughput,
simplicity, and nanometer spatial precision. Beyond enhancing scientific
understanding of protein-polymer surface interactions, SCAN should benefit the
development of biochips, biodevices, and biosensors by providing a simple and
high-resolution means for constructing nanometer scale bioarchitectures. Through
the proposed research projects, graduate and undergraduate students are expected
to gain important scientific skills and insights in nanotechnology and polymer
chemistry. While nanoscience and nanoengineering is well-known among graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, similar awareness is lacking among our
undergraduate students. Implementation of a simple nanofabrication experiment at
the freshmen level would provide critically important exposure of new
generations of researchers, leaders, and citizens to nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;