* 0304727
* NIRT: Science and Commercialization NanoBank, Database and Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Roy Doumani, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,490,000.00

This project uses econometric methods to estimate the impact of nanoscale
science and technology (nano S&T) research, and associated interdisciplinary
research, directly on firms' entry and success and hence on U.S. economic
growth, standard of living, and competitiveness. The research team also performs
scientometric and institutional analyses of diffusion and networks in nano S&T
and converging fields, and the reciprocal effects of institutions on nano S&T
and of academic scientists' involvement in commercialization on their scientific
productivity and teaching. These substantive studies address issues that are
particularly important to sustaining long-term support of nano and associated
S&T. Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students will be engaged in this
research continuously, through hands-on participation and summer and academic-
year internships. Results of the research will be translated into courses for
MBAs and practicing entrepreneurs, including scientists.

Accurate and convincing analysis of these impacts requires building an
integrated database, which will be made available as a public, web-deployed
digital library (DL) called NanoBank.org. The database will be useful to other
researchers pursuing different social-science analyses, as well as investors and
firms seeking to allocate investment to promising new technologies, policymakers
attempting to assess the effects of alternative policy proposals, and nano
scientists and engineers, who will be able to trace relevant research, for
instance, whether a key scientist is author of an article, inventor on a patent,
or collaborator or officer of a firm. A NanoBank user might also seek all
publications, patents, collaborations, alliances, and stock-price returns of
firms working, say, on a particular use of carbon nanotubes and trace all
academic publications and research grants in nano S& T tied to each firm
involved in that use.

The project DL experts will solve challenging technical DL problems to enable
NanoBank users to search multiple and quality-weighted (e.g., by patent or
article citations or employment growth) fields across a variety of databases,
with sophisticated matching of variant names of frequently appearing
organizations and individuals. The team is rich in expertise in carrying out
matches using combined computer and judgment methods that will accelerate the
construction of more fully automated matching/search systems. Nanoscience and
technology experts affiliated with the project are also interested in the
substantive economic, business, and policy questions for which NanoBank can be
the key and are willing to provide the expert input necessary to build a
methodology for tracking and including patents, articles, firms, grants, and
products that should fall within nano S&T and to assess proposed measures of
business activity. They provide access to important knowledge that is often
tacit and transferred by working at the bench level and in industry.

Preliminary empirical results show that where and when firms enter
nanotechnology correlates with regional measures of highly cited academic
articles, federal research funding to universities, and labor force quality.
NanoBank will enable us to provide more definitive estimates of the factors
affecting firm entry and furthermore trace the effects of university-to-firm
knowledge flows on firm success, and of commercial participation on scientists
and engineers. Scientometric analysis can identify emerging fields and explain
trends in cross-discipline research in nano S& T.

This project will begin to answer questions about the economic retum to public
investment in nano S& T research, the channels that knowledge of valuable new
discoveries travels, how discoveries alter these channels, and what institutions
contribute to returns on this investment. The project will directly involve
future and young social, physical, and life scientists in research on the
processes which convert knowledge into valuable goods and services. NanoBank's
availability will attract ambitious social scientists to study of societal
impacts, like high-energy physicists with a new detector, while it also
facilitates discovery by scientists working in other research areas of the
National Nanotechnology Initiative.

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148).
It is being supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE), the Directorate for Computer Science and Engineering (CISE), the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS). Three divisions in MPS are co-sponsoring this effort:
Mathematical Sciences, Physics, and Materials Research.