* 0304921
* THERMEC' 2003 International Conference on Processing and Manufacturing of Advanced Materials; Madrid, Spain; July 7-11, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Brajendra Mishra, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 02/29/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The international conference THERMEC 2003 is planned for Madrid, Spain in July,
2003. Three earlier THERMEC conferences were held in Japan (1988), Australia
(1997) and United States (2000). As a result of resounding success of the
LasVegas-2000-conference, and demand by researchers around the globe, the
2003-conference is planned on cutting-edge materials research with emphasis on
processing, properties, fabrication, and applications of advanced materials.
Around 12 scientific organizations from various parts of the world are co-
sponsors of the conference. The conference covers a wide variety of materials
topics including nanocrystalline, bio and eco materials as well as thin films
and coatings. Other materials topics include light metals (Al, Mg, Ti), steels,
composites, bulk amorphous materials, superalloys, coatings along with Residual
Stresses, Textures, Severe Plastic Deformation, etc. About 28 keynote and 450
oral presentations are expected to be made with participation from 35 countries.
The proceedings will be published by Trans Tech in the form of Materials Science
Forum periodical series in 3 volumes.

The support is directed toward assisting graduate students in attending the
meeting for travel and/or meeting registration. This will avail an opportunity
to a number of US graduate students in materials science in various academic
institutions to get an exposure to the latest developments and excitements in
this area. As in the earlier conferences, a committee of three people will be
involved in the selection process. ENG/DMII is co-funding the current request.