* 0304587
* Topics in Lagrangian Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Jon Wolfson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 175,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Title: TOPICS IN LAGRANGIAN
GEOMETRY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the question of the
existence of &lt;br/&gt;special lagrangian submanifolds in Calabi-Yau manifolds
using &lt;br/&gt;variational techniques and using mean curvature flow. The
variational &lt;br/&gt;techniques involve the study of constrained variational
problems &lt;br/&gt;for lagrangian cycles. These problems can be formulated in
arbitrary &lt;br/&gt;Kaehler (or symplectic) manifolds and involve minimizing
volume among &lt;br/&gt;lagrangians that represent a fixed homology class and
proving optimal &lt;br/&gt;regularity of the minimizer. In particular the
project hopes to show &lt;br/&gt;that if the ambient manifold is a Calabi-Yau
$3$-fold then, for a &lt;br/&gt;suitably formulated problem, the minimizer is
special lagrangian. It &lt;br/&gt;has long been known that the mean curvature
flow of a lagrangian &lt;br/&gt;submanifold preserves the lagrangian condition
if the ambient &lt;br/&gt;manifold is Kaehler-Einstein. The project intends to
investigate the &lt;br/&gt;regularity properties of the mean curvature flow of a
lagrangian &lt;br/&gt;submanifold of a Kaehler-Einstein manifold. In particular,
it &lt;br/&gt;intends to investigate the conditions under which the flow does
and &lt;br/&gt;does not develop singularities in finite
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variational problems with geometric
constraints and mean curvature &lt;br/&gt;flow in codimension greater than one
are on the frontier of &lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis. These problems are
natural in geometry but &lt;br/&gt;they are also important in many different
applied problems. In &lt;br/&gt;material science a ``model'' problem asks to
find a minimizer of &lt;br/&gt;``kinetic energy'' among area preserving maps
between disks and to &lt;br/&gt;find the optimal smoothness of the minimizer. At
present, the &lt;br/&gt;existence of a minimizer is known but nothing is known
about its &lt;br/&gt;singularities. Parts of this project are closely related to
this kind &lt;br/&gt;of ``regularity'' question. In string theory well known
work &lt;br/&gt;conjectures the existence of a certain class of volume
minimizing &lt;br/&gt;three dimensional surfaces called special lagrangian
submanifolds. &lt;br/&gt;This project is a direct attempt to answer this
question in the &lt;br/&gt;affirmative. Mean curvature flow in various
codimensions models many &lt;br/&gt;different physical phenomena. This project
attempts to exploit the &lt;br/&gt;``lagrangian'' constraint to get an
understanding of mean curvature &lt;br/&gt;flow in higher codimensions. This
subject is relatively unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;The techniques investigated in this
project hold the promise of &lt;br/&gt;enhancing the interaction between
geometry and various fields of &lt;br/&gt;applied mathematics and engineering
and in bringing new results and &lt;br/&gt;techniques into these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;