* 0304479
* NUE:    Integrating Nanoscale Science and Engineering into the Undergraduate Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Eric Hellstrom, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) program entitled, "Integrating
Nanoscale Science and Engineering into the Undergraduate Engineering
Curriculum," at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW), under the direction of
Dr. Wendy C. Crone, is jointly funded by the Division of Civil and Mechanical
Systems (CMS) and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems (CTS) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Materials Research (DMR)
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will integrate nanoscale
science and engineering educational modules into key introductory and advanced
undergraduate courses in the College of Engineering at UW. The six courses
targeted for modification range from freshman introductory courses to advanced
level materials and mechanics courses. The proposed work will help to develop a
diverse future workforce with a fundamental understanding of nanoscale science
and engineering concepts. Approximately 400 engineering students will be
impacted in the first year of implementation. Beyond the UW students who will
take these courses over the next few decades at UW, the educational tools in
nanoscale science and engineering developed will be disseminated broadly through
a variety of mechanisms including a web-based Nanotechnology Lab Manual.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;