* 0304483
* NIRT:    Molecular Sensing and Actuation by CMOS Nonvolatile Charges with Independently Addressed Nanoscale Resolution
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* James Engstrom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERITS&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to develop nano-
scale resolution of sensing and actuation between silicon &lt;br/&gt;CMOS
devices and molecules in fluids. We will investigate the implementation of this
interface by nonvolatile charges stored in lithography-pattern floating gates,
self-assembled metal nanocrystals embedded in SiO2, or surface traps with scan-
based direct charging. The nonvolatile charge will interact with the silicon
devices in the Flash memory manner as in the commercial technology of the scan
disk in digital camera and camcorders. The positive and negative nonvolatile
charge will serve as attractive or repulsive receptors like remote cation and
anionic ends to the molecules in fluids. We will investigate the force magnitude
and resolution by different implementation strategies. We will design and
conduct realistic test cases including single molecule trapping/actuation of
fluorescence labeled DNA fragments, and protein recognition based on surface
charge distribution instead of global properties such as size and isoelectric
point. We will also investigate the influence from microfluidic device
integration and autonomous operations, though a complete system design is out of
our scope. We will formulate predictive modeling and simulation tool suites for
equilibrium molecular structures and their movement toward a surface charge
sheet in an environment mediated by the ambient ion charges in fluids. From our
preceding NER work (ECS-0210743), we have preliminary experimental evidence that
the goals we propose in this NIRT are practically
achievable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAJOR APPLICATIONS&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
intellectual studies on the interface of silicon devices and molecules,
successful implementation of this new interface concept can potentially
revolutionize the biological measurements, biomedical microscopy, and
pharmaceutical practices. By functionally mimicking the sensory, digestive and
immune systems in biological systems with electronic receptors, new systems for
molecule actuation, artificial ion channels without applying bias to fluids
directly, protein recognition, and eventually biomedical treatments for cell-
level diseases can be envisioned. The tight integration with present silicon
technology enables affordable production in large
volumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology has
caused major transformation in our society. Successful interface between silicon
devices and biological molecules will not only be intellectually interesting and
commercially valuable, but will also have many social and legal implications.
The technology developers and the general public need more overall awareness on
these impacts. In addition to our existing outreach channels to penetrate
nanotechnology development to K-12 and undergraduate education for broader
awareness and diversified perspectives, we have formulated a realistic plan to
include law school expertise to study the legal and social implications. In the
beginning, the technology developers need to be educated on reasons for
government regulation and the nature of risk. Test cases will then be designed
collaboratively for course discussions. These materials will be assessed from
pragmatic evaluations, proliferated according to the level of understanding, and
then promoted to various audiences including engineering, non-engineering and
high school curriculum. We will also initiate a new outreach program to Wells
College (a womens college 30 miles away from Cornell main campus) in the form of
exchange seminars, short intern period for general awareness, and assessment of
test cases from an independent group.&lt;br/&gt;