* 0304609
* NER:     Spin-Polarized Injection and Transport in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Michael Winokur, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,873.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148). The project
undertakes an exploratory study of spin injection and transport in organic and
polymeric conductors. The approach is to fabricate organic heterostructures,
employing solid-state magnetic electrodes as a source of spin polarized
carriers, and manipulate the nanoscale interfacial properties using molecular
self-assembly and related techniques. Spin will be injected into semiconducting
and conducting polymer/organic thin films. Several specific systems consistent
with "exploratory" time scales and support levels, including the organic analog
of giant magnetoresistance, spin-injected organic/polymer light-emitting diodes,
and tunneling from magnetic nanocrystals through organic layers will be
addressed. In these systems, the interface is judged to be of critical
importance since it controls injection characteristics through the electronic
barrier height in the case of electronic charge, and spin-scattering
characteristics in terms of magnetic electrodes. It is anticipated that
interfacial control will be afforded by organic systems to manipulate spin-
injection properties through the use of interfacial self-assembled monolayers,
and surface doping of the barrier polymer by chemical or electrochemical means.
%%% The project addresses basic exploratory research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance; it is considered a high
risk/high pay-off activity. Conducting polymers and molecular organics are
rapidly becoming technologically important materials because of their unique
fusion of semiconducting electronic properties with the flexibility of
organic/polymeric materials. A wide variety of electronic devices have been
demonstrated with organic materials, such as light-emitting diodes, laser
diodes, and field-effect transistors. The advantages of resulting 'plastic'
electronic devices include ease of fabrication, scalability, and molecular-level
control of interfacial morphology and electronic characteristics. The project
encompasses the research and education theme of Nanoscale Structures, Novel
Phenomena, and Quantum Control. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project is expected to
have broad impact by providing unique educational opportunities and basic
knowledge critical to potential development of organic spintronic devices having
advantages of both organic electronics and solid-state spintronics. The project
is jointly supported by the MPS/DMR/EM and MPS/DMR/POL programs. ***