* 0304525
* NUE: An Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Program in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (IUPNN)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2006
* M Vittes, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) program entitled, "An
Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Program in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
(IUPNN)," at the University of Central Florida (UCF), under the direction of Dr.
Sudipta Seal, is jointly funded by the Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems
(CMS), Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Physics (PHY) in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project, which fits into the
state of Florida funded Nanoinitiative (NIUCF), is to develop a new type of
collaborative education that meets the broad and expanding needs in nanoscience
and technology. This proposed interdisciplinary program combines research and
educational strengths of faculty from across the UCF. Under this program which
will consist of six modular courses in nanotechnology, the students will
specialize in science and engineering subjects with a track in Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will include: (1) Introductory
informal coursework on the basic principals of materials, chemistry, physics,
optics, mathematics, biology and nanotechnology with laboratory hands-on
experience; (2) Research seminars for undergraduates; (3) Seminars, workshops
and discussion sessions on issues of ethics in engineering research; (4)
Research group tutorials; (5) Continuous monitoring of the students' progress by
the PIs; and (6) Evaluation of the program by the UCF College of Education.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;