* 0305248
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the Volatile and Slab Flux in the Izu-Bonin-Mariana MARGIN using Geothermal Fluids, Phenocrysts and Melt Inclusions
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* David Hilton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 05/31/2008
* USD 239,720.00

Under this award, the PIs will carry out an integrated study of volatiles in the
Izu-Bonin-Marianas margin that includes the analyses of specific volatiles (H2O,
CO2, Cl, S) and fluid soluble elements (Li, B, K, Rb, Ba and others) as well as
their stable isotope (?d?D, d?11B, d?13C, d?18O, d?34S) systematics utilizing
SIMS measurements of melt inclusions of recently erupted tephra. This data set
will be complemented by CO2 and He abundance and isotopic measurements (??d13C
and 3He/4He) in erupted phenocysts and discharging volcanic and hydrothermal
fluids. Additionally, the study will measure the complete gas composition and
the N-isotopes of the hydrothermal fluids in order to determine the present-day
total volatile flux from the entire arc through normalization to ground-based
SO2 remote sensing measurements. The combined data set will allow the PIs to
quantify the slab flux in terms of volatile composition (melt inclusion data),
the source of the slab flux in terms of oceanic basement, subducted carbonates
or organic sediments (CO2-He and N2-He systematics), the present day volatile
flux to the atmosphere from the slab and mantle wedge (SO2 flux and volcanic gas
compositions). The study addresses the flux and composition of volatiles into
and out of the IBM system and the distribution of volatiles in the mantle and
its geochemical evolution through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;