* 0305120
* ALGORITHMS: Parallel Large-Scale Sparse Linear System Solvers: New Methods and Paradigms
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2007
* USD 350,494.00

The investigators have developed a set of parallel algebraic multilevel
techniques for solving distributed sparse linear systems of equations, leading
to the ``parallel Algebraic Recursive Multilevel Solver'' (pARMS), a portable
and general purpose library for solving sparse linear systems on parallel
computers. One of their goals is to begin to address the `efficiency gap'
between `special purpose' and `general purpose' methods. On one extreme of the
spectrum of solvers available, lie sparse direct methods which are robust,
general-purpose, but expensive. On the other extreme, are special purpose
methods, such as multigrid, which utilize information about the underlying
problem to tailor-design certain solution procedures. Such methods can be
optimal but they aim at solving the original physical problem instead of the
resulting linear system. In between these extremes are the preconditioned Krylov
methods whose performance is variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
characterized by a different vision of what a library of parallel iterative
solvers should offer. The investigators strongly believe that a new paradigm is
required where a solver is no longer a monolithic box comprising a set of
preconditioners, but allows the user to input specific information, indeed even
parts of the solution algorithm, in order to tailor the multilevel solution
procedure. This approach, which is enabled by the modular design of pARMS, is in
perfect agreement with the standard approach used in industry. The new paradigms
and methods envisioned in this research will also&lt;br/&gt;include a number of
other key issues which arise in a typical solution process. Thus, it is
important to exploit the underlying context when solving nonlinear systems of
equations. It is also important to ensure that the pARMS code provides a fall-
back option to an efficient sparse direct solver for situations where the
iterative solver fails. The investigators also plan to explore new questions
which are starting to emerge with the advent of the Computational Grid. Finally,
they will keep in mind architecture- and problem-dependent tuning of solution
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software developed by the investigators
will continue to be made publicly available. Both investigators have major
interactions with researchers in important applications areas. The pARMS-X code
is also likely to have an impact on graduate education, as was the case with
SPARSKIT in the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;