* 0305982
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Rebecca Brown, Petersen, Rebecca P
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Bioinformatic
analysis of gene sequences encoding variation in gene expression in natural
populations." This research investigates how variation in gene expression among
populations is related to variation in their gene sequences. Sequences of the
regulatory regions of genes are being determined and compared to published data
on gene expression in two natural populations of the fruit fly, Drosophila.
Informatics tools are being used to compare the identified sequences. Whether
these differences are sufficient to account for differences in gene expression
is being tested experimentally.