* 0305996
* Statistical Research in Drug Discovery and Development
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* David Stock, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 01/31/2008
* USD 398,828.00

Three broad issues in drug discovery and development are studied. For target
identification, use of microarrays for gene expression has become a standard
practice. To test the significance of gene expression for thousands of genes,
the issue of multiplicity in testing is central. A new graphical procedure is
proposed. For drug discovery, the research focuses on high throughput screening
(HTS). A central issue in HTS is to be able to identify as many potent drugs as
possible and to achieve this within an economic timeframe. To increase the
"hits", both false positive and false negative errors need to be accurately
estimated and the cutoff point be chosen optimally. The major research effort
focuses on the accurate estimation of false positive and false negative errors,
determination of optimal cutoff points, and estimation strategy. The results
will be pivotal to the planning of validation studies that are used before the
screen is put into production. For drug development, it is proposed to apply
modern techniques in design and analysis of experiments to pharmaceutical
sciences (formulations and stability) and process R&D (chemical and biological
scale-up). Two new techniques are considered: estimation of interactions in
experiments with complex aliasing, and robust parameter design for process
improvement. Since these techniques were developed in the context of
manufacturing and hi-tech industries, new features in the pharmaceutical
applications should lead to the development of new methods. The research is a
jointly effort by the research group of Jeff Wu (PI) at Georgia Institute of
Technology and the nonclinical biostatistics and genetics groups headed by David
Stock and Kim Zerba at Bristol-Myers Squibb.

Statistical tools have been widely used in drug discovery and development in the
pharmaceutical industry. With the increasing competition in the industry and the
explosion of disease targets, it is becoming increasingly important to have an
efficient system for discovering new compounds and developing them into drugs
for clinical trials and scale-up production. There has been a lot of
collaborative research between academia and industries on clinical trials. Much
less collaboration has been done on preclinical research like drug discovery and
development. Successful implementation of this project can serve as a role model
for this collaboration. It can have a major societal impact in accelerating the
identification of disease target and discovery of compounds for blockbuster
drugs, resulting in savings of lives and health care costs. The work should lead
to new advances in theory and methodology and the research findings will be
presented in professional meetings and published in trade journals. Because of
the novelty of applications and the scientific relevance, the methodology and
theory developed in this project will be of a broad and generic nature. They
will benefit the industrial partner as well as the industry in general. Several
Ph.D. students will participate in the project, splitting their time between
university and industrial labs. The project will provide a new opportunity for
graduate students to be exposed to cutting-edge research in drug discovery and
development. It can enrich their educational experience and broaden the
prospects for their careers.