* 0305412
* A Theoretical and Observational Study of Midlatitude Mesoscale Convective Vortices (MCVs) in Vertical Shear
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Michael Montgomery, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 429,261.00

Because of their longevity and ability to organize convection, mesoscale
convective vortices (MCVs) have been the focus of studies seeking to improve the
prediction of widespread, heavy precipitation events during the warm season.
Although progress has been made in the past decade toward identifying conditions
favorable for MCV generation, and in linking the strengthening of MCVs to
convective regeneration in their vicinity, dynamical processes governing the MCV
lifecycle are still not well understood. To better predict potential flooding
events in association with MCVs requires a basic understanding of how MCVs form,
and what permits them to maintain their coherence in adverse environmental
flows. The Principal Investigator (PI) will address both questions under the
aegis of the Bow Echo and MCV Experiment
(BAMEX).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations suggest that the formation and
longevity of MCVs depend critically on how the MCV interacts with ambient
vertical shear. To further understand this interaction the PI will conduct a
combined theoretical, numerical, and observational study that builds on the PI
and Co-PI's previous NSF research. The theoretical study will commence by
examining the quasi-geostrophic `free' alignment of an idealized MCV. This sets
the stage for a key theoretical analysis to determine the critical shear
necessary to irreversibly shear apart a given MCV. Knowledge of the critical
shear is believed central to distinguishing those MCVs that regenerate
convection from those that do not. The impact of new convection triggered by the
vortex's resistance to ambient shear will be studied systematically with the
goal of determining the feedback of convection on the intensity of the
MCV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observational tests of the theoretical work will be
carried out using airborne Doppler radar and dropsonde data from the BAMEX
investigation of MCVs. In particular, the evolution of vorticity associated with
the MCV and nearby convection will be documented using diagnostic tools
previously developed to study the dynamics of the hurricane core and the genesis
of tropical cyclones. Presently, no observational data set is yet available
detailing the radial vorticity structure of an MCV, the evolution of MCV tilt
and intensity, and the development of vorticity in association with regenerated
convection, all of which are essential elements of the BAMEX research
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research can
potentially provide forecasters with the knowledge needed to extend the
prediction time for some times of warm season convective storms.