* 0305653
* RUI:  Exploration the New Class of Layered III-VI Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors and Their Magnetic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Thomas Pekarek, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 163,433.00

These new layered III-VI Diluted Magnetic Semiconductor (DMS)systems complement
the enormous progress in the II-VI DMS and the more recent efforts in the Mn
doped III-V DMS systems. The III-VI DMS Ga1-xMnxSe exhibits a strong red
emission at 1.804 eV attributed to the Mn. GaSe itself is known for its
remarkable nonlinear optical properties and is a promising material for
photoelectronic applications. Ga1-xMnxS and In1-xMnxS will be investigated in
detail followed by a study of Ga1-xMnxSe, In1-xMnxSe and a survey of Fe and Co
based materials. Preliminary non-linear magnetization scaling analysis on
Ga1-xMnxS strongly suggests there is a true spin-glass transition at 11 K. This
important result would add a whole new class of spin-glass materials and raise
interesting questions of the effect of spatial dimensionality on the spin-glass
transition in this system. In terms of broader impacts, this project involves
mentoring 3 undergraduate students each year. The research group currently
includes 1 female and 1 Hispanic student (currently underrepresented groups in
physics). This project also allows this undergraduate institution the honor of
sharing a state-of-the-art SQUID magnetometer with research groups at two
graduate and one undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;These new layered III-VI Diluted Magnetic Semiconductor (DMS)
systems complement the enormous progress made in systems based on other
semiconductor hosts. The III-VI DMS Ga1-xMnxSe exhibits a strong red emission
attributed to the Mn. GaSe itself is known for its remarkable nonlinear optical
properties and is a promising material for photoelectronic applications. Several
III-VI DMS will be investigated to further explore the magnetic properties of
this newest class of DMS based on the layered&lt;br/&gt;III-VI semiconductor
hosts. In terms of broader impacts, this project involves mentoring 3
undergraduate students each year. The research group currently includes 1 female
and 1 Hispanic student (currently&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups in physics).
This project also allows this undergraduate institution the honor of sharing a
state-of-the-art SQUID magnetometer with research groups at two graduate and one
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;institutions.