* 0305213
* International Symposium on Molecular Breeding of Forage and Turf to be held in Dallas, TX, May 18-22, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Andrew Hopkins, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 03/31/2004
* USD 13,475.00

The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Inc. and Texas A&amp;M University are
hosting the&lt;br/&gt;International Symposium on Molecular Breeding of Forage
and Turf, May 18-22, 2003 in&lt;br/&gt;Dallas, Texas. This conference will focus
exclusively on the theme of cultivar improvement for&lt;br/&gt;forage and turf
through the application of conventional plant breeding and molecular
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forages provide the basis for environmentally
sustainable production of animal products&lt;br/&gt;throughout the world, and
turf serves an important environmental and service role in
society.&lt;br/&gt;The economic impact of forages and turfgrasses is
substantial. Cultivar improvement using&lt;br/&gt;conventional selection
techniques has barely kept pace with increased production
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;Molecular technologies offer powerful tools to enhance
the process of cultivar improvement,&lt;br/&gt;although the development of such
technology for forage and turf breeding has been slow relative&lt;br/&gt;to
other major crops. Reasons for this slower than desired progress include: the
complicated&lt;br/&gt;nature of polyploid genetics; the perennial nature of
forage and turf crops; and a lack of financial&lt;br/&gt;resources to support
applied research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will facilitate the
assembly of 250-400 participants from academia and
industry,&lt;br/&gt;representing such diverse professional interests as plant
breeding, agronomy, ruminant nutrition,&lt;br/&gt;plant genetic resources,
intellectual property rights, genomics, transformation,
and&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics. The selected speakers are experts in their
respective field, and each has&lt;br/&gt;committed to attend. Thus, this
conference will provide an otherwise unavailable opportunity for&lt;br/&gt;plant
breeders and molecular scientists in the field of forage and turf improvement to
come&lt;br/&gt;together for the purpose of exchanging information and ideas,
learning the latest developments,&lt;br/&gt;and forming multidisciplinary
collaborations. It is anticipated that this conference will
facilitate&lt;br/&gt;the advancement of current and future cultivar development
in the United States and as well as&lt;br/&gt;developing and developed
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts in conference recruitment will seek to
draw critical new thoughts into this field through&lt;br/&gt;the solicitation of
members of historically underrepresented groups, young scientists
(including&lt;br/&gt;post-doctoral fellows), and graduate students. The
introduction of new ideas to this discipline is&lt;br/&gt;beneficial and
necessary, and the exposure of young scientists to this field will
desirably&lt;br/&gt;contribute to cultivar improvement for forage and turf for
decades to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A summary of the conference, including
papers from invited speakers and selected oral&lt;br/&gt;presentations, will be
compiled in a comprehensive printed proceeding, entitled
inMolecular&lt;br/&gt;Breeding of Forage and Turf.ln This proceeding will be
published by Kluwer Academic&lt;br/&gt;Publishers. This proceeding will be the
principal means used to perpetuate the meeting and its&lt;br/&gt;discussions.