* 0305898
* ITWF: Cross Ethnic Differences in Undergraduate Women's Preference for Information Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Deepak Kapur, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 350,392.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information Technology Workforce (ITWF) -
FY03&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: EIA-0305898&lt;br/&gt;Investigator: Roli
Varma and Deepak Kapur&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Cross Ethnic Differences in Undergraduate Women's
Preference for Information Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of New Mexico has received an IWF award to support a continuation of
the ITWF-funded one-year pilot led by Roli Varma entitled "Why So Few Women in
Information Technology: A Comparative Study" (EIA-0120055). The pilot focused on
the following two questions along gender and ethnic lines:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Why do women who have the potential to succeed in the
study of IT disciplines take alternative educational paths?&lt;br/&gt;(ii) What
barriers and obstacles must be overcome to attract more women to IT
education?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot utilized the technique of ethnographic
interviews to acquire primary data on the subject. Over 65 undergraduate
students in different ethnic groups, majoring in computer science or computer
engineering, in 4 minority-serving institutions were interviewed. Preliminary
findings confirmed for women and minorities in science and engineering and IT
issues such as: (i) the digital divide, (ii) a confidence gap in mathematics and
IT; (iii) subtle biases in early socialization; (iv) the masculine environment;
and (v) lack of role models and mentoring. Preliminary findings also revealed
that: (i) students' perception of IT as white and male-oriented was outweighed
by job opportunities in IT; (ii) students who switched from CS and CE, remained
within IT-related areas, because they offered better job prospects and economic
gains; (iii) students experienced technical difficulties because of lack of
experience with debugging skills and inadequate problem solving skills; (iv)
students had poor time management skills especially when they did not have their
family's financial support for education and thus had to work part-time to
support their studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full study will have
approximately 170 participants and will take place in 5 additional Minority
Serving Institutions. By including the examination of ethnicity as well as
gender as a factor, the full study aims both at deepening understanding of
women's choices and at extending understanding of these choices as expressed in
the literature. Cross-gender and cross-cultural comparison will provide a better
understanding of the issues related to the lack of participation by women in IT
disciplines and careers, and will shed light on the possible differential
contribution of ethnicity to gender based choices. &lt;br/&gt;