* 0305482
* Interaction and Disorder Effects in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Claudio Chamon, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research directed at advancing our understanding
of both the interplay between interaction and disorder effects, and out-of-
equilibrium phenomena in condensed matter systems. The research will investigate
the combined effects of interaction and disorder in two-dimensional electronic
systems, and the consequences of this combination on spin polarization effects
in Si-MOSFET's; the possible metallic and glassy phases in thin films where a
superconductor-insulator transition is observed; and thermal transport of
interacting quasiparticles inside gapless superconductors. The work will address
non-equilibrium phenomena, such as spatial heterogeneities and mesoscopic
fluctuations in the aging dynamics of glassy systems, and slow relaxation in
electronic glasses, such as that recently observed in CdSe artificial solids.
Finally, the research will address non-equilibrium transport, detection, and
dissipation of spin currents through quantum wires and dots.

This award will have a broad impact. While studying phenomena in specific
material systems, new theoretical and computational methods will be developed
for addressing fundamental problems of out-of-equilibrium phenomena and of
combined interaction and disorder effects in condensed matter systems. It will
also provide the opportunity for solid education and training of graduate
students in these areas. Outreach activities will include continued
participation in local high school science fairs. %%% This award supports
theoretical research directed at advancing our understanding of both the
interplay between interaction and disorder effects, and out-of-equilibrium
phenomena in condensed matter systems. The research will investigate the
combined effects of interaction and disorder in two-dimensional electronic
systems, and the consequences of this combination on spin polarization effects
in Si-MOSFET's; the possible metallic and glassy phases in thin films where a
superconductor-insulator transition is observed; and thermal transport of
interacting quasiparticles inside gapless superconductors. The work will address
non-equilibrium phenomena, such as spatial heterogeneities and mesoscopic
fluctuations in the aging dynamics of glassy systems, and slow relaxation in
electronic glasses, such as that recently observed in CdSe artificial solids.
Finally, the research will address non-equilibrium transport, detection, and
dissipation of spin currents through quantum wires and dots.

This award will have a broad impact. While studying phenomena in specific
material systems, new theoretical and computational methods will be developed
for addressing fundamental problems of out-of-equilibrium phenomena and of
combined interaction and disorder effects in condensed matter systems. It will
also provide the opportunity for solid education and training of graduate
students in these areas. Outreach activities will include continued
participation in local high school science fairs. ***