* 0305459
* U.S.-Costa Rica Collaboration -- Ecological and Genetic Effects on the Breakdown of Self-incompatibility
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Judy Stone, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2006
* USD 32,285.00

0305459&lt;br/&gt;Stone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
support Dr. Judy L. Stone of Colby College, Maine in a research collaboration
with Dr. Oscar J. Rocha-Nunez and Dr. Paul Hanson of the Universidad de Costa
Rica in San Pedro, Costa Rica. The researchers intend to investigate genetic and
ecological forces acting on the evolution of self-fertilization, one of the most
common evolutionary transitions in flowering plants. The collaborators propose
to expand the knowledge base of self-compatible and self-incompatible plant
systems that are important in modeling the evolution of self-fertilization and,
ultimately, make contributions to the genetic and ecological factors influencing
selection in mating systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators will bring
complementary skills to the project that will allow them to integrate ecological
processes in the field, theoretical predictions of models, and patterns of
change for the genes of interest. Stone has expertise in sequencing the gene
that controls self-fertilization and in relating changes at the genetic level to
changes in ability to self-fertilize, Rocha has expertise in the study of self-
fertilization in plants in their natural settings, and Hanson's expertise with
insects is needed to determine how differences in insect pollinators will affect
the degree of self-fertilization. In addition, the project will help to support
the involvement of four undergraduate students from the United
States.?????&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;