* 0305128
* Symplectic Geometry and Schubert Calculus
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Rebecca Goldin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 78,645.00

DMS-0305128 Rebecca Goldin

Symplectic geometry occurs at a crossroad of combinatorics, representation
theory, physics, geometry and topology. One of the most important examples of a
Hamiltonian T-space is the coadjoint orbit of a compact Lie group. Coadjoint
orbits arise in physics, as they are the set of all matrices with specified
spectra. They also occur in representation theory, as all irreducible
representations of a complex reductive Lie group occur as holomorphic sections
of a line bundle over a coadjoint orbit. They occur in algebraic geometry as
projective varieties. The intersection theory of naturally arising subvarieties,
called Schubert varieties, appears in questions of linear algebra, valuation
rings, and representation theory. Schubert calculus is important as it is the
linear case for (and hence the first step towards) understanding complex
algebraic intersections more generally. Algebraically, Schubert calculus
analyses the multiplicative structure of the cohomology of flag varieties. The
main open question is to find a totally positive formula for the (equivariant)
structure constants. In joint work with A. Knutson, Goldin has discovered new
techniques that give hope for a positive formula in certain cases. Goldin is
also interested in topological invariants that distinguish reduced spaces for
any compact Hamiltonian T-space, such as certain ideals found in its equivariant
cohomology ring or generalized equivariant Euler classes. Goldin is additionally
developing techniques to calculate integrals on certain symplectic reduced
spaces using small amounts of information about how the torus acts on the
original symplectic manifold.

Understanding Schubert calculus is a small step towards the larger question of
how to study intersections of algebraic varieties. Such intersections arise
outside of mathematics, as scientists ask questions that involve the concurrence
of several physical constraints, and want to understand what possible solutions
there may be. Symplectic geometry is a natural setting to describe physical
systems. The space of the position and the momentum of a particle, for example,
is called "phase space" and has a natural symplectic structure on it. In many
cases, there is a lot of symmetry; physical observations of the Hydrogen atom,
for example, are unaffected by the position of the observer a fixed distance
away from the particle. The study of "reduced spaces" is a way of studying the
physics while simplifying the space by ignoring (in fact, dividing out) these
symmetries. Much of Goldin's work involves techniques to do computations on
these simplified systems, which may shed light on questions that physicists and
chemists are posing about molecules and particles. Goldin is also writing a book
(joint with G. Goldin) on myths in mathematics education.

