* 0305395
* Mapping Forces and Elasticity in Random Solids
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Anthony Dinsmore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This soft condensed matter physics project deals with disordered solids, which
include glassy materials, polymer gels, particle gels, and sand piles. Although
the microscopic details differ tremendously, there is increasing evidence that
these materials are examples of a more general class known as jammed solids.
From a fundamental point of view, the great challenge of these materials is that
they are far from thermal equilibrium and continuum elasticity might not apply
at microscopic or mesoscopic length scales. This project will use optical
methods to obtain direct and quantitative imaging of forces, their spatial
correlations, and the topology of inter-particle connections in three
dimensional samples. Results are to be compared to recent theories, simulations
and measurements on surfaces or on two-dimensional materials. This focus is on
confocal optical microscopy of monodisperse liquid droplets with fluorescent
surfaces, a model system that allows imaging of forces in the interior of three-
dimensional samples. By varying the sizes of the droplets used, the systems
studied will be varied between those solidified by attractive inter-particle
forces and subject to strong thermal fluctuations, to those solidified by
gravitational stresses at, effectively, zero temperature. The project also
investigates how these force maps are changed by external stresses or by point
forces applied inside the material. The project provides in-depth training of
students for research in applied or fundamental programs.

Disordered solids are very common in everyday life, with examples including
window glass, yogurt, soot, and sand piles. Although the microscopic details of
these examples differ tremendously - molecules in one case and millimeter-sized
rough sand grains in another - there is compelling evidence that they may be
understandable within a single theoretical framework. From a fundamental point
of view, the great challenge of these materials is that they never approach
thermal equilibrium and do not form ordered (crystalline) structures. Moreover,
continuum elasticity theory might be incorrect at length scales comparable to
several times the size of the basic particle. This work will provide the first
experimental maps of forces, structure, and connectivity inside these materials.
The major experimental challenge is, somehow, to peer inside a sand pile and
measure forces between adjacent particles. Here this is accomplished using
liquid droplets (instead of sand grains) whose deformation is quantified in
three dimensions using optical microscopy. In addition to allowing investigation
of a number of new questions, the measurements will provide the first tests of
theoretical predictions and computer simulations, and will connect with earlier
experiments on two-dimensional materials or on the surface of three-dimensional
materials. The project also provides training for students at all levels in soft
condensed matter physics and advanced research techniques suitable for academic
or industrial research positions.