* 0305384
* Electronic Noise in Mesoscopic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Emilio Mendez, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 326,000.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms of electronic
conductance in mesoscopic systems by studying experimentally their current
fluctuations, or shot noise. The focus is on the determination of the noise when
electrons tunnel through arrays of potential barriers created in a variety of
semiconductor configurations, and on contrasting its value with existing
theories of electronic conduction. Electron transport is induced, either
electrically or optically, in GaAs-GaAlAs or Si-SiGe heterostructures at low
temperatures (typically 4K or below), prepared by molecular beam epitaxy and
sometimes patterned to sub-micrometer dimensions. This project addresses the
following questions: Are the shot-noise characteristics of devices that exhibit
negative differential conductance universal, that is, independent of the
mechanism responsible for that negative conductance, as some theorists have
suggested? Does quantum-mechanical coupling between (or among) quantum wells
reduce noise as drastically as has been predicted? How large is the shot noise
in strongly coupled superlattices, in which there is coherent transport? The
answers illuminate basic concepts in mesoscopic conductors and probe the
ultimate limits of devices. They have implications beyond the materials studied
here, from organic materials to quantum dots and even to molecular electronics.
The project trains graduate and undergraduate students to work together under
the guidance of a senior scientist in an interdisciplinary topic, in which they
probe deep physics questions; learn connections between science and technology;
while being trained in a range of versatile materials-science techniques of
permanent value for careers in industry, academia or
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The random fluctuations of the electricity that
flows through a conductor often give information that is veiled when only the
average current is known. By better understanding how materials conduct
electricity it becomes possible to determine the ultimate limits of today's
devices and to design new ones with much improved characteristics. The goal of
this project is to elucidate the mechanisms of electronic conductance in
materials of fundamental and technological importance, by studying
experimentally their current fluctuations, or electronic noise. The focus is on
semiconductor heterostructures, which are widely used in applications and at the
same time offer an almost ideal testbed for more complex materials of potential
use in nanoelectronics, for instance plastics and carbon nanotubes. This project
aims to answer questions such as: Are all devices that exhibit the same
macroscopic behavior alike, or can we differentiate among them and select the
optimum one for a specific application? or, How much smaller can devices become
before they are limited by the "personality" of individual electrons? In looking
for answers to these and similar questions, the project trains graduate and
undergraduate students to work together under the guidance of a senior scientist
in an interdisciplinary topic, in which they experience the connection between
science and technology; while learning versatile materials-science techniques of
permanent value for careers in industry, academia or government.&lt;br/&gt;