* 0305494
* X-Ray Studies of Liquids Near Interfaces and in Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Pulak Dutta, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

This research is focused on the investigation of interfacial order in liquids.
Continuum hydrodynamics has been extremely successful at explaining and
predicting the behavior of bulk liquids, but the fact that liquids are made up
of atoms or molecules cannot be ignored in the vicinity of an interface. Many
experiments have shown that the properties of liquids near solid-liquid
interfaces are often different from those of the bulk liquid. Prior research
with this project has shown that it is possible to use synchrotron X-rays to
directly observe the interfacial liquid structure. In the current project,
normal (non-liquid-crystalline, nonviscoelastic, nonmetallic) molecular liquids
will be studied. The dependence of the observed interfacial ordering on
substrate surface structure and shear rates will be investigated in detail. The
knowledge gained from such studies will help determine how and why liquids
behave differently at interfaces, and thus ultimately help design specific
interfacial liquid properties. Since interfacial liquids appear in many everyday
processes, such studies may ultimately lead to technological advances. This
project will integrate research and teaching by training graduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment, and also by giving them experience in the use of
cutting-edge synchrotron facilities. The training will prepare them for a range
of careers in academe, industry and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is focused on the investigation of interfacial order in liquids,. Many
experiments have shown that the properties of liquids near interfaces are often
different from those of the bulk liquid; this implies that the arrangement of
liquid molecules changes near interfaces. Recent work from this group has shown
that it is possible to use synchrotron X-rays to directly observe these
rearrangements. In the current project, order in molecular liquids near
interfaces will be studied, and the dependence of the observed ordering on
substrate surface structure and shear rates will be investigated in detail. The
knowledge gained from such studies will help us better understand how and why
liquids behave differently at interfaces, and thus ultimately help design
specific interfacial liquid properties. Since interfacial liquids play crucial
roles in many familiar processes such as lubrication, adhesion, filtration, oil
recovery, wetting/spreading/coating, etc., such studies may ultimately lead to
benefits to society from improvements in these processes. This project will
integrate research and teaching by training graduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment, and also by giving them experience in the use of
cutting-edge national synchrotron facilities such as the Advanced Photon Source
and the National Synchrotron Light Source. This training will prepare them for a
range of careers in academe, industry and government.&lt;br/&gt;