* 0305325
* RUI: Nucleating Peptide Secondary Structures via Metal-Alkyne Coordination
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Timothy Curran, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 12/31/2007
* USD 146,000.00

Dr. Timothy Curran, Chemistry Department, Trinity University, is supported by
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division to explore the use of bis-alkyne complexes of tungsten and
molybdenum as scaffolds for assembling peptides into defined conformations. The
first goal is the preparation of small peptides that contain an appended alkyne
group. These will be designed so that coordination of the alkyne moieties to a
molybdenum or tungsten center will produce a bis-alkyne complex in which the
peptide is constrained in a particular conformation. Targets will include
peptides possessing alkynes suitable for formation of beta-turns, beta-sheets
(parallel and antiparallel) and alpha-helices. The ability of these peptides to
form tungsten or molybdenum bis-alkyne complexes will be evaluated and the
conformation of the peptides in the metal complexes will be determined using NMR
spectroscopic methods. The goal is to develop a simple, rational methodology for
generating small peptides with defined conformations. This RUI project involves
the heavy participation of undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
physical and biochemical properties of peptides and proteins are determined by
the shapes they adopt in solution. A simple way to determine the relationship
between structure and activity for a particular section of a protein is to
synthesize only that part of the protein and analyze its behavior.
Unfortunately, small peptides generally do not assume defined conformations;
rather, they assume a wide variety of conformations. This study will seek to
overcome the problem by attaching the peptides to a metal center in such a way
as to force the peptide into a defined, specific conformation. This development
will facilitate the design of de novo proteins and allow the evaluation of
relationships between structure and activity in protein chemistry. In addition
to the scientific contributions, this work will provide undergraduate students
with excellent training in research, giving them experience in organic
synthesis, organometallic synthesis and NMR spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;