* 0305746
* Switching in Driven Microscopic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Mark Dykman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2009
* USD 420,000.00

This combined experiment and theory project will explore thermally activated
switching in model physical systems that are driven by time-dependent fields.
The underlying theoretical idea is that a field interferes with switching
dynamics and can therefore strongly affect switching probabilities. Since
experimental understanding of this process requires a well-characterized
physical system, the use of a mesoscopic particle trapped in an optically-
induced double well potential is adopted. This system exhibits behavior
analogous to the hysteretic response of a single-domain nanomagnet in a magnetic
field or a current-biased resistively-shunted Josephson junction. However, the
3-dimensional confining potential can be readily tuned and modulated by
controlling the laser beams comprising the trap. The damping rate can be varied
by changing the particle properties or by controlling the environmental
coupling. Theoretical studies can provide deeper understanding of fluctuation
processes in systems driven far from thermal equilibrium. Results can be
directly transferred to areas of current technological importance, for example,
controlled switching in nanomagnetic random access memory devices. Graduate and
postdoctoral students involved with this research will acquire understanding of
lasers, optical methods, real-time computing, theory of transport phenomena and
non-linear dynamical systems, preparing them for careers in teaching and/or
research in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Switching events
play a pivotal role in many physical and biological processes. On computer hard
disks, information is written into billions of tiny regions with 1's and 0's
expressed as the orientations of nanomagnets. Switching between these two states
should be easy to do when information is stored but it should not happen
spontaneously, which would lead to a loss of memory. In this investigation, a
model of a two-state switch is created by two laser beams. A single beam can
confine a transparent sub-micron particle to a small region in space. With two
parallel beams separated by less than the particle diameter, the particle can
switch between the two beams if it acquires enough energy. By modulating the
energy of the particle, the transition rates can be controlled and the
conditions under which switching occurs studied quantitatively, even in a noisy
environment. The experiments are analyzed by statistical theories that will be
developed to predict the particle's behavior under extreme conditions, i.e.,
when the particle is moved rapidly and with large amplitude. These studies
should lead to optimal methods for controlling random switching processes with
applications not only to magnetism but also to chemistry and biology. Students
will receive training in optics, real-time computing, condensed matter and
statistical physics.&lt;br/&gt;