* 0305400
* Collaborative Research:  Multi-Photon Phosphors Based on Vacuum Ultraviolet Excitation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Richard Meltzer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 10/31/2007
* USD 226,796.00

This program of experimental research is directed to the development of
multiphoton phosphors. These materials convert an initial VUV high-energy photon
into two visible photons of lower energy, thereby establishing a quantum of
efficiency that can be greater than one. The approach defined here is to use
energy-transfer processes among lanthanide ions to implement the multiphoton
process. One lanthanide ion absorbs the VUV photon. This is followed by a cross-
relaxation energy-transfer process in which the initially excited ion shares a
portion of its energy with a different ion. Both ions are left with enough
energy to each emit a visible photon of light, thereby efficiently utilizing the
VUV photon from the lamp discharge to produce two visible photons. Three schemes
will be examined for the energy transfer that involve both the 4fn and the
4fn-15d configurations of the lanthanide ions. From literature data on the
energy levels of the lanthanides and their dependence on host material, a number
of ion pairs and appropriate hosts have been selected for study that will
maximize the chance for success. Since these schemes involve the use of highly
excited states of solids located near the edge of the conduction band where
mixing of localized and delocalized states can occur and where photoionization
and charge-transfer processes can complicate the problem, it will be necessary
to address some of the fundamental issues concerning the nature and dynamics of
these highly excited states from the physics and materials perspectives. The
project will be conducted by collaboration among three groups. The physics group
at the University of Georgia will perform the optical characterization of the
phosphors and study the dynamical properties of their highly excited states. The
chemistry group at Oregon State University will produce the required phosphors
and optimize their properties, and they will also develop new compositions that
are likely to have the desired properties. Scientists at Osram Sylvania will
contribute to the project with their time providing both experimental and
theoretical support on the development and evaluation of phosphors, especially
regarding their practical usefulness in real lamp
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. utilizes almost 25% of its electricity-
energy budget to satisfy the lighting requirements of our society. Current
fluorescent lamps have a wall-plug efficiency of about 30% and their discard
results in the dumping of large amounts of mercury into the environment. The
proposed research will provide much needed insight into the processes and
materials that are necessary to make the leap to a new multiphoton-phosphor
technology and a new form of high-efficiency lighting that will lead to a
substantial reduction of energy consumption and the elimination of mercury in
lighting. The project will involve collaboration among three groups; physicists
at the University of Georgia, chemists at Oregon State University, and
industrial scientists at Osram Sylvania. Students will develop an in-depth
understanding of multiphoton processes and materials design, providing a base
for future contributions in the lighting industry or academe.&lt;br/&gt;