* 0305846
* 3-dimensional manifolds and related topic
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0305846&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Cameron Gordon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The goal of the project is
to investigate several problems in&lt;br/&gt;and around 3-dimensional topology.
A major focus will be the&lt;br/&gt;Cabling Conjecture, which asserts that Dehn
surgery on a&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic knot in the 3-sphere always yields a
prime&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold. This is part of the program to completely
describe&lt;br/&gt;all non-hyperbolic Dehn surgeries on hyperbolic knots.
Recently,&lt;br/&gt;John Luecke and the principal investigator showed that
the&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic knots with non-integral toroidal Dehn surgeries
are&lt;br/&gt;precisely those described by Eudave-Munoz, and some of
the&lt;br/&gt;techniques developed there may be applicable to the
Cabling&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture. Another part of the general program that will
be&lt;br/&gt;addressed is the conjecture that any Seifert fiber space
surgery&lt;br/&gt;on a hyperbolic knot must be integral. The project will
also&lt;br/&gt;consider various geometric group theoretic topics that
are&lt;br/&gt;related to the theory of 3-manifolds, such as surface
subgroups&lt;br/&gt;of Coxeter and Artin groups, and Gromov's question as to
whether&lt;br/&gt;or not a 1-ended word hyperbolic group always has a
surface&lt;br/&gt;subgroup. Another question concerning surfaces and
3-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;that will be investigated is the Simple Loop Conjecture,
which&lt;br/&gt;asserts that if a map from a closed orientable surface to
a&lt;br/&gt;closed orientable 3-manifold is not injective on
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;group, then there is an embedded essential loop in the
surface&lt;br/&gt;whose image is null-homotopic in the
3-manifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The project is part of the general goal to
understand the&lt;br/&gt;structure of 3-dimensional manifolds. These are objects
that are&lt;br/&gt;locally like ordinary 3-dimensional space, but whose
global&lt;br/&gt;structure may be quite complicated. Since we live in
a&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold, one might say that 3-dimensional topology aims
to&lt;br/&gt;describe what the mathematical possibilities are for our
spatial&lt;br/&gt;universe. One important aspect of 3-dimensional topology is
the&lt;br/&gt;theory of knots - a knot being a closed loop embedded somehow
in&lt;br/&gt;space. A wide variety of mathematical methods can be applied
to&lt;br/&gt;the study of knots, leading to new information
about&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds. Recently, deep connections between
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology and quantum physics were discovered in this
way. Knot&lt;br/&gt;theory is related to the general theory of 3-manifolds
through a&lt;br/&gt;construction known as Dehn surgery, in which a solid tube
around&lt;br/&gt;the knot is removed and sewn back in differently. We note that
a&lt;br/&gt;theorem about Dehn surgery, the Cyclic Surgery Theorem, has
been&lt;br/&gt;used to determine the topological nature of the action of
certain&lt;br/&gt;enzymes on strands of DNA. Many aspects of Dehn surgery are
now&lt;br/&gt;quite well understood. One of the main remaining questions,
which&lt;br/&gt;is a major focus of the project, is to show that (except in
an&lt;br/&gt;obvious degenerate situation) the 3-manifold resulting from
a&lt;br/&gt;Dehn surgery on a knot never decomposes as a "sum" of two
simpler&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Another important tool in 3-dimensional topology
is&lt;br/&gt;the study of (2-dimensional) surfaces in 3-manifolds, and
the&lt;br/&gt;project will also address various questions in
this&lt;br/&gt;area. Finally, the project will enable the principal
investigator&lt;br/&gt;to continue his involvement in the education and training
of&lt;br/&gt;graduate students in topology at the University of Texas
at&lt;br/&gt;Austin.&lt;br/&gt;