* 0305251
* US-Ireland Cooperative Workshop: Educating with Virtual Experience (EVE 2003) Maynooth, Ireland, Fall 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Daniel Laughlin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2004
* USD 25,020.00

0305251&lt;br/&gt;Hoban&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award supports travel
of U.S. participants to a European workshop on educating with virtual
experience, which will take place at the National University of Ireland in
Maynooth, Ireland, in the Fall of 2003, and is co-organized by Susan Hoban of
the University of Maryland/Baltimore and John W. Keating of the National
University of Ireland/ Maynooth. The objective of the workshop is to bring
together thirty-five scientists, technologists, K-12 educators and students
working with remote experimentation and virtual experiences in education. The
themes of the workshop are: (1) Innovative Applications of Remote
Experimentation; (2) Virtual Experience of Remote Locations or Environments, (3)
Curriculum Development and (4) Support for Grades K-12 Educators. The
participants will also participate in brainstorming strategy sessions to develop
a roadmap for a long-term collaborative network. The workshop builds on the
expertise gained from the U.S.-Ireland Virtual Telescopes in Education that
offers U.S. and Irish classrooms remote access to
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will lay the groundwork for a
digital library of remote experimentation and virtual experience education
projects and resources. &lt;br/&gt;