* 0305050
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Dawn Brooks, Brooks                  Dawn           J
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary
Informatics for fiscal year 2003. The fellowship supports research and training
at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. These fellowships provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
research and educational activities in biology and informatics to a wide range
of recent doctoral recipients. There is an increasing need for training in
biological informatics at all occupational levels, and it is expected that
Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training
the future workforce.

The research and training plan is entitled "Introducing evolutionary information
to improve detection of remote homologs using profile hidden Markov models." The
ability to assign otherwise un-annotated sequences to a protein family often
provides the first clue to its function. To improve our ability to distinguish
family members from nonmembers, this research introduces evolutionary models and
phylogenetic information into the process of building profile hidden Markov
models to represent sequence families.