* 0305519
* The Study of Ultrafast Structural Dynamics in Solid Materials with Femtosecond Electron Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jianming Cao, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2006
* USD 347,622.00

This project will investigate structural phase transition dynamics in solids and
the dynamical Jahn-Teller distortion in manganites. The dynamical processes will
be initiated by impulsive excitation energy from a femtosecond pulse laser.
Their temporal evolutions will then be probed via the newly developed technique
of femtosecond electron diffraction, which directly monitors atomic motions on
the timescale of a single atomic vibrational period. These measurements are
accompanied by complementary femtosecond time-resolved optical spectra that are
also sensitive to the relevant degrees of freedom. The aim is to gain a
microscopic understanding of these dynamic processes beyond the current time-
averaged thermodynamic point of view; for example, the interplay of local
structural deformations on the global properties in transition-metal oxides.
Issues and questions to be addressed include: (1) How the melting and
recrystallization in order-disorder structural transformations in solids evolve
with time, microscopically on the atomic scale; (2) How atoms rearrange
themselves and evolve, time scales and possible pathways, from one distinct
structure to another in solid-solid structural transformations; and (3) The role
of the dynamical Jahn-Teller distortion in the colossal magnetoresistance
effect, in particular, the correlations between the dynamical Jahn-Teller
distortion and the other physical properties in manganites, such as the
charge/orbital ordering and conductivity. Graduate students involved in the
project acquire training and knowledge in one the forefront areas of
contemporary condensed matter physics in preparation for advanced studies or
employment in academe, industry or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is directed at the study of physical processes involving ultrafast structural
changes in solid materials, in particular, laser-induced structural phase
transition and the role of dynamical Jahn-Teller distortion in colossal
magnetoresistance materials. A thorough understanding of these dynamic behaviors
will have important scientific implications in laser-related materials
processing and manufacturing, and in developing new materials in the magnetic
data recording and storage industry. Graduate students involved in the project
acquire training and knowledge in one the forefront areas of contemporary
condensed matter physics in preparation for advanced studies or employment in
academe, industry or government. &lt;br/&gt;