* 0305858
* Robust Methods for Exploring Multivariate Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* David Tyler, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 211,155.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: David Tyler
(DMS-0305858)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Robust Methods for Exploring
Multivariate Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research project
is to develop computationally feasible, conceptually appealing and theoretically
defensible robust methods for exploring and making inferences about a
multivariate data set. The main class of estimates to be studied is the
multivariate redescending M-estimates with auxiliary scale recently introduced
by the investigator. This class of estimates is based upon the key idea of
partitioning the scatter component into a nuisance "scale" component and a
structural "shape" component. This partitioning method produces a novel
interpretation of robust multivariate estimation problems, and enables concepts
from univariate robust statistics and from robust regression to be readily
extended to the multivariate setting. In particular, it allows for the
generalization of the regression MM-estimates to MM-estimates for multivariate
data. Given that the regression MM-estimates are the default robust regression
estimates in S-plus, theoretical and computational developments for the
multivariate MM-estimates are expected to have wide impact as a standard method
in the analysis of multivariate data. Aside from the MM-estimates, the
redescending M-estimates with auxiliary scale also include the multivariate
S-estimates and the multivariate constrained M-estimates. A general unifying
study of the robustness properties, including influence functions, relative
efficiencies, and maximum bias functions, of these and other multivariate
M-estimates with auxiliary scale is to be undertaken. The methods and ideas
underlying the robust estimates of multivariate location and scatter are
conceptually broad enough to be extended to other settings, such as to
multivariate linear models and to structured covariance problems, and such
extensions are to be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;Multivariate location and scatter
play a central role in many classical statistical procedures, such as principal
component analysis, discriminate analysis, and canonical correlation analysis,
which are routinely applied in such diverse disciplines as psychology, biology,
geology, and other fields. Hence, the further development of robust estimates
for multivariate location and scatter can have a substantial impact on data
analysis methods in these scientific areas. Aside from the intrinsic importance
of robust estimates of multivariate location and scatter, such estimates also
serve as an important first step to a deeper analysis of a high dimensional data
set. The development of exploratory methods for multivariate data based on the
redescending M-estimates with auxiliary scale is another primary goal of this
research project. Such exploratory methods for high dimensional data are
pertinent to contemporary data problems arising, for example, in areas such as
data mining and in image data. For such data problems, the classical model of
data arising as signal plus noise is inappropriate and the data is better viewed
as arising as signal plus noise embedded within a mass of clutter. Robust
multivariate methods are particularly apt for this latter view of data. The
investigator has noted important links between this methodology and
methodologies developed in other areas such as cluster analysis and computer
vision. A deeper investigation into these links will be undertaken.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;