* 0305146
* ITWF:    The Influence of Gender, University Majors, and Work Experiences on Perceptions and Choice of IT Careers
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Stanley Dunn, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 06/30/2008
* USD 505,686.00

EIA-0305146&lt;br/&gt;Angela M. O'Donnell&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University-New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Influence of Gender, University
Majors, and Work Experiences on Perceptions and Choice of IT
Careers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF award provides support to study the
extent to which&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Gender, attitudes, perceptions, work
experiences, and competencies influence the choice by students of IT-related
majors collectively and non-IT majors. &lt;br/&gt;2. Gender, attitudes,
perceptions, work experiences, and competencies influence the choice by students
in different IT-related majors (Computer Science, Computer Engineering, and
Information Technology). &lt;br/&gt;3. Specific technology-involved work
experience influences attitudes and perceptions of the IT workforce, interest in
IT careers, and choices about continuing with this type of work for more than
one year. &lt;br/&gt;4. Recent graduates are working in jobs related to
information technology and the degree to which gender, attitudes, perceptions,
and work experience during college influence post-graduation career choice among
the four different groups of students in this study. &lt;br/&gt;5. Recent
graduates believe themselves to be prepared for the IT
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take place over 3 years in a
number of departments and on several campuses of Rutgers University. The study
combines quantitative and qualitative approaches to understand how men and women
make career decisions while in school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;