* 0305322
* Collaborative Research in Computer Graphics:       Real-Time Visualization and Rendering of Complex Scenes
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Ravi Ramamoorthi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 11/30/2007
* USD 224,734.00

ABSTRACT

Real-time rendering with complex illumination, realistic materials, and an
accurate simulation of light scattering, with the ability to manipulate
parameters interactively, is the challenge addressed in this project.
Fundamental questions about the representation of appearance are explored,
resulting in the development of a new class of real-time algorithms.
Specifically, the focus is on three main directions: (i) Mathematical and
Empirical Analysis of the complexity of appearance representations and light
transport; (ii) Computational Techniques such as fine-to coarse and coarse-to-
fine algorithms, function dictionaries, and hierarchical principal component
analysis; and (iii) Algorithms and Systems supporting interactive manipulation
of illumination, materials, and viewpoint.

Computer graphics and scientific visualization is increasingly used in areas
such as simulation and training, automobile design, architectural renderings,
defense, electronic commerce, and entertainment. With today's technology, it is
possible to create strikingly realistic images using sophisticated, but also
slow rendering algorithms. These algorithms cannot address the growing need for
effective methods to manipulate and interact with 3D environments. Modern PCs
can render scenes with millions of polygons at interactive rates, but this
performance comes at the cost of a considerable loss in quality and realism.
This project seeks to overcome these limitations: producing highly realistic
images at interactive rates.

Over the last thirty years computer graphics research has created technology
that improves both the realism and generation speed of computer-generated
images. However, there is no widely used method for creating realistic images,
and it remains difficult in practice to create realistic images. This project
aims to develop a practical method for realistic image creation that addresses
the visual effects believed to be salient by the graphics and perception
communities. The method is intended to be robust, relatively simple, and to have
the potential to be interactive in the next decade.

The ability to rapidly generate realistic images is useful in many applications.
For example, flight and driving simulators rely on realistic imagery, but the
interactive nature of these systems limits the realism that is feasible. The
proposed work should extend these limits. The proposed method would also be
useful for generating images for planning and education; images could be created
to help visualize the results of reconstruction efforts, habitat change, and
urban planning. Finally the method should be useful for generating synthetic
images for input to automated vehicles, where many different scenes and
atmospheric conditions could be generated rapidly and at low expense.