* 0305403
* Dynamics of Localized Photoexcitations in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2007
* Susan Dexheimer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 09/30/2007
* USD 359,000.00

This research focuses on the dynamics of localized electronic states, which play
an important role in determining the properties of many electronic materials,
and which can dramatically alter their optical characteristics as well as their
transport properties. The studies are carried out in materials in which the key
physical interactions, the electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions,
can be systematically tuned. Studies of these model systems, which include both
quasi-one-dimensional inorganic metal complexes and organometallic polymers, are
accomplished using femtosecond laser spectroscopic techniques that are sensitive
to both the electronic and vibrational dynamics. Specific issues addressed
include: (1) the dynamics of the formation of the initial photoexcited states,
(2) the electronic and vibrational coherence properties of the excitations, (3)
the time evolution of the photoinduced defects, and (4) transport properties of
the electronic excitations. The conceptual and experimental approaches developed
and used in this work will be applicable to a wide range of other optical and
electronic materials. Methods employed in the studies include femtosecond
vibrationally impulsive excitation techniques to investigate vibrational
dynamics, photon echo measurements to investigate electronic coherence
properties, and optical pump / THz probe techniques to investigate carrier
processes and vibrational dynamics. Graduate student training is an integral
part of the work. Students involved in the research will gain expertise in
research methods and experimental techniques using state-of-the-art technology,
providing them with excellent preparation for a range of careers in academe,
industry, or government.

This research focuses on the dynamics of localized electronic states, which play
an important role in determining the properties of many electronic materials,
and which can dramatically alter their optical characteristics as well as their
transport properties. Issues related to localization of electronic excitations
can become especially important in nanoscale and molecular-based materials,
where the size of the electronic excitation can be comparable to the length
scale of the material. The studies are carried out in materials in which the key
physical interactions can be systematically tuned. Studies of these model
systems, which include both quasi-one-dimensional inorganic metal complexes and
organometallic polymers, are accomplished using state-of-the-art femtosecond
laser spectroscopic techniques that are sensitive to both the electronic and
vibrational dynamics. The conceptual and experimental approaches developed and
used in this work will be applicable to a wide range of other optical and
electronic materials. Research on molecular-based and nanoscale electronic
materials has the potential for significant future impact on the development of
new technologies for a wide range of applications, and this work will contribute
to the understanding of key fundamental physical processes that are important
for future technological development. Graduate student training is an integral
part of the work. Students involved in the research will gain expertise in
research methods and experimental techniques using state-of-the-art technology,
providing them with excellent preparation for a range of careers in academe,
industry, or government.