* 0305437
* DMR-Dynamics of Branch Point Motion in Entangled Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

Under this grant, the slip-link algorithm will be extended to the case of
polymers with multiple branch points, for which a theory for branch-point motion
is required. As a test case, a series of asymmetric stars will be considered,
ranging from one with a zero-length third arm (which is therefore a linear
polymer) to one whose third arm has length equal to the other two (a symmetric
star). The experimental relaxation behavior for this series of polymers will be
predicted, including the hitherto unexpected finding that even a small third arm
with only two or three entanglements slows down the dynamics of the star much
more than predicted by existing dynamic dilution theories, making a short arm
nearly as effective as a much longer arm in slowing down the relaxation. This
success of the slip-link model implies that the algorithm has the potential to
capture accurately the physics of branch-point motion, which is a necessary
requirement for understanding the dynamics of more complex H and comb polymers,
as well as mixtures of these with linear polymers and with each other. The slip
link algorithm will thus be extended to the cases of H and comb molecules and
the effect of branch point dynamics on their relaxation properties will be
explored, comparing the predictions of the model with recently obtained
experimental data. We will also explore branch-point motion with a more
sophisticated real-space slip-link model that has been recently developed by
colleagues at Nagoya University. The goal is to obtain an accurate theory of
branch-point motion, which is the most important missing ingredient required for
development of general theories of polymer melt relaxation. The results obtained
from these simulations will be incorporated into a general hierarchical model
for relaxation of general polydisperse branched polymer melts, thus enhancing
our ability to use rheological theory to infer molecular branching structure
from rheological data, which is an important practical and commercially valuable
goal. The research will continue international collaborations with the group of
Masao Doi at Nagoya University in Japan. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
theoretical research project will extend the PI's successful models to other
polymer structures. The models will then be able to better describe polymer melt
relaxation and subsequently the flow of polymers. Conversely, using this theory,
relaxation measurements will yield information about molecular branching
structure of polymers. The work will be done in collaboration with a group at
Nagoya University, Japan.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;