* 0305965
* Analysis of Optimal Control Problems with State Space Constraints Arising in Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Heinz Schaettler, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 108,449.00

In this project, synthesis type sufficient conditions for optimality of
controlled trajectories in optimal control problems with state-space constraints
will be developed, including both local results in the form of a field of
extremals around a reference trajectory and global results in the form of a
regular synthesis. This research is strongly motivated by problems arising in
applications and will be used to prove optimality of families of extremals for
problems from two different application areas, namely (a) the minimization of
the base transit time in semi-conductor devices in electronics and (b) the
analysis of mathematical models for cancer chemotherapy when explicit upper
limits on the number of cancer cells or lower limits for bone marrow are
included. (a) In electronics, the problem of choosing the base-doping profile to
minimize the base transit time in semi-conductor devices generally is solved
numerically. In this project, the problem is formulated as an optimal control
problem with state space constraints, and different models corresponding to both
homojunction and heterojunction bipolar transistors are analyzed. For silicon
bipolar transistors, explicit analytic solutions for general carrier diffusion
coefficients will be derived, and their optimality will be proven by
constructing a complete synthesis. (b) In many mathematical models for cancer
chemotherapy the aim is to minimize the number of cancer cells at the end of a
pre-determined fixed therapy interval while limiting the toxicity of the drugs
through a penalty term. This, however, does not always prevent the number of
cancer cells from rising to unacceptably high levels in between. It therefore is
more realistic to consider models that incorporate explicit limits on the cancer
cells as state-space constraints. The analysis of optimal controls for such
models will be pursued.

In this project, mathematical conditions will be developed that guarantee the
optimality of controlled processes in the presence of strict limits. This
theoretical research will be guided by two practical problems, one from
electronics, the other biomedical. In the electronics topic, complete analytical
solutions will be developed for a simplified model describing the speed of
certain semiconductor devices. In the biomedical area, mathematical models for
chemotherapy of cancer or other diseases will be analyzed in the presence of
restrictions, for example, that bone marrow must not fall below a specified
minimum level or that cancer cells are not allowed to increase beyond a maximum
level. These topics also will be used to illustrate optimal control methods on
an undergraduate level with more relevant and realistic problems than are
currently available in most textbooks on the subject.