* 0305524
* Intersubband Dynamics in Semiconductor Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* David Citrin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 246,000.00

This theoretical grant focuses on the nonlinear response associated with
intersubband transitions in semiconductor quantum wells. Typical subband
splittings in quantum wells grown from the GaAs/AlAs and InAs/GaAs systems are
in the far- to the mid-infrared region of the spectrum - from 1 to 100meV. In
wide-bandgap III-V materials, such as InGaN/GaN and GaN/AlGaN quantum wells,
intersubband splittings from the far- to the near-infrared are possible.

The follwing project swill be addressed:

Carrier-wave Rabi flopping: These are population oscillations between two
subbands driven coherently up and down by a strong THz pulse in wide GaAs/AlGaAs
quantum wells.

Nonlinear far-infrared response: A wide n-type GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well driven
by a strong field near an intersubband transition may exhibit an essentially
nonlinear response owing to intersubband plasmons, which screen out the driving
field.

Intersubband carrier dynamics in GaN/AlGaN and InGaN/GaN quantum wells: Wide-
bandgap nitride quantum wells may possess built-in electric fields as large as
~1MV/cm - in excess of dielectric breakdown fields in lower-bandgap
semiconductors. The dynamic screening of this polarization field as an
intersubband tranition is driven by a THz source will lead to a strong nonlinear
response.

Each topic will be studied in close cooperation with experimental groups at
Michigan, UCSB and Georgia Tech. %%% This theoretical grant focuses on the
nonlinear response associated with intersubband transitions in semiconductor
quantum wells. These transitions can lead to many novel phenomena of both
fundamental and applied interest. The research will be done in close
coordination with leading experimental groups. ***