* 0305418
* Controlling Stress Evolution in Ceramic Thin Films and Coatings:  Investigations of Mechanical and Chemical Responses
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Brian Sheldon, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2008
* USD 566,000.00

This research focuses on controlling intrinsic stresses in several different
polycrystalline ceramic films and coatings where residual stresses have an
important effect on key materials properties. The intrinsic stresses are
produced by the film growth process, and can thus be controlled during
processing. While previous work has examined intrinsic stresses in metal films,
ceramics have been investigated in far less detail. Four inter-related efforts
will lead to a significant increase in both knowledge and our ability to control
stress-related effects. First, in MEMS devices, residual stress effects at small
length scales are critical. By controlling stress gradients in polycrystalline
SiC, we expect to eliminate bending problems in free standing SiC films for MEMS
applications. Secondly, non-stoichiometric oxide films are important for a
variety of electrochemical applications. Initial work with TiO2-X shows that
stresses due to compositional variations can be accurately measured, and that
the defect chemistry of the material determines the type of stress changes
observed. Additional work on oxides will explore yittria stabilized zirconia and
CeO2-X, both of which are used as electrolytes in solid oxide fuel cells. As
well, new models of tensile and compressive intrinsic stresses have been
developed with previous NSF funding. These will be integrated into a unified
model, applicable to a broad range of vapor-deposited polycrystalline films.
Finally, the fracture resistance and adhesion of SiC coatings will be measured
as a function of residual stresses and stress gradients. Our demonstrated
ability to vary the film microstructure and stress independently during
deposition will make it possible to isolate the effects of residual stresses.
All three investigators are engaged in significant educational activities.
Profs. Rankin and Sheldon will continue to promote several different K-12
outreach activities. Prof. Rankin is also the Associate Director of the Sheridan
Center for Teaching and Learning at Brown, where she is regularly engaged in
advancing the teaching skills of faculty and graduate students from a wide range
of different disciplines. During the academic year, Prof. Walden is on the
faculty at Trinity College, an undergraduate teaching institution. We will
employ Trinity undergraduates in research efforts, providing them with
experience in a research setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide new knowledge and materials fabrication capabilities for controlling the
mechanical stresses that invariably exist in coatings and thin-films of ceramic
materials. These stresses can be either detrimental to the materials performance
(e.g., by promoting failure) or beneficial (e.g., by improving toughness). Thus,
proper control of these stresses is critical. Work is focused on two types of
materials, silicon carbide that is of interest in miniature machines (so-called
micro-electro-mechanical systems or MEMS), and oxide ceramics that are useful
for electrochemical applications such as fuel cells. Much of the knowledge that
is obtained from these investigations will also be broadly applicable to thin-
films and coatings that are used for a wide variety of other applications,
including microelectronic devices, jet engines, and hard coatings that are used
to extend the life of different types of machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;