* 0305557
* RUI: Spectroscopy of Many-Body Processes in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 108,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational studies of electron dynamics
in semiconductor quantum dots. The main focus is on understanding the role of
many-body correlation and quantum confinement effects in optical spectra that
can be observed using time-resolved optical spectroscopy techniques. The first
part of the project will address the structure of the strongly correlated
multiexciton states in single quantum dots excited by a high-intensity optical
pulse. The energy spectrum of these excitations appears through the fine
structure of the emission spectrum. This structure represents a set of narrow
lines corresponding to the many-body transitions that accompany the emission of
a photon. Of particular interest is the effect of many-body processes on the
photon temporal correlation statistics. The second part of the project is
related to ultrafast nonlinear optical spectroscopy of ring-shaped quantum dots
(nanorings) in the presence of a magnetic field. Due to the finite nanoring
size, the magnetic field gives rise to the Aharonov-Bohm effect on optical
absorption by modulating the exciton binding energy. Here the role of Coulomb
correlation and Aharonov-Bohm effects in the coherent dynamics of multiexciton
states will be investigated. The third part of the project involves the role of
cooperative effects in the luminescence from systems of self-assembled quantum
dots. These effects become relevant when the luminescence spectra are collected
from an ensemble of ~ 102 quantum dots. In the presence of disorder, the
eigenstates of a system of radiatively coupled emitters manifest themselves
through a random but repetitive fine structure of the emission spectrum. The
statistics of the emission lines provide the fingerprints of the quantum dots
spatial and level distributions.&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical description of many-body
processes in these structures is complicated by strong quantum-size effects,
which requires nonperturbative theoretical approaches. The completion of the
project will involve a variety of analytical and numerical methods. The results
will be compared to the available experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students will actively participate in the project. The project will be carried
out in a historically black university setting and enhances research and
education opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational investigations of very fast light pulses (down to several
femtoseconds) interacting with electrons in semiconductor quantum dots. This
work contributes to the understanding of ultrafast spectroscopy techniques and
their use to probe the correlations among electrons that arise as a consequence
of their interaction with each other. The unique optical properties and
tunability of quantum dots make them attractive candidates for many
technological applications including new types of lasers, single-photon light
sources, and as bits in quantum computers. Undergraduate students will actively
participate in the project. The project will be carried out in a historically
black university setting and enhances research and education opportunities for
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;