* 0306008
* Statistical Mining of Massive Data, Data Depth and Aviation Risk Management
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Regina Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 220,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Regina Liu, Proposal Number:
DMS-0306008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Statistical Mining of Massive Data, Data
Depth and Aviation Risk Management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop a systematic data mining procedure for exploring some large non-standard
data sets by automatic means, with the purpose of discovering meaningful
patterns and useful features. The procedure includes four particular research
areas: text analysis, risk analysis, data depth and multivariate nonparametric
analysis. The PI proposes to introduce and investigate several new data
extracting and tracking methodologies. She plans to use two aviation safety
report repositories ("Program Tracking Report Subsystem" from the FAA and
"Aviation Accident Statistics" from NTSB) to illustrate problem statements as
well as applications of the proposed research to aviation risk management. The
data mining procedures and methods for constructing and tracking performance
measures or risk indicators developed in this project can be a critical
component of any effective decision-support systems. Also, included in this
project are: a research plan for establishing a general theory of multivariate
spacings based on data depth, and some new nonparametric statistical inference
methods using the concept of depth-ranking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent
advances in computing and data acquisition technologies have made the collection
of massive amounts of data a routine practice in many fields. Besides the
voluminous size, the types of data are also often less traditional. They may be
textual, image, or unstructured high dimensional data. Scientists face
increasingly the task of analyzing such massive non-standard data sets.
Moreover, with the low cost of implementing automated data collection systems,
many data collection systems are often designed to accumulate maximum amounts of
data without clearly defined missions. Consequently, the data analysis required
of statisticians often includes the new challenge of mining a sea of
unstructured data. The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive
statistical mining scheme that should have a broad applicability to many fields.
The investigator plans to use some aviation safety report repositories from the
NTSB (National Transportation Safety Board) to illustrate problem statements as
well as applications of the proposed research to aviation risk management. The
data mining procedures and methods for constructing and tracking performance
measures or risk indicators developed in this project can be a critical
component of any effective decision-support systems. &lt;br/&gt;