* 0306927
* Microbial Observatories: Workshop to Expand the Understanding of Modern Microbial Identification Technologies in Environmental Settings, Morocco, Spring 2003
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Daniel Oerther, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Daniel B. Oerther of the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering at the University of Cincinnati to host an
international workshop of environmental microbiologists, engineers and students
at the University Ibn Tofail, Kenitra, Morocco. This international workshop is a
direct follow-up of a workshop held previously at NSF headquarters in the Spring
of 2002 (BES-0116929), the purpose of which was for U.S. researchers to explore
the value of applying molecular biological tools in the field of environmental
engineering. The theme of the Morocco workshop will be using state-of-the-art
molecular techniques to track microorganisms in the environment. The specific
objectives of the international workshop include: teaching state-of-the-art
technology to young researchers; transferring technology to potential
collaborators; and exploring opportunities for international collaboration to
better tackle local issues facing environmental health in Morocco as well as
global issues in environmental microbiology. Approximately ten U.S. university
faculty members specializing in environmental microbiology will visit Morocco,
present their research results and give talks on molecular techniques for the
detection of microorganisms in the environment to potential international
collaborators and their students. The Morocco workshop will also provide
researchers from the U.S. with an opportunity to interact with and learn from
colleagues abroad.

The 2-day international workshop will serve as a lecture and discussion-based
introduction for a two-week hands-on training course sponsored by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Involving
environmental microbiologists from the U.S. in this broader training effort
demonstrates a commitment by the U.S. to be actively involved in technology
transfer and the exchange of intellectual capital in this part of the world. One
of the broader impacts of this effort is the emphasis on bringing female faculty
in environmental microbiology from the U.S. to Morocco. By involving women in
this international effort, Dr. Oerther also hopes to elevate the visibility of
women scientists in parts of the world where role models for women in science
are less common.

