* 0306487
* Uniformization of Projective Manifolds and Global Properties of Embeddable CR-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Bruno De Oliveira, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 98,984.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0306487&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Bruno De Oliveira&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
will investigate the geometric and&lt;br/&gt;analytic properties of complex
manifolds and their real&lt;br/&gt;submanifolds. The first topic of the
investigator's research is&lt;br/&gt;the uniformization problem for Kahler
manifolds. More precisely,&lt;br/&gt;the study is of the geometric properties of
the algebra of&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic functions on the universal cover of a
Kahler&lt;br/&gt;manifold. There is a conjecture of Shafarevich formulated in
the&lt;br/&gt;early 1970's stating that the universal cover of a compact
Kahler&lt;br/&gt;manifold is holomorphic convex. This conjecture proposes that
the&lt;br/&gt;function theory of noncompact universal covers of compact
Kahler&lt;br/&gt;manifolds is very rich. The difficulty in proving the
conjecture&lt;br/&gt;is that there is a lack of methods to produce
holomorphic&lt;br/&gt;functions on universal covers. The investigator has
developed a&lt;br/&gt;methodology to produce holomorphic functions on
universal&lt;br/&gt;covers. Holomorphic functions are shown to arise from
the&lt;br/&gt;identification on the universal cover of the pullback of
distinct&lt;br/&gt;vector bundles on the Kaehler manifold. This methodology will
be&lt;br/&gt;expanded, and in conjuction with the work of Kollar, will
obtain&lt;br/&gt;variations of the Shafarevich conjecture. The second topic
of&lt;br/&gt;this project is about the interaction between the properties
of&lt;br/&gt;special real submanifolds and the properties of the
complex&lt;br/&gt;manifolds that contain them. More precisely, how does
the&lt;br/&gt;presence of a given CR-submanifold in a compact complex
manifold&lt;br/&gt;influences the global analytic and geometric invariants of
the&lt;br/&gt;latter? A flexible construction of projective varieties
with&lt;br/&gt;given prescribed singularities shows that even
though&lt;br/&gt;CR-submanifolds impose restrictions in analytical properties
of&lt;br/&gt;the ambient complex manifold like the Kodaira dimension, they
are&lt;br/&gt;expected to be less restrictive on topological properties
like&lt;br/&gt;the fundamental group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex manifolds are
natural objects in mathematics and in&lt;br/&gt;particular in the field of
complex geometry. They appear in the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models of
engineering and physics. The research&lt;br/&gt;program proposed will contribute
to a better understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;properties of complex manifolds and
the theory of their&lt;br/&gt;functions. Advances in complex geometry will have
a significant&lt;br/&gt;impact on the development of the models of physics, such
as&lt;br/&gt;string theory, describing the forces that shape
our&lt;br/&gt;universe. This project will also allow the principal
investigator&lt;br/&gt;to organize seminars that will bring experts of the field
from&lt;br/&gt;other parts of the country to his institution. This will
help&lt;br/&gt;foster the research in complex geometry in the area and it
will&lt;br/&gt;be essential to the education of the graduate students at
his&lt;br/&gt;institution. The principal investigator hopes to foster
an&lt;br/&gt;environment of scientific curiosity and investigation that
will&lt;br/&gt;have a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;