* 0306440
* RUI: Practical Computing with Semi-Algebraic Sets via Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Christopher Brown, United States Naval Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Dmitri Maslov
* 05/31/2006
* USD 76,081.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0306440&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: United States Naval
Academy&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Brown, Christopher
W.&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: RUI: Practical Computing with Semi-Algebraic Sets
via Cylindrical Algebraic
Decomposition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
research is to develop algorithms and produce programs that are able to perform
practical symbolic computations with semi-algebraic sets. The primary tool for
this is Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition (CAD), which provides a data-
structure for explicitly representing semi-algebraic sets. CAD is a powerful and
general tool, which has been implemented several times and already shown itself
to be of more than just theoretical value. However, the consensus in the
literature is that interesting application problems cannot be solved by current
CAD programs within a reasonable amount of time and space. The three principal
goals of the project are to extend the theory of CADs to deal efficiently with
the types of semi-algebraic sets that arise in applications, produce efficient
algorithms and programs that compute with CADs, and promote the use of CADs to
solve problems in other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide variety of
problems from many areas of science and engineering reduce to questions about
semi-algebraic sets, that is sets containing both numeric and symbolic entities.
Problems come, for example from control theory, robotics, computer-aided design,
geometric theorem proving, and even epidemiology. There are many advantages to
performing these computations symbolically, foremost among them is that free
parameters in the problem description remain free parameters in the solution, so
that a single computation provides solutions to whole families of problems. The
primary disadvantage to computing symbolically with semi-algebraic sets is
simple but profound: the time and space requirements are typically prohibitive.
To be an effective tool for applications, symbolic methods for computing with
semi-algebraic sets must be able to solve practical sized problems in a
reasonable amount of time and space, which is precisely the goal towards which
this project aims to contribute. Since this work focuses on practical computing
with semi-algebraic sets, its theoretical improvements are incorporated into
actual programs. Furthermore, these programs are freely and easily available
(via the Web) to others to encourage experimentation with their use in science
and engineering. Finally, the results of such experiments help direct further
theoretical effort. Student participation is an integral part of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;