* 0306436
* Collaborative Research:  Parallel Hybrid Differential and Integral Equation Based Solvers for Time Domain Electromagnetic Analysis with Application to High-Speed Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop fast and accurate physics-based parallel
transient electromagnetic solvers that are geared towards applications to high-
speed circuits. This is being achieved via a combination of high performance
parallel algorithms, novel advances in numerical schemes that permit
hierarchical computation and finally, the hybridization of different numerical
techniques. More specifically, the following objectives are being pursued: (i)
development of novel numerical schemes that reduce the overall computational
work and the corresponding parallel schemes; (ii) development of parallel and
numerical methods for analyzing transient fields in diffusive and dispersive
material media; (iii) development of parallel methodologies for integrating
differential equation and integral equation based schemes such that one can reap
the advantages of both; (iv) and finally, integrating the EM solver developed in
the last item into the circuit simulation tool SPICE, to enable fullwave EM
simulation of circuits. The principal impact of the proposed research is the
development of high performance transient electromagnetic analysis tools that
are applicable to a variety of design and analysis problems. The techniques
developed are being used to analyze issues in high-speed circuits including on-
chip signal integrity, non-linear devices, cross-talk, reflections, and non-
linear terminations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electromagnetic (EM) phenomena
constitute the physical underpinnings of applications ranging from electrical to
electronic to communication to computer technologies and are completely
described by Maxwell's equations. Fast and accurate physics-based simulation
tools offer a second modality of investigation into electromagnetic phenomena,
and are rapidly becoming indispensable in civilian and military R &amp; D
settings. As a part of this endeavor, researchers at Michigan State University
and Iowa State University are collaborating on developing an arsenal of fast and
accurate simulation tools that permit on-the-fly optimization that can be used
for rapid design prototyping of electromagnetic devices. To this end, novel
numerical methods for transient electromagnetic analysis and algorithms to
parallelize these are being developed. The techniques developed are being
applied to the design and analysis of electromagnetic devices. &lt;br/&gt;