* 0306519
* Homotopy Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Haynes Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,375,000.00

DMS-0306519&lt;br/&gt;Michael J. Hopkins, Lars Hesselhot, and Haynes R.
Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Hesselholt, working with Ib Madsen and
Thomas Geisser, has&lt;br/&gt;made deep advances in understanding the cyclotomic
trace spaces&lt;br/&gt;associated to a ring. These spaces were invented to
describing the&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphism groups of high dimensional manifolds,
and Hesselholt's&lt;br/&gt;work is a significant step in that program. Central
to Hesselholt's&lt;br/&gt;work is a connection he descovered between the
cyclotomic trace spaces&lt;br/&gt;and the de Rham-Witt complex of p-adic
arithmetic algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry. This has led to a generalization of the
de Rham-Witt complex&lt;br/&gt;to a mixed characteristic situation, where it is
related to the sheaf&lt;br/&gt;of p-adic vanishing cycles. This relationship
further suggests the&lt;br/&gt;existence of a motivic theory behind the
cyclotomic trace&lt;br/&gt;spaces. Under the support of this grant, Hesselholt
will pursue this&lt;br/&gt;striking relationship between p-adic arithmetic
algebraic geometry and&lt;br/&gt;the computations in topology relevant to
understanding diffeomorphism&lt;br/&gt;groups. Professor Hopkins, working with
Matthew Ando and Charles Rezk&lt;br/&gt;has recently uncovered a new approach to
congruences between modular&lt;br/&gt;forms using algebraic topology, which he
plans to pursue with an eye&lt;br/&gt;on several open problems in the area. In
another collaborative&lt;br/&gt;effort, Professors Hopkins, Dan Freed and
Constantin Teleman&lt;br/&gt;discovered a topological expression for the
Verlinde algebra--an&lt;br/&gt;algebraic structure arising in mathematical
physics and in the theory&lt;br/&gt;of representations of loop groups. The three
of them plan to explore&lt;br/&gt;this connection more deeply, with the long
term ambition of&lt;br/&gt;discovering the topological sources of topological
quantum field&lt;br/&gt;theories. Hopkins will also continue his work with
Isadore Singer on&lt;br/&gt;their theory of ``differential function spaces,''
which offers a&lt;br/&gt;refinement of algebraic topology especially suited for
meeting the&lt;br/&gt;demands of mathematical physics. Professor Miller will
continue his&lt;br/&gt;work on Landweber exact and elliptic cohomology theories,
his work&lt;br/&gt;with Bill Dwyer on topological Hochschild homology and the
geometry of&lt;br/&gt;free loop spaces, and his study of the homotopy theory of
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structures arising in knot theory and the modern theory of
Hopf&lt;br/&gt;algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of algebraic topology
arose in the late 19th century as&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians noticed deep
similarities between very different&lt;br/&gt;looking areas of research. By the
beginning of the 20th century, the&lt;br/&gt;basic theory of algebraic topology
was in place, and it was being used&lt;br/&gt;to explain, codify and reveal many
qualitative aspects of geometry.&lt;br/&gt;During the next hundred years
algebraic topology advanced at an&lt;br/&gt;amazing pace, and by now it seems as
if every branch of contemporary&lt;br/&gt;mathematics draws on some form of
algebraic topology when undertaking&lt;br/&gt;to articulate its qualitative
aspects. The algebraic topology group&lt;br/&gt;at MIT runs a large and diverse
program emphasizing the many&lt;br/&gt;connections between algebraic topology,
algebraic geometry, geometry,&lt;br/&gt;and mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;