* 0306286
* Collaborative: Exploiting Component Contracts for Static Analysis and Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Matthew Flatt, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2005
* USD 159,989.00

0306270/0306286&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative: Exploiting Component Contracts
&lt;br/&gt;Robert Bruce Findler/Matthew Flatt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
central role of testing in the development process, current programming
languages and environments provide scarcely any support for testing. Most
testing research has focused on generating&lt;br/&gt;test inputs and test
oracles from program specifications, but program specifications are difficult to
produce and maintain. Consequently, language and environment designers remain
unmotivated to support specifications, and opportunities to support testing are
lost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contracts offer a route around the specification
problem. Contracts are a form of lightweight specification that work with the
base programming language, i.e., there is no need for the programmer to learn a
special logic for writing specifications. Contracts are monitored as the program
executes, which means that the programmer is forced to maintain contracts with
the code. Since contracts are essentially a generalization of assert statements,
experience suggests that programmers will use them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators focus on contracts as a specification language for automatic test
suite generation. To validate their investigations, they will extend the
DrScheme programming environment to support unit&lt;br/&gt;testing at component
boundaries. In addition, they will use the new testing infrastructure to test
DrScheme itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;