* 0306628
* Texas Geometry and Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Jon Pitts, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2007
* USD 33,030.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0306628&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Huai-Dong Cao and Jon T. Pitts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas
Geometry and Topology Conference has been held spring&lt;br/&gt;and fall since
its founding in 1989, a total of 28 times. The&lt;br/&gt;conference has become
an extremely successful semiannual event in&lt;br/&gt;the Southwest. The next
series of conferences will have six&lt;br/&gt;primary sponsoring universities:
The University of Texas at&lt;br/&gt;Austin, Texas A&amp;M University, Rice
University, the University of&lt;br/&gt;Houston, Texas Tech University, and
Texas Christian&lt;br/&gt;University. The conference is designed to enhance both
the&lt;br/&gt;educational and the research atmosphere of the growing
community&lt;br/&gt;of Texas geometers and topologists. The conference is
committed&lt;br/&gt;to bring researchers of national and international stature
to&lt;br/&gt;Texas to discuss their research and to interact
with&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians from Texas and surrounding states. Summaries
of&lt;br/&gt;talks with notation of important results have been
reported&lt;br/&gt;annually for some time and will continue similarly in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By design, the Texas Geometry and Topology
Conference has two&lt;br/&gt;high-impact foci. First, the conference makes it
possible for&lt;br/&gt;the community of geometers and topologists from Texas
and&lt;br/&gt;surrounding states (a huge geographic region) to meet and
share&lt;br/&gt;mathematics on a regular basis, which both stimulates
individual&lt;br/&gt;research and generates productive cooperative efforts
between&lt;br/&gt;schools. Second, the conference is committed to
the&lt;br/&gt;strengthening and enrichment of the mathematics personnel
base.&lt;br/&gt;In order that there be no barrier to participation,
the&lt;br/&gt;conference is widely advertised, participation is open, and
there&lt;br/&gt;are no registration fees. Graduate students, junior
faculty,&lt;br/&gt;women, minorities, and persons with disabilities are
especially&lt;br/&gt;encouraged to participate and to apply for
support.&lt;br/&gt;