* 0306765
* Symposium on Patterning Along an Axis:  Insights from Cnidarian Development; to be held July 10-11, 2003; Lawrence, KS
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Paulyn Cartwright, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2004
* USD 4,998.00

0306765&lt;br/&gt;Cartwright&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium, "Patterning
Along an Axis: Insights from Cnidarian Development," will be held at the 7th
International Conference on Coelenterate Evolution, July 6-11, 2003, at the
University of Kansas in Lawrence Kansas. Funding for this symposium will provide
an opportunity for the sharing of information and ideas regarding axial
patterning in cnidarians and its implications for metazoan evolution. Previous
studies have revealed evidence for similar mechanisms controlling axial
patterning in distantly related organisms, suggesting that the regulation of
axial patterning is highly conserved across the Metazoa. Most of this
information comes from model organisms in the Bilateria. The cnidarians, a
probable sister group to bilaterians, require axial patterning mechanisms to
specify the various developing axes represented in a typical life cycle; the
anterior/posterior axis of the planula larva, the aboral/oral axis in polyp and
medusoid forms, and the developing axes of stolons from which polyps bud in
colonial forms. The extent to which these axes and axial patterning mechanisms
are shared within bilaterians is largely unknown, but many genes have been
characterized in cnidarians whose sequence and expression patterns suggest
similarities with Bilateria axial patterning genes. The basal phlyogenetic
position of the Cnidaria make this an ideal group for providing important clues
for understanding how axial patterning mechanisms evolved. This symposium will
bring together cnidarian biologists who study different cnidarian species and
different aspects of cnidarians axial patterning, including larvae, polyps,
medusae and colony-wide patterning. This provides a unique and timely
opportunity to develop a greater understanding of how the developmental axes in
the cnidarian body plan are regulated to generate the diverse forms found within
the Cnidaria, and to assess the degree in which mechanisms of cnidarian
development are shared with other metazoans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;