* 0306211
* RUI:Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds and Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Colin Adams, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 144,219.00

In 1978, William Thurston revolutionized low-dimensional topology
by&lt;br/&gt;demonstrating that many 3-manifolds have hyperbolic metrics. The
Mostow&lt;br/&gt;Rigidity Theorem then implies that these metrics can be used to
generate&lt;br/&gt;interesting invariants to distinguish hyperbolic 3-manifolds.
A tremendous&lt;br/&gt;number of results have come out of these ideas. The goal
of this proposal&lt;br/&gt;is to further understand hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In
particular, there are a&lt;br/&gt;set of invariants that come out of the cusps
of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic knots, including the cusp
volume, the meridian length and the&lt;br/&gt;longitude length. The plan is to
continue to work on these invariants,&lt;br/&gt;delineating better their
possible range of values and determining their&lt;br/&gt;implications for the
rest of the hyperbolic structure. Moreover, recent&lt;br/&gt;work has
demonstrated the existence of totally geodesic surfaces in&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic
knot complements. Their existence is suprising and exciting. It&lt;br/&gt;is
hoped that a determination can be made as to which knots possess
such&lt;br/&gt;surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding hyperbolic
3-manifolds has implications for determining the&lt;br/&gt;shape of the spatial
universe. These invariants will be the kind that&lt;br/&gt;cosmologists may use
to empirically identify the universe. Although recent&lt;br/&gt;measurements of
the cosmic background radiation point to a curvature very&lt;br/&gt;close to
flat, this could mean that the universe is hyperbolic, but very&lt;br/&gt;large.
Then more subtle hyperbolic invariants will be necessary to&lt;br/&gt;determine
its topological shape.&lt;br/&gt;