* 0306343
* Noise Simulation in Nanoscale Semiconductor Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Giorgio Casinovi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 200,000.00

The growth in the market for wireless communications devices has reached
dramatic proportions in the past decade. This development has spurred rapid
advances in RF integrated circuits technology. Competing requirements on the
performance of RF circuits pose significant technical challenges at all levels,
from architectural design to integrated circuit fabrication. In order to meet
these challenges, significant advances in related computer-aided design (CAD)
technology are also needed. The availability of innovative CAD tools that cover
the entire design process is critical to the successful design of leading-edge
RF systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important limiting factor affecting the
performance of RF components is electrical noise, a phenomenon intrinsic to all
electronic devices. The mechanisms responsible for the generation of electrical
noise inside semiconductor transistors are poorly understood, and even less so
in the case of devices whose size is in the nanoscale range. For this reason,
currently it is very difficult, if not impossible, to assess the impact of noise
on the performance of circuits built using nanoscale technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is the development of
computer-aided software to simulate the mechanisms responsible for the
generation of electrical noise in nanoscale semiconductor devices. The
simulations will be used to develop improved and more accurate mathematical
models of those mechanisms, which will be validated against data from
experimental measurements available in the literature. These models will make it
possible to realize aggressive designs of nanotechnology-based RF systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial use of the scientific results of this project
will be facilitated by the Interconnect Focus Center, a research center
established by the Semiconductor Industry Association at Georgia Tech, whose
goal is to sustain the technology growth of the semiconductor industry by
placing an emphasis on significant long-term research. Integration of research
and education will be pursued through graduate and undergraduate courses and
seminars and through the Georgia Tech Regional Engineering Program, a distance-
learning program established in collaboration with other Georgia universities to
offer innovative engineering education and to serve as catalyst for economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;