* 0306104
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Blythe Durbin, Durbin, Blythe P
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. The research and training plan for this
fellowship is entitled "Transformations for gene-expression microarray data."
Statistical analysis of gene-expression microarray data can be greatly
simplified by use of data transformations which bring the data more closely in
line with the assumptions common to standard statistical techniques. This
research develops methods for finding appropriate transformations for microarray
data, using maximum-likelihood methods and robust statistical techniques.