* 0306283
* New Directions in Geometric Algorithm Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Bernard Chazelle, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/2007
* USD 480,000.00

Special Abstract for 0306283 (Dobkin and Chazelle, Princeton
U,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: New Directions in
Geometric Algorithm Design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project pursues a number of objectives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;that have been at
the heart of important&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;new developments in computational
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chief among them is the issue
of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;algorithm design for large
datasets:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;how to deal with high
dimensionality,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty; how to optimize
functions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;approximately in sublinear time; how to simplify
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;visualize complex data;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;how to
customize data structures to speed up search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort is
to involve a mix of theoretical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and experimental
investigations, with targeted&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;applications to surface
simplification,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D shape matching, massive dataset
visualization,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and protein structure
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical issues
involve&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial geometry, algorithm
design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and basic complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is aimed at deriving
new&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;computational methods for
solving&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;problems of a geometric or biological
nature&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;that have resisted past
investigations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;because of one two reasons: either the
input&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;data is too massive to be processed
directly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and it can only be "sampled" cleverly
or&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the number of variables is itself so
high&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;that standard methods suffer from an exponential
blowup&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;in the time it takes to run them.
New&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;dimension reduction techniques are
needed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;to resolve this
bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;etric Algorithm Design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a number of
objectives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;that have been at the heart of
important&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;new developments in computational
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chief among them is the issue
of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;algorithm design for large
datasets:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;how to deal with high
dimensionality,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty; how to optimize
functions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;approximately in sublinear time; how to simplify
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;visualize complex data;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;how to
customize data structures to speed up search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort is
to involve a mix of theoretical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and experimental
investigations, with targeted&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;applications to surface
simplification,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D shape matching, massive dataset
visualization,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and protein structure
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical issues
involve&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial geometry, algorithm
design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and basic complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is aimed at deriving
new&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;computational methods for
solving&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;problems of a geometric or biological
nature&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;that have resisted past
investigations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;because of one two reasons: either the
input&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;data is too massive to be processed
directly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and it can only be "sampled" cleverly
or&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the number of variables is itself so
high&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;that standard methods suffer from an exponential
blowup&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;in the time it takes to run them.
New&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;dimension reduction techniques are
needed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;to resolve this bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is a careful outline
of research work that may greatly aid in geometric data
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;