* 0306868
* DG:  Policy Made Public:  Technologies of Deliberation and Representation in Rebuilding Lower Manhattan
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* David Stark, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 06/30/2006
* USD 499,919.00

New digital technologies have figured critically in the process of deciding the
future of Lower Manhattan after September 11th, not only supplying the
infrastructure for soliciting public input but also opening new channels of
communication between citizens, designers, advocacy groups, and decision-makers.
This research builds on ethnographic work on organizational responses to
September 11 and on the early stages of public dialogue about the redevelopment
of the World Trade Center site. One component of the current research is a
comparative longitudinal study of participation in three public forums held to
discuss the future of Lower Manhattan, forums that relied on face-to-face,
exclusively online, and mixed technologies of deliberation. The project's second
component focuses on the online dialogues themselves. A discursive analysis of a
sample of the twenty-six online discussion groups that accompanied the face-to-
face forum will identify the conditions that facilitate or obstruct group
discussions to approximate the equality, reflexivity, reciprocity, and openness
that scholars have seen as hallmarks of authentically democratic deliberation.

The third and fourth components of the research turn to the process by which
multi-vocal public dialogues are translated into "public concerns" and then into
design plans. By compiling an archive of all the websites devoted to Lower
Manhattan redevelopment issues and tracking changes in the form and structure of
the websites over time, the project will examine how old and new advocacy groups
are adapting to a political landscape in which new deliberative technologies may
be challenging traditional mechanisms of citizen participation. In the fourth
component of the research, the focus is on communication between citizens, on
one hand, and architects and public officials on the other. Analysis of the
website database will chart whether and how architects and urban planners are
capitalizing on new digital technologies to involve residents more directly in
design. Interviews with representatives of the agencies charged with overseeing
the development process will examine whether and how they are relying on
internet-mediated representations of the public in their decision-making-and
with what effect.