* 0306270
* Collaborative:  Exploiting component contracts for static analysis and testing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Robert Findler, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2006
* USD 124,158.00

0306270/0306286&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative: Exploiting Component Contracts
&lt;br/&gt;Robert Bruce Findler/Matthew Flatt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
central role of testing in the development process, current programming
languages and environments provide scarcely any support for testing. Most
testing research has focused on generating&lt;br/&gt;test inputs and test
oracles from program specifications, but program specifications are difficult to
produce and maintain. Consequently, language and environment designers remain
unmotivated to support&lt;br/&gt;specifications, and opportunities to support
testing are lost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contracts offer a route around the
specification problem. Contracts are a form of lightweight specification that
work with the base programming language, i.e., there is no need for the
programmer to learn a special logic for writing specifications. Contracts are
monitored as the program executes, which means that the programmer is forced to
maintain contracts with the code. Since contracts are essentially a
generalization of assert statements, experience suggests that programmers will
use them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators focus on contracts as a
specification language for&lt;br/&gt;automatic test suite generation. To
validate their investigations,&lt;br/&gt;they will extend the DrScheme
programming environment to support unit&lt;br/&gt;testing at component
boundaries. In addition, they will use the new&lt;br/&gt;testing infrastructure
to test DrScheme itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;