* 0306398
* Asymptotics of conservative PDE's and instability of vortex patches and filaments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Daniel Spirn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 01/31/2005
* USD 77,544.00

Abstract, Proposal 0306398&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Daniel P.
Spirn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Asymptotics of conservative PDEs and
instability of vortex patches and filaments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: The
proposed research concerns asymptotics of conservative&lt;br/&gt;partial
differential equations (PDE) and instability of the incompressible Euler
equations in three specific areas. The first project concerns the long time
behavior of vortex solutions in the nonlinear wave equation. Although recent
progress has led to greater understanding of how concentrations behave in the
nonlinear wave equation, very little is known about how such solutions radiate
energy after long times; we will rigorously study this question. Second, we will
study the nonlinear wave equation in asymptotically thin domains. Conventional
wisdom holds that most PDE's with an asymptotically large aspect ratio will be
well approximated simply by dropping the dimension of the PDE and relying only
on the planar direction; this work will examine the precise timescales for which
this practice is acceptable. The third project involves the nonlinear
instability of various PDE's arising from the incompressible Euler equations, in
which the governing dynamics reduce to the behavior of an interface -- such as
in two-layer models and vortex patches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Often, physical
phenomena are well modeled via nonlinear PDE's. Such&lt;br/&gt;equations are
exceedingly difficult to study, both numerically and&lt;br/&gt;theoretically,
yet their understanding is crucial to the further progress of many areas of
physics and engineering. Two of the projects outlined above offer rigorous
methods for simplifying classes of these equations, not only providing insight
into the basic behavior of fluids and quantum field theory, but also greatly
reducing the scope of numerical simulations. Such reductions in computational
costs should aid physicists, computer scientists, and engineers. The third
project endeavors to classify the stable structures in fluid dynamics, helping
us to gain a better qualitative understanding of the way fluids
behave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;