* 0306912
* Efficient Financial and Monetary Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Narayana Kocherlakota, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 49,898.00

The research in this project is guided by a simple principle. Suppose cer-tain
societal institutions governing financial and payment arrangements are used in a
wide variety of societies. Then there should be a strong presump-tion that those
arrangements are economically efficient. (The idea. of course is that the
arrangements were not efficient. then the societies would change them in order
to achieve the same individual utility, levels at lower costs.) The key here is
that the term `'efficient arrangement" is to be understood as meaning efficient
subject to both resource and informational/enforcement constraints: I use the
term "economic frictions" to refer to the latter type of
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;Given this presumption of economic efficiency, the
current project has two immediate goals. The first is to understand the economic
frictions that make it efficient for societies to use money in conjunction with
other assets. The second is to understand the economic frictions that make it,
efficient for societies to use deposit insurance.&lt;br/&gt;The general method
of attack is as follows. A class of model economies is constructed that
incorporates certain informational and/or enforcement frictions that appear to
be important aspects of the real world. Efficient arrangements are then
constructed for the class of economies. These efficient arrangements are
examined to see if they resemble real world institutions along key dimensions.
If not, then the original informational and enforce-ment frictions are perturbed
so as to improve the "fit" between real-world institutions and the properties of
the efficient arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the task is essentially one of
"reverse engineering" existing institu-tions so as to understand what frictions
underlie them. In this proposal, the institutions of interest are money/bond co-
existence and deposit insurance. There is a simple reason why the proposed
research has first-order policy relevance. If institutions are efficient
responses to existing frictions, then governments and other agencies can only
improve on those institutions if they can overcome the frictions that give rise
to them. Doing so requires knowing what the frictions are.&lt;br/&gt;