* 0306508
* Boosting, Support Vector Machines, and Cloud Detection over Ice and Snow
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 274,999.00

DMS-0306508&lt;br/&gt;Bin Yu&lt;br/&gt;Boosting, support vector machines, and
cloud detection over ice and
snow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classification and
regression are two fundamental statistical problems posed by the Information
Technology (IT) age and at the same time aided by the computational tools it
provides. Boosting and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are two revolutionary
methodologies from machine learning for regression and classification that meet
the needs of massive data sets of our IT age. The investigator and her
colleagues study when and why boosting and SVMs work to shed light on the design
or tuning of Boosting and SVMs; in particular, understanding on the choice of
the base learner in L2Boosting and the effect of the input density distribution
on the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert space induced by the kernel in an SVM.
Theoretical understandings on boosting and SVMs are then used, in collaboration
with colleagues at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, in the cloud-detection problem
over ice/snow based on Multi-angle Imaging SpectroRadiometer (MISR) data. The
investigator and her colleagues also develop a novel cloud detection algorithm
based on linear correlations using MISR data and compare this with the boosting
and SVM based approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information Technology (IT) is
changing just about every facet of our lives. At a professional level, emerging
innovations in IT areas represent tremendous opportunities for statistical
research, providing both fundamental methodological challenges as well as
applications with real-world impact. Advances in data collection and computing
technologies have led to the proliferation of massive data sets such as those
from remote sensing. Understanding the role of statistics in such data-rich
applications forces us to reevaluate and revise traditional procedures and
frameworks. The investigator and colleagues study Boosting and Support Vector
Machines (SVMs), which are two revolutionary methodologies from machine learning
for regression and classification that meet the needs of massive data sets of
our IT age. In collaboration with colleagues at &lt;br/&gt;NASA's Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, they apply the research results from these studies to the problem of
cloud detection, which is a crucial step in any climate prediction or modeling
including weather forecasting and global warming monitoring. Multi-angle Imaging
SpectroRadiometer (MISR) was launched in 1999 by NASA to provide 9 angle (4
band) data to retrieve or estimate the cloud height and hence cloud detection.
However, cloud detection even with MISR data has been proven very difficult over
ice/snow. The investigator and her colleagues develop a novel cloud detection
algorithm based on linear correlations using MISR data to work over ice/snow and
compare it with boosting and SVM based approaches. &lt;br/&gt;