* 0306599
* Curves and 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Abigail Thompson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 117,474.00

We describe three problems in this proposal, all in the general &lt;br/&gt;area
of knot theory and 3-manifolds. A Heegaard splitting of a &lt;br/&gt;3-manifold
is a decomposition of the 3-manifold into simple pieces, &lt;br/&gt;called
handlebodies. This decomposition is an effective way to &lt;br/&gt;study many of
the interesting open questions about 3-manifolds, but &lt;br/&gt;there are some
startling gaps in our basic information about Heegaard &lt;br/&gt;splittings. We
know that given two Heegaard splittings of the same &lt;br/&gt;3-manifold, one
can move from one to the other by a series of moves. &lt;br/&gt;The first
problem in this proposal asks how "far apart" two different &lt;br/&gt;Heegaard
splittings of a 3-manifold can be under these moves. The &lt;br/&gt;second
problem is to explore a particular aspect of the Poincare &lt;br/&gt;Conjecture
prompted by Dunwoody's recent attempt and suggested by &lt;br/&gt;earlier work
of Freedman and Yau. We will look carefully at whether &lt;br/&gt;a plan
analogous to what Dunwoody proposed can be made to work on a &lt;br/&gt;real
3-ball, beginning with an even simpler version of the question &lt;br/&gt;on a
triangulated 2-sphere. The final problem is a generalization &lt;br/&gt;of
recent work of the proposer on immersed curves in the plane to
&lt;br/&gt;immersed 2-spheres in 3-space. We will look at the set of
&lt;br/&gt;singularities (including, for example, curves of self-intersection
&lt;br/&gt;and points of zero curvature) and try to derive relationship between
&lt;br/&gt;numbers and types of singularities, similar to the kinds of results
&lt;br/&gt;known for immersed curves in the plane or in projective 2-space. We
&lt;br/&gt;also describe how these and other related problems have been used by
&lt;br/&gt;the proposer to stimulate interest in the field and in mathematics in
&lt;br/&gt;general at levels ranging from high school students, including
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates and graduate students, through
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-dimensional topology is the study of
properties of spaces in &lt;br/&gt;dimensions two, three, and four. It is a
field that used to lie &lt;br/&gt;squarely in the realm of "pure" mathematics,
and research in the &lt;br/&gt;field was pursued largely for its intricacy and
beauty. As we &lt;br/&gt;continue to understand the universe, from the shape of
space itself &lt;br/&gt;to the knotting of strands of DNA, the deep connections
between this &lt;br/&gt;abstract area and the real world are increasingly
apparent. This &lt;br/&gt;proposal aims to explore some of the fundamental
questions in &lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional spaces and knot theory, including
understanding the &lt;br/&gt;relationships between different decompositions of
3-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;spaces and quantifying the complexity of 2-dimensional
spheres &lt;br/&gt;immersed in a standard 3-dimensional universe.&lt;br/&gt;