* 0306905
* ARGOS: Dynamic Composition of Web Services for Goods Movement Analysis and Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Peter Gordon, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,050,000.00

This research will develop a flexible data query and analysis system based on
the web services paradigm. As an application domain several goods movement
planning problems will be examined along with their effects on spatial urban
structure. The research has three objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) to
advance computer science research by developing an expressive web services
description language and techniques for dynamically&lt;br/&gt;composing web
services, &lt;br/&gt;2) to develop and conduct test applications of an intra-
metropolitan goods movement flow model using web services in cooperation with
government partners, and &lt;br/&gt;3) to use the model to conduct social
science research on intra-metropolitan economic linkages and spatial structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the focus is on the specific topic of urban goods
movement, the approach to web service composition is general and can be applied
to other scientific data gathering and analysis tasks. The first objective is to
develop Argos, a general framework for dynamically composing web services. Many
scientific problems can be modeled as a workflow that includes information
gathering and processing operations. Argos will provide graphical tools for
manual specification and composition of web services, as well as automatic
composition based on expressive web service descriptions for given application
domains (such as transportation planning). The second objective is to use Argos
in an actual metropolitan planning application. In consultation with an advisory
team of government representatives, from the Los Angeles County Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, the San Bernardino Associated Governments, the
Southern California Association of Governments and the Port of Long Beach. a
scenario analysis using the Los Angeles region as a case study will be
conducted. The scenario analysis will allow evaluation of Argos both in terms of
its utility as a transportation planning tool as well as its ease of use by
practitioners. The third objective is to extend the transportation planning
domain to address problems of urban spatial structure that heretofore have not
been practical for social science researchers to study due to the lack of tools
for integrating and analyzing available data. There is an extensive theoretical
literature on employment location; transport of freight inputs and outputs are
critical elements of these models. Empirical research on employment location is
limited, because of the lack of availability of freight flow data. The research
team will analyze the relationships between industry mix, flows, and urban
spatial structure, using the Los Angeles region as a case study. &lt;br/&gt;