* 0306907
* An Analysis of Factors Contributing to Hybrid Zone Expansion in the Piriqueta Caroliniana Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mitchell Cruzan, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 140,320.00

The proposed research will examine the processes contributing to the spread of
novel genotypes resulting from hybridization between morphologically and
ecologically distinct lineages of the Florida rock rose (Piriqueta caroliniana).
The mixing of divergent taxa via natural hybridization is considered to have
been important in the history of a variety of plants and animals. However, we
currently have little information on the dynamics of hybrid zones that extend
over broad geographic regions. The process of spread of hybrid genotypes and
expansion of the hybrid zone will be complicated by hybrid breakdown (loss of
viability and fertility) in the early generations following hybridization. This
research will examine patterns of hybrid breakdown and its demographic and
genetic consequences. Patterns of fitness loss that accompanies hybridization
will be documented and its impact on the process of hybrid zone expansion will
be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will provide
information on processes that affect aspects of natural hybridization that have
direct economic and social impacts including; 1) the spread of exotic species
that is facilitated by hybridization with natives, and 2) the escape of genes
from genetically modified crops via hybridization with native and weedy species.
Furthermore, information obtained on the development of superior genotypes
through natural processes may have applications in plant and animal breeding
programs. &lt;br/&gt;