* 0306934
* Classification Theory of 4-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Vyacheslav Krushkal, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2006
* USD 93,758.00

This research project concerns the geometric classification theory &lt;br/&gt;of
topological 4-manifolds. The classification techniques&lt;br/&gt;are known to
hold for a class of good fundamental groups, and are &lt;br/&gt;conjectured to
fail in general. This conjecture remains a central&lt;br/&gt;open problem in
4-dimensional topology.&lt;br/&gt;One goal of this project is to prove that the
disk embedding &lt;br/&gt;theorem, and consequently the surgery and s-cobordism
theorems, hold &lt;br/&gt;for amenable fundamental groups. Another approach to
surgery, &lt;br/&gt;explored in the project, is provided by the disk
&lt;br/&gt;embedding conjecture up to s-cobordism. The topology of
&lt;br/&gt;4-manifolds is closely related to link-slicing problems, and the
&lt;br/&gt;third part of the project aims at extending the results about
&lt;br/&gt;slicing to Whitehead doubles of homotopically trivial links.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classification of possible large-scale structures in
dimension &lt;br/&gt;4, which locally look like the 4-dimensional space-time,
has been&lt;br/&gt;a focus of intensive research over the past 20 years. This
area of &lt;br/&gt;research lies at the intersection of topology, geometry,
analysis &lt;br/&gt;and physics. This project is aimed at classification of
&lt;br/&gt;4-dimensional objects with amenable fundamental groups,
and&lt;br/&gt;at proving the non-existence result of certain 4-dimensional
shapes &lt;br/&gt;with large fundamental groups, which contain many loops that
cannot &lt;br/&gt;be contracted. &lt;br/&gt;