* 0306385
* Splines Over Iterated Voronoi Diagrams
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Gerald Farin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 11/30/2007
* USD 155,253.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;0306385&lt;br/&gt;Farin, Gerald &lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Splines are used to describe geometric objects
by breaking down into individual parts such that the overall smoothness of thes
pieces is guaranteed. Splines are widely used in the automotive, aerospace, and
other engineering disciplines. They work very well when the geometry has a
rectilinear struture (such as the roof of a car), but need considerable effort
when this is not the case. For that reason, splines are not much used in
biological or medical applications, where shapes tend to be highly irregular.
This research introduces a new class of splines having all the smoothness
properties of standard ones but also being able to cope with complex and
unstructured shapes. &lt;br/&gt;This research explores a new class splines,
those that are defined over an unstructured set of 2D points - i.e., no regular
structure is assumed. The most fundamental algorithm in the theory of B-spline
curves is the recursive de Boor algorithm. This algorithm is generalized to a
recursive algorithm involving the construction of a hierarchy of Voronoi
diagrams in the plane. The resulting surfaces are of arbitrary degree and are
piecewise smooth. They are capable of reproducing polynomials of any order.
Since the de Boor Algorithm is fundamental to all spline theory, a proper
reformulation for unstructured point sets is a significant breakthrough and
constitutes the main intellectual merit of this research. The existence of
splines defined over unstructured point sets opens up the possibility of
handling complex shapes. This is particularly important for organic shapes,
which tend to be highly irregular. Thus the broader impact of this research is
the possibility to successfully describe non-engineering shapes using techniques
similar to standard splines.