* 0306166
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Katarzyna Bernacki, Bernacki, Katarzyna
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Computational investigation of
structural and dynamical effects of protein post-translational phosphorylation."
The regulation of protein activity by phosphorylation plays a key role in many
cellular processes. Despite the centrality of this post-translational
modification, the mechanisms of regulation remain poorly understood in many
cases. The primary goal of this research is to develop new computational tools,
to validate existing sampling algorithms, and to refine force fields that can be
used to analyze and predict structural and dynamical effects of phosphorylation.