* 0306035
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Matthew Vaughn, Vaughn                  Matthew        W
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. The title of the fellowship's research
and training plan is "Using biological informatics to reveal gene silencing
domains in Arabidopsis thaliana." Eukaryotic chromosomes are organized into
heterochromatin, which stains intensely in histological preparations and
associates with low levels of gene expression, and euchromatin, which stains
lightly and contains the majority of active genes. Cryptic, non-staining
heterochromatin is thought to be distributed throughout the genome of
Arabidopsis thaliana, where it may affect expression of nearby genes. By
correlating methylation and gene expression data from genomic microarrays with
computationally- and experimentally-derived parameters, this research is
identifying new heterochromatic domains and investigating their role in
regulating gene expression.

