* 0306372
* Collaborative Research:    Scalable Integration Testing of Object-Oriented Software:     An Empirical Research Program
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Mary Harrold, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2007
* USD 207,146.00

CCR-0306372 and CCR-0306023 Title: Collaborative Research: Scalable Integration
Testing o Object-Oriented Software: An Empirical Research Program PIs: Mary Jean
Harrold, Alessandro Orso, Gregg Rothermel

When object-oriented and component-based software systems are developed, they
must be integration tested. Integration testing methods proposed to date for
such systems, however, suffer from three limitations: they fail to consider
system evolution, they fail to accommodate heterogeneous engineering models and
sources of nformation, and they provide little or no empirical investigation or
understanding of the factors influencing the testing effort. This research
addresses these limitations. The initial objective of the work is to design and
conduct families of experiments to compare the cost-benefits of existing
techniques for integration testing applied to evolving object-oriented and
component-based software, and evaluate the potential tradeoffs among those
techniques. The results of these studies will guide the development of
evolution-aware integration testing techniques, capable of accommodating
heterogenous sources of testing information, and responding to the wide range of
engineering models associated with object oriented and component-based software.
By making experimental data, infrastructure, and new experimental methodologies
available to the research community, the proposed work will enable scientific
progress on the issues investigated to accelerate. By providing methodologies
for testing this important class of software systems, the work will reduce the
risks these systems present to society.