* 0307123
* Collaborative Research:  Timescales of Magmatic Differentiation and Crustal Assimilation Beneath Iceland:   Combined U-Series and Oxygen Isotope Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Kenneth Sims, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2005
* USD 34,814.00

EAR-0307123&lt;br/&gt;Sims&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will measure
226Ra-230Th disequilibria and oxygen isotope compositions in whole-rock samples,
groundmass separates and plagioclase separates from recent lavas of Krafla
volcano in Iceland. This approach will be applied both on the relatively broad
scale of variations in whole-rock (226Ra)/(230Th) and d18O between different
eruptions, and also in detail by separating and analyzing more than one size
fraction of plagioclase separates from the same lava. Because the fractionation
of oxygen isotopes between coexisting plagioclase and silicate liquid is
relatively well-known, d18O measured in crystals can be related directly to
variations in d18O of the liquids from which they crystallized. Thus, d18O of
early-formed crystals can preserve a record of the compositions of liquids
before magma mixing or crustal assimilation occurred. The diversity of oxygen-
isotope composition of plagioclase in Krafla lavas, both between different
eruptions and within a single lava, will provide information on the relative
influence of mantle-derived and crustally-derived material and the process of
producing intermediate lavas. By dating the same crystal populations, the timing
of mixing/assimilation can be established, providing unprecedented information
about the rates of these magmatic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The results of this project will enhance our understanding of the
processes of magmatic differentiation and crustal assimilation by linking
information about the timescales over which such processes occur to mass balance
of crustally-derived and mantle-derived material. These results will have
important implications in terms of the mass and heat balance of crustal
reservoir systems, and will be compared to the extensive body of work in Iceland
on geophysical observations of crustal structure, reservoir volume, and
geothermal activity. These results will provide background and groundwork for
future studies of magma mixing and crustal assimilation in other areas of
Iceland and in other tectonic settings. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
will serve to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in the
geosciences by supporting the early career development of a female PI.
Furthermore, we anticipate that a graduate student will be extensively involved
in this project as part or all of his or her thesis project, and that an
undergraduate will be involved in the technical aspects of this project; funding
for this project would therefore support the education and training of the next
generation of scientists. Finally, an explicit goal of this collaboration is
that the PI Cooper will travel to WHOI with the graduate student in order to
gain experience in U-series analyses specifically by PIMMS. She will transfer
this expertise to the new analytical facilities at UW, and these techniques will
subsequently be applied to a variety of solid earth and oceanographic problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;