* 0307040
* Femtosecond Laser Assisted MBE
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Steven Yalisove, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 335,084.00

This project addresses mechanisms that enhance thin film growth kinetics
resulting from exposure to high intensity, ultrafast laser pulses (120 fs)
during growth. Several methods will be utilized to assess atomistic processes
and mechanisms. These include the use of marker layers to directly measure
structural details and their spatial variations (via transmission electron
microscopy-TEM), in-situ surface methods (LEED/RHEED/AES), as well as a variety
of other chemical and structural probes (x-ray diffraction, XEDS, EELS, AFM). An
additional technique, a NanoThermometer, will be explored to characterize
thermal effects as a function of distance from the surface of the material being
irradiated. The NanoThermometer concept is a grown-in layer of a different
material that diffuses in a well-characterized manner. By measuring the
diffusion length of such a layer, it is anticipated that an "effective
temperature" for mass transport can be inferred. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses basic materials research issues in a topical area of materials
science with technological relevance, and places emphasis on the integration of
research and education. The research program provides excellent opportunities
for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific equipment.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the synthesis,
processing, and characterization of electronic materials. This project also
provides a synergistic vehicle for interaction with minority students during the
summer through the complementary NASA/Sharp program at Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;