* 0307322
* Geometric and Size Control of Mechanical Properties in Surfactant Templated Silicas and Periodic Nanoporous Oxides
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Vijay Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

GEOMETRIC & CONTROL OF MECHANICAL PROPERTIES IN SURFACTANT TEMPLATED SILICAS &
OTHER PERIODIC POROUS OXIDES Sarah H. Tolbert and Vijay Gupta, UCLA

This study involves a number of experiments aimed at understanding and
exploiting the unique elastic properties of periodic nanostructured
silica/surfactant composite and porous inorganic solids. Advances in material
synthesis and self-assembly now allow for the production of periodic, highly
regular inorganic/organic composite materials through solution-phase self-
organization. Similarly ordered porous inorganic oxides can be generated by
selectively removing the organic fraction of the composite. By varying the
nature of the organic template, the pore size can be tuned from approximately 2
nm to over 20 nm and the overall periodicity can be varied. Recent experiments
by the PI suggest that the mechanical properties of these periodic materials may
be quiet different from disordered inorganic/organic composites or disordered
porous materials. Ordered materials appear to be both stiffer than disordered
composites and more elastic, showing very high failure strain. Our goal is thus
to explore the elastic properties of these periodic composite and porous
materials to understand how nanoscale architecture influences mechanical
properties. We are working on this goal in two different ways. In the first set
of experiments, we are compressing composites under hydrostatic conditions using
diamond anvil cell techniques with a goal of understanding how local deformation
combine with nanoscale distortions to control bulk moduli. In the second set of
experiments, we are examining the mechanical properties of thin films under
tension, aiming both to measure macroscopic elastic moduli and to understand the
high failure strain observed in preliminary experiments. In the first set of
experiments, we use hydrostatic, conditions to compress composite materials
while interrogating them using spectroscopic of scattering techniques in order
to understand the basic for the high modulus and excellent reversibility of
distortions observed in periodic silica/surfactant composites. We do this by
combining low-angle X-ray scattering, Raman scattering, and Brillouin scattering
under pressure to probe distortions on both the atomic and nanometer length
scales. A range of samples with varying periodicity, wall and pore structures,
and dimensionality are being examined. Our goal is to systematically vary
surfaces area, surface structure, length scale, and connectivity to examine the
effect of these variables on both local and longer length-scale, and
deformations of the periodic structure. The results will allow us to develop a
detailed understanding of how nanoscale architecture and atomic scale bonding
combine to control mechanical properties. In the second set of experiments, we
are examining tensile properties of continuous periodic templated thin films to
examine how anisotropic nanoscale architectures can produce anisotropic
mechanical properties. Tensile moduli and strain-to-break values are measured;
preliminary results on periodic silica/polymer composites indicate remarkable
strain-to-break values 50x greater than those observed for bulk silica. We are
exploring a range of samples with variations in nanoscale architecture like
those described above, particularly exploiting bulk alignment of the composite
film to measure anisotropic elastic moduli. Data is being modeled using fracture
and applied mechanics concepts to understand the role of geometry in controlling
cracking and strain-to-break. The broader impacts of this work are multifold.
Periodic composite or porous materials have the potential to dramatically
improve applications where low thermal conductivity, low dielectric constant, or
simply low density need to be combined with high stiffness and high strain. By
developing the framework for understanding the role of architecture in
controlling elastic properties, we lay the foundation for a broad range of
future advances. More immediately, the experiments proposed here are a true
collaboration between chemists and engineers and as such, they provide excellent
training for graduate students in the area of in interdisciplinary science and
technology.