* 0307053
* Travel Support: International Brittle Matrix Composites (BMC) 7 Symposium; October 13-15, 2003; Warsaw, Poland
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Victor Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 03/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

Re: Proposal Number 0307053&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title
&lt;br/&gt;Travel Support for US Researchers for BMC7
Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project aims at providing
financial assistance for 12 leading&lt;br/&gt;American specialists in the
mechanics and technology of brittle matrix&lt;br/&gt;composites for their
participation at the next International BMC 7 Symposium in Poland, October
13-15, 2003.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In BMC 1-3 Symposia the participation of
specialists from USA was&lt;br/&gt;insufficient and did not correspond to the
involvement and interest of&lt;br/&gt;American scientists in that field of
research and technology. In BMC 4, 5,and 6, partly thanks to support from NSF,
more than ten professors and scientist from USA presented their papers and took
part in discussions and social events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The participation
of a representative group of American specialists will considerably enhance the
role of the Symposium BMC 7, and stimulate international cooperation. It will
also benefit the American research community in keeping abreast of European
research and development in ceramic and cementitious composites, and their
manufacturing and industrial applications. We expect to hear some research
reports coming from the European Community (EC) joint projects such as those
supported under the BRITE and EUREKA programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; New
knowledge derived from the participation of specialist from the US at BMC-7 will
be integrated into graduate level courses taught by these participants at their
respective institutions. In particular, the PI teaches a course of Fracture and
Micromechanics of Fibrous Composites (at UM) which includes the latest
development in this field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;