* 0307090
* U.S.-Venezuela Planning Visit:  Natal Dispersal and New Group Formation In Capybaras: Combining Behavioral and Genetic Information
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Zuleyma Tang-Martinez, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/2004
* USD 1,655.00

0307090&lt;br/&gt;Tang-Martinez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-Venezuela Planning
Visit grant will allow Ms. Elizabeth Congdon, a doctoral student working under
the supervision of Professor Zuleyma Tang Martinez of the University of
Missouri, St. Louis, to travel to Venezuela to help plan and participate in a
field study with Professor Emilio Herrera of the Universidad Simon Bolivar in
Caracas, Venezuela. The research will focus on the behavioral ecology and
dispersal of the world's largest rodent, the capybara (Hydrochaeris
hydrochaeris), and will be of mutual benefit to the research programs at both
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, Ms. Congdon will begin a
detailed study of natal dispersal during the dry season of 2003, collecting pre-
dispersal behavioral data and monitoring animal movements over time using radio
telemetry technology. Professor Herrera will use molecular genetic analyses to
examine patterns of paternity in social groups and relatedness among and between
groups. These data will then be used together to&lt;br/&gt;evaluate the
dispersal strategy of this species and the genetic ramifications of that
strategy. Results from this planning visit will be used in Ms. Congdon's thesis
dissertation work and will help to develop the collaboration between US and
&lt;br/&gt;Venezuelan investigators. By examining the connection between genetic
structure and dispersal, this research will contribute to the understanding of
the social dynamics of this species and the evolution of sociality in
general.&lt;br/&gt;