* 0307851
* Explorations of the Milky Way's ``New'' Halo
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* William Kunkel, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

AST 0307851&lt;br/&gt;Majewski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold dark matter (CDM)
models for the growth of structure in the Universe predict the growth of large
structures from the accumulation of smaller ones and the persistence of long-
lived, "sub-halo" substructure within large halos. However, the number of
observed satellites of the Milky Way is orders of magnitude less than predicted
by most CDM models, and, if these sub-halos are dark, their presence should heat
dynamically cold spiral disks, dwarf satellites and star clusters. Thus,
considerable problems remain in refining the CDM paradigm to explain the
evolution of galaxies like the Milky Way. If the Milky Way halo formed from the
merger of luminous sub-halos, we expect to see substructure in the phase space
distribution of halo stars, clusters and satellites. Due to Galactic tidal
effects, this substructure would be in the form of streams of stars from the
disrupted parent star systems, like those recently discovered coming from the
Sagittarius (Sgr) dwarf spheroidal and the star cluster Palomar 5. Tantalizing
evidence that the distribution of halo stars is very lumpy has been accumulating
over the past decade. If the merged CDM sub-halos were dark, the coherence of
star streams like Sgr and Pal 5 place strong constraints on the sub-halo mass
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Steven Majewski and colleagues at the
University of Virginia will acquire a more complete understanding of this "new"
Milky Way halo by substantially expanding observational constraints on accreted
substructure which set essential boundary conditions on current halo formation
models. They will determine the actual filling factor of tidal debris and the
likely mass spectrum of accreted entities. These measurements, in turn, permit
inference of the Galactic mass distribution and the accretion history of the
Galaxy. The program naturally expands upon previous work and approaches these
questions from two directions: (1) The Galactic satellite system - objects that
are most likely to be the prototypes of previously accreted entities, among
which are current contributors to the accreted halo. First, this research team
will undertake a comprehensive study of the Sgr dwarf spheroidal galaxy - the
paradigm for Milky Way accretion - exploiting the clear, all-sky view of the Sgr
core and tidal tails provided by the Two Micron All-Sky Survey. Second, they
will continue the analysis of extended density profiles found around a number of
Galactic dwarf spheroidal satellites, and ascertain whether these King profile
"break populations" represent bound stellar halos or unbound tidal debris.
Finally, they will expand the search for tidal disruption of Galactic satellites
to the halo globular cluster system with a search for Pal 5 analogues. (2) The
group will undertake a systematic search for substructure within the halo field
star population using three large catalogues of K giant stars: the almost
completed Grid Giant Star Survey, the companion Deep Giant Star Survey (DGSS),
and a 225 square deg survey of K giants at the North Galactic Pole. In a pilot
version of the DGSS, the team have undertaken observations in fields around the
Magellanic Cloud periphery and uncovered substantial evidence for an outer halo
that is highly networked by cold tidal streams and with no apparent contribution
by a hot, pressure-supported component of halo stars. It is important to
determine whether this finding is specific to regions near the Magellanic
Clouds, or whether it represents the general character of the
halo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A majority of the funds in this award are for direct
support of undergraduate and graduate students who will participate
substantially in the research efforts. Undergraduate involvement will include
individual Senior Thesis research projects and assistance with the gathering of
data as part of a semi-dedicated spectroscopic program at the local observatory.
Dr. Majewski will continue his active public lecture commitment, and continue to
work with the University of Virginia Digital Media Lab to produce animations and
other graphics that enhance the explanation of Galactic structure science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;