* 0307480
* Understanding subdwarf B stars through asteroseismology
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* George Wolf, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 07/31/2008
* USD 301,314.00

AST 0307480&lt;br/&gt;PI Reed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After decades of progress in
both stellar evolution theory and observational stellar astronomy, the late
stages of evolution of most of the stars in our Galaxy - stages in which they
shed their outer envelopes and expose their compact cores - conceal many still-
unanswered questions. Recently, we have begun to exploit a powerful tool,
astroseismology, for probing the interiors of stars and modeling their structure
from oscillations and pulsations of the stars. Subdwarf B (sdB) stars are
evolved stars located on the so-called horizontal branch of the Hertzsrung-
Russell diagram, and they are thought to be the precursors of low mass white
dwarf stars. Their progenitors are stars like our Sun. To date, the
observational emphasis has been on discovering new pulsating sdB stars. With
over 30 members discovered, the field is now mature enough to turn the success
we have enjoyed applying astroseismology of white dwarfs to sdB stars. To do so
requires that sufficient photometric data be obtained to resolve the often
complex pulsation structure of individual objects. As horizontal branch stars,
sdB stars are burning helium in their cores, With their limited hydrogen
envelopes, these stars have no shell hydrogen burning simplifying their
structure, and making them easier to model. Thus far only a few pulsating sdB
stars have resolved pulsation spectra, some of which have revealed very
interesting results. The goal of this research is to fully apply the tools of
astroseismology to sdB stars by resolving the pulsation spectra of several
additional members. This requires substantial telescope time to be split between
national facilities, Baker Observatory (operated by our home institution), and
multi-site observational campaigns with international collaborators. Pulsating
stars may also be used to look for planets. Companions to sdB stars can be
detected as periodic variations in the pulsation phases. Such measurements are
readily sensitive to sub-Jupiter mass planets with long periods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Undergraduate students will assist in
obtaining and reducing the data in this research project. By exposing
undergraduate students to research, they are better able to decide if astronomy
is the correct career path for them. Additionally, it allows Southwest Missouri
State's students to competitively apply for graduate programs based on a strong
undergraduate research experience.&lt;br/&gt;