* 0307603
* The Milky Way Galaxy at 21-cm
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* John Dickey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 10/31/2008
* USD 319,983.00

AST 0307603&lt;br/&gt;Dickey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the stars, dust, and
gas in the plane of the Milky Way are concentrated in a narrow band of only a
few hundred square degrees across the southern sky. This area is intensely
studied by astronomers, particularly those working with radio, infrared, and
X-ray radiation that are not obscured by the interstellar medium. This project,
led by Dr. John Dickey at the University of Minnesota, is a spectroscopic survey
of this area, the first and fourth quadrants of the Galaxy, using the 21-cm line
of neutral atomic hydrogen (HI). This project is an extension of the successful
Southern Galactic Plane Survey (SGPS), a collaboration among astronomers in the
United States and Australia led by the University of Minnesota. That survey uses
the two observatories of the Australia Telescope National Facility (Parkes and
the Compact Array), combining the single dish and interferometer data to obtain
high angular resolution while preserving the sensitivity to the
large&lt;br/&gt;scale brightness distribution. This represents an order of
magnitude improvement in resolution over previous surveys of the Southern Milky
Way. Now the goal is to complete the entire area of the inner Galaxy, to join
the SGPS with the Canadian Galactic Plane Survey in the north, to produce a
single, seamless atlas of the entire Milky Way disk. This will be a combination
of data from observatories in several countries, including the U.S. National
Radio Astronomy Observatory's Green Bank Telescope and Very Large Array.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The astrophysics of the atomic phases of the interstellar
medium (ISM) is revealed by these observations. Absorption and emission spectra
together specify the temperature and abundance of the neutral hydrogen all over
the Galaxy, as a function of radius and height above the mid-plane. Interstellar
clouds of atomic hydrogen are abundant in the Galactic disk; the survey data
provide a huge atlas of clouds, sheets, and other ISM features. Because the
atomic medium is so widespread,&lt;br/&gt;it traces the largest structures, such
as supershells and chimneys that reach from the disk up into the halo to vent
hot gas injected by supernovae. The warm and cool atomic phases in the ISM are
critical stages in the cycle of Galactic evolution; this survey shows how matter
moves through these stages from one generation of stars to the next.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides educational opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. It will be the subject for two or more
Ph.D. theses, and several senior honors theses. In the area of public outreach,
the survey project will be the subject of a video documentary, as well as many
public talks. The data from this survey will be distributed freely to all. The
SGPS maps have already been given to more than a dozen astronomers all over the
world to support their own research. The 21-cm line cubes provide the context
for objects seen at other wavelengths; maps from this survey show the gas
density and velocity fields in the area surrounding HII regions, molecular
clouds, supernova remnants, and all kinds of Galactic
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;