* 0307657
* Beyond Shakura-Sunyaev:  First-Principles Physics of Accretion Disks in Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Omer Blaes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2008
* USD 419,082.00

AST-0307657 Blaes The mechanism responsible for the prodigious power output of
quasars and active galactic nuclei is almost certainly the accretion of plasma
onto super-massive black holes, probably in the form of a rotationally supported
accretion disk. The standard model of accretion disks has been based on an ad
hoc phenomenological prescription for turbulent angular momentum transport and
energy dissipation, introduced by Shakura & Sunyaev some thirty years ago.

The current research will create local, radiation-magnetohydrodynamical
simulations of this accretion flow, for the first time with no ad-hoc
assumptions, which should finally lift the long-standing uncertainties in the
standard model. The power and sophistication of modern numerical techniques will
be used to determine whether there is an achievable thermally stable equilibrium
state, how much turbulent stress is present in radiation-pressure-dominated
flows, the average vertical distribution in the flow, and the rates of heat and
energy transport. The work will also consider compressibility, density
inhomogeneities, and the nonlinear development of photon-bubble and
magnetoacoustic-wave instabilities.

Snapshots of the turbulent state at different locations in the flow will be made
available for scientists everywhere, to add other physics or consider additional
effects. Some tests will be possible for the first time because the models will
be based on physics and not phenomenological prescriptions. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in the research. Animations of the
simulation results will be effective as part of the investigators' public talks
about the interesting complexity of black hole astrophysics, which continues to
fascinate.

