* 0307315
* Collaborative Research:    White Dwarfs and the Star Formation History of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Ted von Hippel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 01/31/2007
* USD 300,820.00

AST 0307315&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ted von Hippel&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of
Texas, Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ted von Hippel of the University of Texas
will collaborate with James Liebert of the University of Arizona (AST-0307321)
and a team of colleagues to address fundamental questions of the ages of the
Galactic disk, thick disk, and halo. They plan to place the ages of the Galactic
components on the same relative age scale to within 1 Gyr, and derive an
absolute age of the disk to within 1 to 2 Gyr. Their project will also lead to
improvements in understanding of the evolution and luminosity function of white
dwarfs. New observations at the University of Arizona's and the University of
Texas' observatories, as well as use of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, will yield
more than 2400 new white dwarfs, a sample unbiased by kinematical selection.
Precise astrometry from the USNO telescopes will allow the determination of the
parent populations for a subset of the most important (oldest) white dwarfs. The
result of these observations will be a set of parameters for white dwarfs that
is precise enough to guide the theoretical work and to measure ages for a subset
of the most important white dwarfs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure broad impact
of this research, the team will produce instructional materials at the secondary
school level on stellar evolution and the age of the Galaxy. The materials will
be used at teacher professional development workshops to be held at McDonald
Observatory. The materials will also be disseminated by the partners and on the
web. The workshops are a collaboration between the PI and the education outreach
staff at McDonald Observatory, the National Optical Astronomy Observatory, and
the National Solar Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;