* 0307454
* The Low Mass End of the Mass Function in OB Associations with Small and Medium Astronomical Research Telescopes System (SMARTS)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Frederick Walter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 246,552.00

AST 0307454&lt;br/&gt;PI Walter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups of stars known as OB
associations are the birthplaces of the hot and massive O and B stars. They are
fossil star formation regions, retaining a complete record of all the stars that
formed therein. All the low mass stars that formed in such an OB association are
still present, generally unobscured, and are at their final masses. The stars
have the same times of birth, and the very low mass stars and substellar mass
objects are still sufficiently bright to be easily observable. Since most low
mass stars form in OB associations, these regions provide a representative view
of low mass star formation in our Galaxy. The observational effort investigates
several questions: Are the low mass stars formed in-situ in the Orion OB1b
association, with their development arrested by the massive stars, or are they
ejected from the association by multi-body gravitational interactions as
underdone embryos? What is the distribution of stellar rotation periods, and how
do the stars spin up at ages between two and ten million years, an age interval
currently not well sampled? New observations will provide a uniform set of mass
distribution functions for the stars in a sample of young nearby OB
associations, and so we may ask how universal is the low mass end of the initial
mass function?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project contributes to
both undergraduate and graduate astronomy programs at Stony Brook, as well as to
local outreach efforts. Large amounts of guaranteed observation time through the
Small and Medium Astronomical Research Telescopes System consortium allows
research proposals from qualified undergraduates to obtain data for use in the
undergraduate courses. To that end, two undergraduate data aides will be
employed, and the project will offer research opportunities to others. This
support will also enhance outreach to local secondary schools. About 2 high
school students per year have been supervised over the past decade for science
fair projects. The guaranteed observing time will afford these students a wider
range of options for planning, proposing, reducing, and analyzing data on
projects of their choosing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;