* 0307585
* Membership, Rotation, Activity, and Lithium Abundances in a Selection of Nearby Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Burton Jones, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,395.00

AST 0307585 Jones, Burton F.

This project will expand our knowledge of how stars like the Sun evolve by
obtaining membership information for stars in nearby star clusters. Observations
of star clusters have long provided the best link to theories of stellar
structure and evolution. Stellar models of a given mass, composition, and age
predict luminosity and effective temperature (color). Under the reasonable
assumption that all stars in a cluster are the same age and chemical
composition, cluster color versus magnitude diagrams provide templates against
which the luminosity and effective temperature of stellar models can be
compared. Lick Observatory has a collection of first epoch glass plate negatives
of open star clusters taken around 1970 with the 36 inch refractor. Over the
last three years second epoch plates of 11 nearby clusters were taken. The
second epoch photography of these clusters, and 4 more clusters, is being
completed. Suitable plate measurements are then used to determine proper motions
for stars in the clusters and thence membership probability estimates for
individual stars. Spectroscopic observations will be obtained of member stars in
several of the clusters for the determination of abundances, stellar activity,
and rotation. This database will be used by the PI and others toward a better
understanding of the evolution of stellar activity, lithium abundance, and
rotation in solar type stars different ages and metallicities.

Broader Impacts. This research will produce a database with importance for
studies of the mass and luminosity functions and the dynamical evolution of open
star clusters, and will also be of use to spectroscopic observers who want to
observe cluster members at high dispersion. This database will be made freely
available. This grant supports collaboration with astronomers in Germany and at
the Space Telescope Science Institute.