* 0307273
* Long Term Variations in the Rotation of Neutron Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Ira Wasserman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 204,935.00

AST 0307273 PI Wasserman

Two main projects will be studied that are important for understanding the long
term behavior of the rotation of neutron stars. One project will focus on the
precession of neutron stars, with a particular emphasis on the best observed
candidate for a precessing pulsar, PSR 1828-11, and focusing on what can be
learned about the interior properties of neutron stars, for example coupling
between the fluid interior and crustal structures. The idea that a rotating star
with a magnetic field tilted with respect to the rotation access must precess
(an idea proposed long ago) will be applied to pulsars. For neutron stars, the
PI has proposed that observable precession is a natural consequence of one form
of superconductivity, or large internal toroidal fields, or both, which would
imply much larger core magnetic stresses than would follow from the dipole field
strength strengths that are inferred from the rate of pulsar spindown.
Implications for pulsar observations and gravitational radiation detection will
be explored. The other project will focus on the nonlinear development of the
r-mode fluid oscillation instability of fast rotating neutron stars using a
formalism that includes interactions among inertial modes of the star.
Particular emphasis will be placed on simulating the nonlinear dynamics of many
interacting inertial modes (wobbles). Although the results will pertain
specifically to neutron stars, the techniques ought to be applicable to a broad
range of problems in which numerous normal modes can interact resonantly to
truncate an instability.

Broader impacts. This research will include: the training of a pair of Cornell
Ph. D. students, one of whom is an outstanding young woman; the anticipated
inclusion of an undergraduate in assessing the observational implications of
some of the work; public lectures to be given by the PI under the auspices of
the Harlow Shapley program of the American Astronomical Society;
multidisciplinary collaboration with colleagues in pulsar astronomy and
gravitation physics both at Cornell and elsewhere; broad dissemination of the
results, where feasible, at conferences and workshops in related fields
(condensed matter physics, gravitational physics, nonlinear dynamics).



