* 0307281
* Study of the Pulsations of the Semiregular Variable Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* J. Robert Buchler, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 260,863.00

AST 0307281 Buchler, J. Robert

Irregularly pulsating stars stretch from the so-called W Vir type stars through
the RV Tau and Semi-regular stars all the way into the long period Mira variable
star region. In this project, a thorough, novel analysis of observational
lightcurve data and a systematic numerical modeling survey of the pulsational
properties of these stars is underway. These bright variable stars are playing
an increasingly important role in the observational study of star clusters and
dwarf galaxies where standard candles such as classical Cepheid variables may be
rare. The goal is to extract unique, quantitative information from the irregular
lightcurves. A test is also planned of the hypothesis that a single resonant
mechanism is at the heart of the irregular pulsations of these stars. Further,
the study will shed new light on the uncertain evolutionary status of these
stars. New observational data, novel methods of analysis adapted from nonlinear
dynamics, and progress in numerical convective hydrocodes lend this study a
timely status.

The project has a broader impact, because the techniques being developed are
very useful in other research areas as well, ranging from astronomy to nonlinear
dynamics to medicine. Thus two of the codes are being made user-friendly and
publicly accessible: TIFRAN, the time-frequency analysis, that has medical
applications as a diagnostic tool for speech disorders, otolaryngology and
neurology among other things, and FLOWRECON, the flow reconstruction from a
time-series with wide applications in nonlinear dynamics research. A popular
website on radially and nonradially pulsating stars with audio and video is
being constructed with the help of two undergraduate students. The teaching of
the large undergraduate noncalculus physics class provides the investigator with
the opportunity to bring astrophysics, and this research in particular, to the
classroom.

