* 0307613
* RUI:     Observational Studies of Supernova Remnants and the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Frank Winkler, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 06/30/2009
* USD 291,081.00

AST 0307613 Winkler

Supernovae are the cataclysmic events in which massive stars end their lives. A
typical supernova explosion releases in a few seconds an energy of about 1044
Joules, comparable to what the Sun will expend throughout the entire course of
its lifetime. Such a prodigious release of energy has profound effects on the
dynamics of galaxies in which supernovae occur; for example, the shock waves
from supernovae can trigger episodes of star formation when they encounter dense
interstellar clouds. Supernovae are responsible for the production and
distribution of most of the heavy elements in the universe. Virtually all the
elements from helium to iron on the periodic table were forged by
nucleosynthesis in the cores of massive stars and distributed around the cosmos
through supernova explosions. The overall goal of this project, led by Dr. Frank
Winkler at Middlebury College, is to achieve a better understanding of how
supernovae explode, how their prodigious energy release affects their host
galaxies, and how they contribute to the chemical evolution of the Universe. For
young supernova remnants (SNRs) where uncontaminated ejecta from the supernova
can be identified, spectroscopy will lead to chemical abundances of these
fragments of the stellar core and provide information about the nucleosynthesis
processes that produced them. Current models suggest that supernova explosions
must be asymmetric; proposed velocity measurements of surviving knots of ejecta
and of recoiling neutron stars can test these theories. In the far more numerous
remnants that are older and larger, expanding shocks can probe the density,
structure, and abundances of the interstellar medium. Images of dozens of
remnants as seen in emission lines of hydrogen, oxygen, and sulfur will be
compiled into an Emission-Line Atlas of SNRs. Widely available on-line as well
as in printed form, the optical images will dramatize the dynamic processes that
shape the cosmos for the general public and will serve as a resource for
astronomers to combine with images at X-ray, radio, and other wavelengths. The
Magellanic Cloud Emission-Line Survey (MCELS) has imaged both the Large and
Small Magellanic Clouds, nearest neighbor galaxies to our own, from the 0.6-m
Schmidt telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO). The deep
emission-line images it provides will be analyzed to study the interstellar
medium on all scales-from tiny planetary nebulae, to supernova remnants, to
giant supershells carved by multiple supernova blasts-unimpeded by the dust that
blocks our view in the Milky Way. Statistical studies of these entire galaxies,
as well as detailed probes of individual objects within them, will be pursued in
collaboration with astronomers at CTIO and elsewhere.

The integral role that undergraduate students will play in all phases of this
research is the most important broader impact of this project. As early as their
first or second year, an able student will be able to complete the image
analysis for an individual object. More complex projects will require the
development of sophisticated analytical tools and manipulation of large data
sets-enough to challenge the most ambitious senior honors candidate. For those
students who follow careers in astronomy or physics, as well as for those whose
career paths take other directions, the experience of grappling independently
with unanswered, often subtle, questions during their undergraduate years will
leave them better equipped to face future challenges. Research students will
themselves contribute to the broader impact by assisting in the popular program
of public nights at the Middlebury College Observatory. An even broader impact
for the general public will be the striking images, available over the web and
published in popular literature, from the Emission-Line Atlas and the MCELS.
This award is made under the auspices of the Research at Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) program at NSF. ***