* 0307257
* Upgrading the ARL-SEMQ Electron Microprobe at North Carolina State University
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Ronald Fodor, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2005
* USD 49,000.00

EAR-0307257&lt;br/&gt;Fodor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies
NSF funds to upgrading the ARL-SEMQ six spectrometer electron microprobe in the
Department of Marine, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at North Carolina State
University. The microprobe upgrade will modernize and broaden the capabilities
of students and faculty for research and teaching endeavors that use digital
imaging and quantitative analyses in mineralogy, in the petrology of igneous,
metamorphic and sedimentary rocks, terrestrial sediment and invertebrate
paleontology. These include investigations of basaltic lavas and xenoliths
within, mantle xenoliths, North Carolina granitoid rocks and low-to-high grade
contact and regional metamorphic rocks, terrestrial sediment and marine
phosphate studies and trace-element "mapping" in dinosaur bones. The Upgrade
will bring the microprobe up to state-of-the-art analytical capability by adding
(i) the capacity to do backscattered electron and x-ray imaging of geologic
material with advanced software for imaging functions, by (ii) applying a
Windows-based software for the microprobe operation, and (iii) by implementing a
Pentium-processor computer to accommodate all imaging and operational softwares.
The upgraded NCSU microprobe lab will enable students and faculty to continue
publishing research in major journals and to teach and train modern analytical
instrument techniques to undergraduate and graduate students. Broader impacts of
this project include that students and faculty from neighboring universities
will have access to the upgraded instrument, some of which are minority-based
schools (NC Central University; Robeson Community College) and women's colleges
(Meredith; Peace). NCSU supports this instrument upgrading by matching NSF
funding with $18,500, or about 30% of the total costs for all purchases,
installation and user training.&lt;br/&gt;