* 0307082
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  Thermodynamic Properties of Thin Films of Magnets and Liquid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2009
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2009
* USD 35,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration project examines the thermodynamic
properties of thin films of magnetic compounds and liquid helium. The project
brings together groups led by D. Landau, Center for Simulational Physics at the
U. of Georgia in the US, and J.A. Plascak, at the Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais in Belo Horizonte, Brazil. The main issues addressed for the magnetic
meso-structures are: i) how the lateral size of high quality magnetic nanofilm
structures controls its magnetic properties; ii) the influence of atomic steps,
islands, etc., on the magnetic behavior of such films; iii) the evolution of the
thermodynamic behavior as a function of the film thickness. The studies of
liquid helium focus on the use of classical "magnetic" models that are believed
to be in the same universality class as helium. The computer simulations are
done by using Monte Carlo methods for continuous spin systems together with re-
weighting procedures and also spin dynamics for the intrinsic time evolution for
the correlations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulations are of increasing
importance due to their ability to determine the properties of many models in
statistical physics that are not amenable to exact solution. The collaboration
furthers the training in computer simulations and the international exposure of
junior project participants. This award is supported by the Division of
Materials Research, the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;