* 0307208
* FIBR: Planning  the Development of a Model Host System to Study Symbioses between Plants and Nitrogen-Fixing Cyanobacteria
* BIO,EF
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* John Meeks, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2005
* USD 49,910.00

The N2-fixing cyanobacterium Nostoc enters into symbioses with a wider variety
of plants than any other bacterium. Symbiotic strains of Nostoc appear to be
little specialized for their role; rather, they have been repeatedly
domesticated by certain plants that have developed the ability to control
cyanobacterial behavior and biochemistry. The special adaptations in plant
partners are not investigated and understood owing to the absence of tools to
support the molecular dissection of any host plant. An international group of
researchers studying plant-cyanobacterial symbioses has resolved to develop a
model plant partner system, but it is not clear at present which plant amongst
the best-studied symbioses would be the most suitable as a model system for
detailed investigations. This question will be answered by collaborative
exploratory experiments designed to assess the ease with which each plant can be
genetically manipulated and by a series of videoconference discussions among the
researchers. The candidate plants are: the liverwart Blasia, the hornwart
Anthoceros, the cycad (gymnosperm) Zamia, and the angiosperm Gunnera. Once a
plant species is identified, a research plan for a preliminary proposal will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Less than 3% of world agricultural production
comes from crops capable of associations with N2-fixing bacteria. Most other
crops, most notably the grains, rely on nitrogenous fertilizer for highest
yields, a practice both costly and damaging to the environment. Understanding
the basis of plant-cyanobacterial symbioses may present the best chance to
extend the benefits of biological nitrogen-fixation to crop plants outside the
legumes. The experiments will be conducted through the exchange of students and
material between U.S. and European laboratories of the consortium.&lt;br/&gt;