* 0307687
* Probing mass loss mechanisms in AGB and post-AGB stars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* John Bieging, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 159,211.00

AST 0307687&lt;br/&gt;Bieging, John H.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will continue a research program on mass loss processes in intermediate mass
stars in the late stages of their evolution, with emphasis on the so-called
asymptotic giant branch stars, and the subsequent stages where expansion leads
to formation of planetary nebulae. The PI will endeavor to understand the
physical processes in these evolved stars by which pulsation, shocks, non-
equilibrium chemistry, and dust formation drive the stellar mass loss and
determine the composition of the ejected gas and dust. The PI will use optical
telescopes with a sensitive, wide-band spectropolarimeter to measure the optical
polarization as a function of wavelength for a selection of evolved stars.
Polarized light reflected off dust grains near such stars is a diagnostic of
newly-formed dust very close to the star. Comparison of models and data should
give uniquely powerful constraints on the location and properties of dust formed
in the circumstellar environment of these stars. Furthermore the PI will obtain
mm and submm observations of key molecular emission lines to constrain the
spatial distribution of molecules in the circumstellar envelopes of the evolved
stars. One key goal of this study will be to test whether the molecular
abundances and excitation conditions imply that pulsation-driven shocks in the
stellar atmosphere determine the chemical composition of the ejected matter.
Additional ~1 arcsec resolution images of a small sample of bright nearby giant
stars in light of selected molecular emission lines that are tracers for gas
temperature and density will give information on the physical conditions in the
small-scale structures detected previously by the PI in their circumstellar
envelopes &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The results are disseminated not
only in the scientific literature, but also to the wider community via public
lectures and displays, routinely provided by the Steward Observatory to our
community, with an emphasis on making the science accessible to the interested
public, and on stimulating further learning. This research has an important
education function by engaging both undergraduate and graduate students, and by
allowing and encouraging them to attend scientific meetings to present the
results of the work in which they participated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;