* 0307549
* Origin of Binary Near-Earth Asteroids
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Derek Richardson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2007
* USD 213,642.00

AST 0307549&lt;br/&gt;Richardson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Derek Richardson,
University of Maryland, will carry out research aimed at understanding the
origin of binary near-Earth asteroids (NEAs). Current estimates from light curve
analysis and radar imaging suggest that at least 15% of NEAs (asteroids that
approach Earth within 0.017 AU) may be binaries, i.e., dynamical systems that
consist of two asteroids orbiting a common center of mass. Moreover, roughly 50%
of fast-spinning NEAs (having rotation periods between 2 and 4 hours) with
diameters larger than 0.2 km appear to be binaries. The NEA binaries appear
qualitatively different from other observed asteroid binary populations, namely
the main belt, Trojan, and Kuiper belt binaries. In particular, the NEA binaries
tend to have small separations and intermediate size ratios between components.
These characteristics, and the frequency of doublet crater formation
on&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial planets, may be explained if tidal disruption plays an
important role in the creation of binary NEAs. However, for tidal disruption to
be effective, the progenitor must be fragile (a gravitational aggregate or
rubble pile) and therefore capable of being pulled apart by tides. Observational
evidence has been mounting that such bodies exist: comet breakups, crater
chains, doublet craters, truncated spins, low bulk densities, giant craters,
surface grooves, and unusual shapes are all indications of weak, possibly rubble
structure among comets and asteroids. Yet previous studies of tidal disruption
of asteroids by terrestrial planets were either very simplified models or were
concerned primarily with distinguishing between severe and mild disruption
without specifically concentrating on binary formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Richardson will perform high-resolution numerical
simulations of the tidal disruption of NEAs by the Earth to determine the
frequency of binary formation and the typical characteristics of the resulting
binary systems. The parameter space to be sampled includes progenitor size,
shape, spin, encounter speed, and close-approach distance. The first year of the
effort will include some software development since, although the main
simulation software is already written and stable, auxiliary codes specific to
the proposed project are needed for automation and analysis. In the second and
third years the main exploration of parameter space will take place. The results
of this study will be compared to existing and future observations of binary
NEAs to establish whether tidal disruption can explain some or all of the
existing population. Some simulations will be carried out for a longer interval
to compare the evolution with analytical estimates, in particular to derive the
tidal dissipation parameter Q for a rubble pile, a quantity that could be used
to estimate the long-term evolution of a binary system without requiring
explicit integration. The simulations will also be examined for slow or tumbling
rotators in an effort to understand how such anomalous rotation states
originate. Results from this research will give insight into the internal
structure of NEAs and may have implications for hazard mitigation strategies.
Overall, a better understanding of NEAs in particular will lead to a better
understanding of asteroids in general, and thereby to a clearer picture of our
origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of this work entails the development of a
web-based interface for organizing and mining the&lt;br/&gt;large data sets that
will be produced. An undergraduate student with experience in web design will
assist in this development. In fact, as many as three undergraduate students and
two graduate students will be involved directly in this project. Once the
project is completed, the web interface will be available to the public for
accessing our data freely.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;