* 0307782
* Electron Pairing and Spin Dynamics in Metal Clusters at Low Temperatures in a Molecular Beam
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Walter De Heer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Cluster physics approaches matter from the standpoint that material properties
evolve systematically when clusters are increased in size one atom at a time
until the bulk limit is reached. This approach has yielded important new
insights into the physical properties of simple metal cluster systems. This
individual investigator award supports a project addressing two fundamental
problems: the physics of adiabatic spin-relaxation processes in ferromagnetic
cluster systems and pairing correlations in paramagnetic cluster systems. (1)
Adiabatic spin-relaxation processes, probed using molecular beam deflection
methods, have been observed in all ferromagnetic cluster systems studied yet
there the mechanism that mediates this process is unknown. (2) Cluster beam
deflections at low temperatures reveal large even-odd oscillations in the
electric dipole polarizabilities of niobium clusters, which are accompanied by
exceptionally large permanent electric dipole moments. This indicates a
symmetry-broken ground low temperature phase with strong electron-paring
correlations, suggesting nascent superconductivity. Cluster beam investigations
of these effects will have far-reaching consequences in the understanding of
electronic correlations and spin dynamics in small systems. Graduate students
involved in the project receive training in fundamental experimental techniques
with cutting edge technology. This training will prepare them for a range of
careers in academe, industry or government. The project is jointly supported by
the Divisions of Materials Research (Condensed Matter Physics) and Physics
(Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics).

Cluster physics approaches matter from the standpoint that material properties
evolve systematically when clusters of atoms are increased in size one atom at a
time until the bulk limit is reached. It is important to explore at what size a
piece of material becomes small enough that it looses its "normal," bulk
behavior. In addition by studying clusters which are small enough not have
behave like the bulk material, one may discover novel interesting phenomena. The
state of the art molecular beam methods developed for this project are ideally
suited to probe these extremely small clusters: clusters of virtually any metal
can be produced at temperatures from 10 K to 300 K in a new ultra-low
temperature pulsed-laser cluster-source. This project will investigate the
magnetic and electric properties of very small clusters of metal atoms. At low
temperatures, the electric charge spontaneously separates in niobium, vanadium
and tantalum clusters. This may suggest nascent superconductivity.
Investigations of these effects are proposed and they will have far-reaching
implications in the understanding superconductivity and related electronic
effects in these important materials. Graduate students involved in the project
receive training in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting edge
technology. This training will prepare them for a range of careers in academe,
industry or government. The project is jointly supported by the Divisions of
Materials Research (Condensed Matter Physics) and Physics (Atomic, Molecular,
and Optical Physics).