* 0307800
* RUI: Saturn's Rings
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Richard French, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 09/30/2007
* USD 196,448.00

AST 0307800&lt;br/&gt;French&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to develop a deeper understanding of the dynamics and structure of Saturn's
rings, through a comprehensive investigation of dramatic variations in their
apparent brightness with ring longitude. This azimuthal brightness asymmetry is
generally ascribed to gravitational wakes -- clumps of ring particles attempting
to accrete under their mutual gravitation, but frustrated in the attempt by
Saturn.s strong tidal influence. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Richard French, at
Wellesley College, will compare measurements of the asymmetry from a rich set of
hundreds of Hubble Space Telescope images and multiple radar images of the rings
from Arecibo Observatory, with the predictions of dynamical models of
gravitational wakes. The N-body simulations of the detailed structure of the
rings, and the resulting gravitational wakes, show a very strong dependence on
the detailed properties of the rings, such as the distribution of particle
sizes, the surface mass density, and the elasticity of interparticle collisions.
The strength of the resulting asymmetry also varies greatly across the rings,
for reasons that are not yet completely understood. This work will quantify the
newly-discovered azimuthal &lt;br/&gt;asymmetry in the inner B ring, for
example. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will be of general interest to
planetary scientists because it combines two complementary, superb quality data
sets (a decade of HST observations and several years of Arecibo radar results)
with a realistic physical description of the rings. The research will address
fundamental characteristics of ring dynamics, such as gravitational
instabilities, as well as properties of the ring particles themselves. The
observations and analysis will provide a firm foundation for Cassini mission
investigation of the rings. The HST and Arecibo data will not be supplanted by
Cassini observations, because they have been taken under different viewing
geometries and they sample very different parts of the scattering phase function
of the particles. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigator will relate the
research to the educational life of Wellesley College, an undergraduate women's
college with a history of success in educating women in science. This will be
accomplished by supervising honors thesis students and undergraduate summer
students, and by incorporating detailed examples of their research in both
introductory and advanced courses. Dr. French will continue a successful
outreach program by leading several-day seminars to about 25 K-12 teachers each
year on the relationship between modern planetary science and terrestrial
concerns such as global climate change and the consequences of giant impacts,
and he will share the ongoing research under this project with teachers and the
general public at a non-technical level. This award is made under the Research
at Undergraduate Institutions program at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;