* 0307419
* Collaborative Research: Creating a Computational Theory for Conceptual Design
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Robert Stone, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 07/31/2007
* USD 386,717.00

This project combines new design representations and computational approaches to
enable computational conceptual design. The design representations and
computational methods leverage the constant increases in computational power and
information retrieval reasoning algorithms. Descriptive methods, stored
knowledge, and algorithmic reasoning provide the potential for a computational
theory of conceptual design that could greatly benefit the designer during
difficult stages of concept generation. The underlying theme is the combination
and formalization of function-based synthesis, constraint management and state
space search. The primary objective of the work is to create a computational
theory of conceptual design that can compute design alternatives. The
computation will result in a comprehensive space of concept variants and search
it for feasible candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity of concept
generation is one of the cornerstones of engineering design. Until recently, the
only resources available to a designer during conceptual design were personal
experiences and innate abilities. While the designer's resources have advanced
significantly in the last three decades, there is still a lack of continuity
between computational design tools and conceptual design methods. Many formal
methods of conceptual design have yet to be realized as computational
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop representations and
computational methods that allow design concepts to be created from the
functional description of a needed product. Through the development of a design
knowledge repository and a concept generator that uses the stored knowledge,
this research extends the current understanding of the relationship between
function and form and codifies it. Also, novel component representations enable
computers to determine component compatibility and thus synthesize a concept
variant. Additionally, this work is useful for comparison to human design
behaviors, as it is built on commonly used design
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is both basic and practical in nature.
Thus, the broader impacts extend beyond publication to the usage of the
resultant knowledge, methods and tools in education, engineering practice and
research. For example, students will be able to use the concept generator to
create solutions that, because of their limited experience, they might otherwise
not have developed. These solutions will expose students to different
disciplines and engineering and scientific domains. The results of this research
impact industry and research in a similar manner. In both cases, the research
can be used to generate a broader array of solutions much more quickly than
would have been possible without it.&lt;br/&gt;