* 0307168
* Atoms and Molecules Within Fullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Martin Saunders, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 416,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Martin Saunders and R. James Cross of Yale University will continue
their highly successful studies in fullerene chemistry. The PIs' are proposing
new experiments that involve collaborations with other groups that bring
particular expertise to the work. Work is proposed to better understand the
properties and products of fullerenes using Helium NMR. Incorporating Helium
into fullerenes and using this as the starting material allows it to be used as
a tool, since Helium NMR yields a single sharp peak for the starting material
and every different soluble product. Thus the PIs will study higher fullerene
chemistry, Diels-Alder reactions involving fullerenes, high temperature
rearrangements of fullerenes, and the incorporation of other noble gases into
fullerenes. This detailed study will enhance our understanding of these unique
materials and assist researchers in the community who are working on more
applied problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program supports Professors Martin Saunders and R. James Cross of Yale
University whose research effort has already benefited areas as wide ranging as
medicinal chemistry and astronomy. Researchers have found helium-filled
fullerenes in meteorites, suggesting that these molecules formed in an
extraterrestrial environment where helium is more plentiful. This result, only
possible because of Saunders and Cross's previous investigations into endohedral
helium compounds, has significant implications for astrochemistry, as scientists
try to determine where the organic building blocks of life originated. In
addition, chemists using fullerene derivatives for materials or medicinal
applications have used and will continue to use the methods developed by the PIs
to determine the products of their synthetic reactions. Helium NMR remains the
most sensitive measure of how many fullerene compounds are present in a given
sample. If the planned He-proton NOE experiments are successful, synthetic
fullerene chemists will have even more precise analytic tools at their
disposal.&lt;br/&gt;