* 0307743
* Ground-based Observations of Low to Moderate Redshift Damped Lyman Alpha Systems
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2010
* David Turnshek, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2010
* USD 515,897.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST-0307743&lt;br/&gt;Turnshek&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy formation
and evolution require the conversion of gas into stars. A comprehensive study of
galaxy formation therefore requires a correct description of both the gaseous
and stellar components of the Universe. The investigators will study the neutral
gas components of galaxies at low to moderate redshifts, through investigations
of damped Lyman-a (DLA) absorption-line systems, seen in the spectra of
background quasars. This research will arrive at a quantitative understanding of
the redshift evolution of the neutral gas component and its properties, as well
as make definitive tests of hierarchical models for galaxy formation. Much use
will be made of existing and archival data, allowing for carefully targeted
follow-up observations at a variety of public and private
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lower redshift studies will compare local gas
with high redshift DLAs, and evaluate biases that are difficult to assess in
studies that track only the stellar components of galaxies. Fundamental tests
are possible because there are parameters which can currently only be measured
in the lower-redshift DLAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to advancing
knowledge and understanding in specific forefront areas of observational
cosmology, this program will develop an infrastructure to make the data widely
available to the community. Plans are also underway to convey the nature of this
research and some of its fundamental scientific methods to specific other target
audiences, which will be helped by the fact that the team already happens to
include individuals from traditionally under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;