* 0307393
* Collaborative Research:    The Star Formation History of the Milky Way - Integrating Color-Magnitude Diagram and New Chemical Abundance Information
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Jon Holtzman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2008
* USD 124,902.00

AST 0307393&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jon Holtzman&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: New Mexico State
University &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Holtzman, in this collaborative
project with Dr. Verne Smith of University of Texas, El Paso (AST-0307532), will
carry out a multi-faceted project that will lead to improved understanding of
the star formation of the Milky Way Galaxy. Their approach will combine two
widely used techniques to strengthen the conclusions that one could draw from
the application of either separately. They will investigate the star formation
history of the solar neighborhood by creating a homogeneous database of high-
resolution spectroscopic observations, and the abundances derived from it, for a
volume-limited sample of evolved stars in the Hipparcos catalog, and combine
this abundance information with the color-magnitude diagram. They will then
develop models of galactic chemical evolution which are constrained by both this
star formation history and the detailed abundance profiles. They also plan to
investigate the star formation history of the Galactic bulge by a similar
technique of combining information on stellar metallicity with color-magnitude
diagrams. They will make available to the community the database of both
observations and abundances for their sample. They also work closely with both
undergraduate and graduate students at their institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;