* 0308213
* Mining and Indexing Spatio-Temporal Patterns in Video Databases of Human Motion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Stan Sclaroff, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 405,000.00

The aim of this research project is to develop and test methods for indexing,
retrieval, and data mining of human motion trajectories in video databases.
Computer vision techniques are being devised for automatic extraction of human
motion time series data from video. Data mining algorithms are being developed
that can be used to discover clusters and other patterns in the extracted motion
time-series data. One promising direction being explored is to model the
observed motion time series sequences with a finite mixture of Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs). Use of the HMM representation presents certain advantages with
regard to modeling; however, it presents important challenges for the design of
efficient clustering, indexing, and retrieval algorithms. Thus more efficient,
sampling-based and embedding-based methods must be formulated. The resulting
ideas are evaluated in a prototype video retrieval system, with real-world video
datasets that depict human body motion. Synthetic sequences (e.g., generated via
computer graphics) are used in quantitative performance experiments where ground
truth information is required. The products of this research effort can enable
numerous applications that are valuable to society: homeland security; video-
based analysis of human biomechanics for occupational safety, as well as dance
and sports training; archive management and analysis for news, entertainment,
and sports video; and video database management for non-intrusive monitoring of
the motion patterns of handicapped, infirm, or elderly people to detect decline,
danger, and to alert caregivers when needed. Results can be accessed at the
project's Web site (http://www.cs.bu.edu/groups/ivc/MotionMining/).