* 0308937
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Drought Tolerance and Evolution of Hydraulic Traits in Juniperus Species
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,730.00

&lt;br/&gt;Dissertation Research:&lt;br/&gt;Drought tolerance and evolution of
hydraulic traits in Juniperus species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robert B. Jackson
and Cynthia J. Willson&lt;br/&gt;Duke University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will elucidate the effects of phylogenetic and environmental influences on
cavitation resistance and other hydraulic traits in Juniperus (Cupressaceae), a
drought-tolerant genus of shrubs and trees. The approach implemented is a unique
combination of systematics and physiological and morphological measurements. A
phylogeny for juniper species throughout the U. S. and Caribbean will be
constructed based on DNA sequence variation. Physiological measurements will
include the hydraulic traits of cavitation resistance and hydraulic
conductivity. Morphological measurements will include xylem conduit diameter and
wood density. The effects of climate, soil type, species, and phylogeny on the
variation in hydraulic traits will be assessed. This study will be unique in its
integration of systematics, physiology, and ecology to explain patterns of
species distribution in an evolutionary context. Exploring the effects of
environment and phylogenetic history on variation within and between species in
water relations will provide a better understanding of adaptive trait evolution
and the factors important in determining plant distributions. This study will
forge new links between the disciplines of physiological ecology and plant
systematics. It will also lend land managers insight into controls on
distribution of native tree species invading into shrublands and grasslands in
North America. &lt;br/&gt;