* 0308549
* Teaching the Grand Tradition of Modern Engineering through Introductory Courses for Engineering Students and for all Other Students in Higher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* David Billington, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 345,000.00

Over a quarter century of research and teaching, the PI and his colleagues have
developed an approach to engineering education at the introductory level that
reconnects engineering to the liberal arts and attracts new groups of students
to engineering. The core of the approach is the idea that efficiency, economy,
and ethical and aesthetic choice are all intrinsic to engineering design, not
separate considerations superimposed from without. Students come to understand
that engineering is not mere technical work but is a creative activity that
combines discipline, imagination, and responsible choice. While other approaches
that try to link engineering and the humanities have engineering students take
more liberal arts courses, the approach that the PI and his colleagues have
developed brings out the humanistic potential in engineering itself. Teaching in
introductory courses is reinforced through visual understanding, numerical work,
and expository writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
disseminate this work nationally through scholarly publication, a structured
series of symposia, public lectures, and traveling
exhibitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Award, along with other grants, is
enabling the basic scholarly foundation of the courses to be completed. A
textbook is being written that completes a three-volume series on the historical
development of major American engineering innovations from 1776 to the present.
An important article-length work on the transfer of foreign technology to the
United States in the twentieth century is also being written, as is the second
of two books on the great public works of the twentieth century United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Award is also supporting an annual
symposium and exhibition that will bring about thirty faculty from other
colleges and universities to Princeton each spring. During this project, the PI
plans to lecture at schools and in professional gatherings, such as the annual
meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education, as a plenary
speaker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of the project is to help other
schools attract non-traditional students to the engineering profession and to
improve the engineering education of all students by teaching its modern
tradition of outstanding works.&lt;br/&gt;