* 0308127
* Fundamental Studies of Ion Cutting
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Terry Alford, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 585,406.00

This collaborative project between T.L. Alford and J.W. Mayer of Arizona State
University (ASU) and S.S. Lau of the University of California, San Diego (UCSD)
addresses fundamental aspects of ion-induced delamination of thin surface layers
from Si and other semiconductors. The ion-cut process uses ion implanted gas
atoms to promote splitting and transferring of a thin sur-face layer onto a
different substrate. Although the ion-cut phenomenon is widely applied, little
is known about many of the fundamental aspects of this process. It was not until
very recently that the basic mechanics of the cutting process and the related
cut-depth were investigated. This pro-ject seeks understanding of fundamental
issues of how and why the ion-cut process affects the properties of the split
layers. The approach includes study of the dose, dose rate, and the implan-
tation temperature dependence of the exfoliated layer properties. In addition to
the ASU/UCSD collaboration, a collaboration with M. Nastasi, team leader of the
ion-solid interactions and inter-face engineering group at the Los Alamos
National Laboratory is established. D. Adams of the University of the Western
Cape, South Africa, UWC, a Historically Disadvantaged University will also be
participating as a Visiting Scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
significant technological relevance, and places emphasis on the integration of
research and education. This project is expected to have broader impacts in
education, and in technology-three dimensional integration by providing layers
of semiconductors that can be vertically stacked and also provid-ing single
layers of single crystal Si bonded to glass substrates. The research program is
carried out by a culturally diversified team and with active involvement with a
national laboratory, and involvement of D. Adams of the University of the
Western Cape, South Africa will benefit the research programs and activities at
UWC and will allow continuation of graduate support for the collaboration
between ASU/UCSD and UWC. Graduate and undergraduate students will have
opportunities to participate in a multidisciplinary and culturally diverse
research and education environment.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;