* 0308897
* Mathematical Modeling of the Nervous System of the Leech
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Carl Cowen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This IGMS project will deepen and extend the preparation of PI Carl Cowen to
undertake research in mathematical neuroscience by working in the Purdue
University Dept. of Biological Sciences with Prof. Chris Sahley and her postdocs
Brian Burrell and Brenda Moss. Professor Sahley's group studies the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of behavioral plasticity, especially associative learning
and non-associative learning using the medicinal leech, Hirudo medicinalis, as a
model organism. Cowen proposes to spend the year of the project working in
Sahley's lab, observing the experimental techniques used, learning about the
underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of learning, working closely with
the biologists in developing mathematical and computational models of the
processes, analyzing the dynamics of the models, working with the biologists to
understand the models' predictions, and using the predictions to deepen
understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved or design
experiments to test new hypotheses. The project will develop the close working
relationships between Cowen and biologists at Purdue that are expected to lead
to successful interdisciplinary collaboration.

The specific cellular mechanisms proposed for study, interactions between
S-cells and P-cells in the neurosystem of the leech, are both simple enough to
afford detailed investigation and also representative of an important class of
neuronal interactions in both invertebrates and higher animals, including
humans. The project centers on learning, including Cowen's learning in the area
of neurobiology and modeling and the learning of some related mathematics and
modeling by his collaborators. In addition, in Spring 2004, Cowen will offer a
course in the Purdue Biology Department on the differential equations and
dynamical systems involved in modeling neuronal systems that will be suitable
for advanced undergraduates or beginning graduate students in biology or other
sciences. Moreover, Cowen will direct two undergraduate students during summer
of 2004 in research projects involved with modeling neurosystems. This project
will provide the foundation for Cowen to begin research in collaboration with
Purdue's neurobiologists and to mentor graduate and undergraduate students,
including women and members of underrepresented minority groups, in mathematical
neuroscience.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).