* 0308750
* Investigation of Global Scale Seismic Mantle and Core Structure Using Forward and Inverse Approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 664,592.00

Romanowicz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support a program of
investigation of lateral heterogeneity in the earth's mantle and core at the
global scale, using seismological methods. There are two main components in this
research program. The first is global seismic waveform tomography and related
forward modeling. Global seismic tomography can provide constraints on key
mantle dynamics questions such as: the fate of subducted slabs, the role of D"
as a thermo-mechanical boundary layer, the depth of origin and role of mantle
plumes in the global circulation, or the nature of coupling between upper and
lower mantle and the distribution of geochemical reservoirs. The second
component is the investigation of core-sensitive phases and their interpretation
in terms of structure/anisotropy of the core and of the deep mantle. While a
very small part of the earth, the inner core is thought to play an important
role in the dynamics of the outer core and the magnetic field generation.
Evidence for complexity in its anisotropic structure has been accumulating, and
trade-offs between core and mantle structure need to be further
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under component (1), the investigators will
extend their waveform tomography approach to include a combination of
approximate analytical and exact numerical methods in the computation of
synthetic waveforms and partial derivatives. Under component (2), they will
continue to collect and analyze core sensitive travel time data to test recently
proposed complex models of the inner core and further evaluate trade-offs
between inner core, outer core and mantle
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed program of
investigation of deep earth structure will benefit a broader community of non-
seismologists in geophysics (geodynamicists, mineral physicists) and
geochemists, in that it aims at providing seismological constraints on global
geodynamical models of the earth's mantle (part 1 of this proposal) as well as
the core (part 2 of this proposal).