* 0308540
* Open-Ended Evolution in Visually Rich Virtual Worlds: Implementation, Analysis, and Use in Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Lee Spector, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 304,903.00

Evolutionary computation systems, in which Darwinian principles of variation and
selection govern the development of digital representations in simulated
environments, have applications in several areas of science and engineering.
With the addition of facilities for high-quality 3D visualization and
interactivity, such systems can also provide dramatic windows into complex and
dynamically evolving virtual worlds. This project builds on the PI's work on
evolutionary computation to produce software that implements open-ended
evolution in visually rich virtual worlds. The project aims to produce software
that provides a laboratory environment of research opportunities for fields
ranging from evolutionary biology to optimization theory. This software
simulates evolutionary processes and evolves based on Darwinian principles, thus
improving itself. First goal of the project is to attract and engage
undergraduates (both science majors and non-majors) via the intrinsically
compelling life-like dynamics of behaviorally complex, visually presented
virtual worlds. To achieve this, the developed software includes a graphical
user interface that enables non-programmers to formulate and investigate
meaningful questions about evolutionary processes, providing genuine research
experience to undergraduates. Second goal of the project is to support
fundamental research on these same questions. The system uses modern, robust
evolutionary computing technologies and can be implemented both for single PCs
and for high-performance computer clusters. The software supports both
undergraduate and faculty research, and contributes to the understanding of
evolution, by developing useful technologies based on evolutionary computation,
and by presenting research results in formats understandable by non-
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;