* 0308779
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological and Evolutionary Implications of Rodent-mediated Spore Dispersal of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* James Bever, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The ecological importance of soil-borne organisms are becoming increasing
appreciated by scientists. For example, symbiotic soil fungi called arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi are required by most plants for nutrient uptake. Species
composition of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal communities is thought to have
great influence on the plant community. Therefore, understanding how different
mycorrhizal fungal species are distributed in the soil, and what factors lead to
these distributions, will contribute to a full understanding of the process of
forest regeneration. While most species of mycorrhizal fungi are dispersed
short-distances through root growth, a subset of mycorrhizal fungal species can
be dispersed long distances by rodents. These species produce their spores in
relatively large clusters, which are consumed by rodents and passed as living
spores in their feces. My dissertation research aims to address the ecological
and evolutionary importance of rodent-mediated spore dispersal to both fungi and
to tropical-tree seedlings. Specifically, can rodent movement patterns be linked
to the distribution of rodent-dispersed arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi? Also, do
plants respond differently to rodent-dispersed mycorrhizal fungi than to fungal
species incapable of rodent-mediated dispersal? Furthermore, what are the
consequences of forest fragmentation on the dispersal of mycorrhizal fungi by
rodents? Besides providing needed information on the importance of soil fungi
and their dispersers to the regeneration of tropical forests, this project will
facilitate the biological training of several Latin American students. This
project has already allowed me the opportunity to co-direct the undergraduate
thesis of a student from Colombia and will allow at least two Panamanian
undergraduates the opportunity to learn techniques for studying both above- and
belowground organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;