* 0308700
* The Development of Sensitive Diagnostics and Their Use in Shock Tube Studies of Formaldehyde and Formyl Reaction Rate Coefficients
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Ronald Hanson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 05/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a two-part research program
consisting of the development of a new tunable ultraviolet-laser absorption
diagnostic and the application of this diagnostic to the investigation of
formaldehyde oxidation and nitrogen-oxide kinetics. A sensitive formyl (HCO)
absorption diagnostic using a ring-dye laser with an external frequency doubler
is developed that takes advantage of the strong ultraviolet (UV) HCO absorption
feature near 230 nm. This method should yield a threefold increase in HCO
sensitivity over the current laser absorption measurements made at 614 nm. Also
used are a sensitive (ppm level) hydroxyl (OH) laser absorption diagnostic at
306 nm and a formaldehyde (CH2O) lamp absorption diagnostic at 174 nm that have
been developed previously. Hydroxyl is an important marker of radical pool
development in combustion systems and this procedure will enable better
isolation of certain reactions in the complex CH2O/HCO/O2 kinetic system. These
diagnostics permit measurement of the following reactions over the approximate
temperature range 1000 to 1600 K:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HCO + O2 ? CO + HO2
(a)&lt;br/&gt;HCO + NO ? CO + HNO (b)&lt;br/&gt;CH2O + O2 ? HCO + HO2
(c)&lt;br/&gt;CH2O + OH ? HCO + H2O (d)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactions involving
formaldehyde (CH2O) and formyl radical (HCO) lie on the primary oxidation
pathway for methane and other hydrocarbon fuels. Even with this primary role,
there are still large uncertainties in the high-temperature rate coefficients of
many of the key reactions in this sub-mechanism. The uncertainty in the
experimental measurements of these reaction rates stems largely from an
inability to measure important reaction species, such as HCO, with sufficient
sensitivity and to kinetically isolate the individual reactions from interfering
reactions. Higher-sensitivity measurements of HCO combined with the use of
complementary diagnostics for OH permit the design of simpler, more direct
experiments with fewer interfering reactions, and hence enable more reliable
determinations of rate coefficients for several important elementary
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
contributes significantly to graduate education and scientific databases and
impacts combustion-chemistry modeling activities in government laboratories and
industry. The program provides an opportunity for graduate students to learn
state-of-the-art laser and shock-tube methods and gain practical experience in a
world-class laboratory. Experimental techniques developed in this program are
included in graduate laboratory classes and textbooks. Data, results and
expertise acquired in this program are actively shared with government and
industry, particularly through the development and distribution of web-based
kinetics databases, reviews of combustion-related reaction rates, and personal
contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;