* 0308244
* Simulating the Human Visual "Find" Command
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Anthony Hornof, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2009
* USD 340,934.00

For most computer users, the visual display provides the highest bandwidth of
information throughput. However, the full potential of the visual display is
often not achieved. Visual layouts are often poorly designed, minimally
evaluated, and based primarily on the intuitions and introspection of the
designer. Though some visual interface designers have developed a good sense for
what works, most have a very limited understanding of human visual perception,
the planning and execution of eye movements, and how visual design interacts
with those processes. Part of the problem is that no empirically validated
comprehensive theories of applied visual search have been developed. Visual
search is rigorously studied in cognitive psychology and human factors, but
typically one phenomena at a time; this leads to theories that are disjoint,
disconnected from design guidelines, and that do not provide much practical
guidance. No integrative theories are sufficiently well formed to provide useful
explanations or predictions of how people search the visual layouts in web pages
and computer software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will develop
a predictive theory of visual search based on ecologically valid scenarios. The
comprehensive theory will identify the interaction among visual-perceptual,
cognitive, semantic, and oculo-motor processing during visual search of
realistic computer screen layouts. The theory will be embodied in a
computational cognitive model and integrate the core processes used in visual
interaction. The PI will compile the theory into SimFind, a simulated human
visual "find" command. SimFind will model and display the fundamental human
processing that occurs when a search is triggered. This will be a software
module that will stand alone, but which could be integrated into existing
predictive tools to provide an accurate and robust human "find" within a larger
human simulation. The module will implement the processing, components, and
behaviors that are fundamental to visual search. The module will provide
analytical predictions, as well as visualizations, of human-computer visual
interaction -- the seemingly invisible processes that direct a user's attention
across a layout. The PI will evaluate and refine the theory behind the simulated
visual search with empirical studies that will include eye tracking. Empirical
data will evaluate how the theory accurately captures the cognitive strategies
motivated by the structure of the layout, and the shifts of attention that occur
in response to the structure, visual features, and content encountered during
the search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This interdisciplinary project
will synthesize psychological theory and engineering models to provide the
research community with advanced integrative theory and the commercial world
with a highly practical application. The project will illuminate the otherwise
invisible processes that take place during visual interaction, and will be
useful to visual interface designers, students of design, human factors
researchers, and cognitive psychologists. It will illustrate and predict human
behavior for searching web sites, online voting and census forms, and general-
purpose human-computer visual layouts.&lt;br/&gt;