* 0308970
* Junior US- Based Mathematicians at 03/04 Special Yr At Fields Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Joceline Lega, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 12/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

ABSTRACT of NSF proposal DMS-0308970&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Joceline Lega,
University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Junior US-Based Mathematicians
at 2003/2004 Special Year at Fields Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will provide support to enable young US mathematical researchers to participate
in a semester long thematic program in elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations (PDE) to take place at the Fields Institute during the
autumn of the academic year 2003-2004. During the semester there will be a
number of focused periods of activity, including two one-week long workshops on
current topics in PDE: one will be a workshop on the "Calculus of
&lt;br/&gt;Variations: Superconductivity, Microstructure of Materials and
Geometric Problems" to take place August 25 - 30, 2003 and the other will be a
workshop on "Patterns in Physics" scheduled for November 14 - 18, 2003.
Additional specific activities include a mini-course series of lectures on
mathematical problems in fluid dynamics as well as one or two weekend-long
symposia focused on specialized topics of current
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of PDE is a center-point
where mathematics interacts with other areas of research, and there are many
ways in which it has ties with other scientific disciplines. In the recent
several decades the field has seen numerous major advances, and it is a very
active and vibrant area of research. Progress in PDE has been important in the
modern development of a number of other scientific subjects, and notably it has
virtually reconfigured many areas of applied mathematics, mathematical physics
and differential geometry. This program at the Fields Institute intends to focus
on "current problemsin elliptic and parabolic PDE", principally in areas that
are motivated by applied mathematics, mathematical physics and/or differential
geometry. The theory of elliptic and parabolic PDE arises in numerous problems
in the physical sciences, including the structure of superconducting materials,
phase transitions in continuous media, the microstructure of new materials for
novel applications, and the modeling of pattern formation in a large variety of
physical systems. There is a broad international spectrum of prominent and
active researchers in the field, a notable number of whom will be participating
in the Fall 2003 thematic semester at the Fields Institute. Young US based
researchers attending this program will find many opportunities for fruitful
collaboration with mathematical analysts and researchers working in other
academic disciplines, in government scientific laboratories as well as in
industry. The organizing committees will make efforts to bring out the potential
for these interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;