* 0308864
* Non-Commutative Harmonic Analysis in Object Recognition and Tracking
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Robert Boyer, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,584.00

The principal investigator, a professor of mathematics, will visit the
Department of Computer and Information Science in the School of Engineering and
Applied Science at the University of Pennsylvania to initate a collaborative
research program in computer vision emphasizing omnidirectional sensors, which
are visual sensors with unusually large fields of view. These new sensors have
numerous applications in surveillance, navigation, and communications, yet they
have raised a host of complex new mathematical questions because they are not
accurately modelled with the conventional methods of computer vision and image
processing. Remarkably, the relevant mathematics is the representation theory of
non-compact Lie groups, non-commutative harmonic analysis, and the associated
algorithms.

To make a contribution to this field, it is essential for the principal
investigator to be immersed in a laboratory active in vision research where
inevitable technological advances in performance and equipment cause continuous
change in the requirements and complexity of the models. The PI will investigate
applications of noncommutative harmonic analysis on Lie groups and their
homogeneous spaces to two of the major problems in computer vision: object
recognition and tracking. The noncommutative Fourier transform will be
especially helpful for these problems as well as in discovering analytical
invariants for images needed for template matching.

After the PI's leave at Penn, he intends to establish an image science group at
Drexel that includessa colleagues who are experts in mirror design and
differential geometry. This group will develop courses and seminars fostering
cross-fertilization among students and faculty from computer science and
electrical and computer engineering departments in the College of Engineering.
With the close physical proximity of Penn with Drexel, the PI expects the
collaborations initiated during his leave will continue with joint seminars,
joint research students, and research projects.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).









