* 0308845
* Finite Element Methods for Two Problems for Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Max Gunzburger, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 166,928.00

Finite element methods are often the method of choice for determining
approximate solutions of partial differential equations (PDEs) and they are
usually also the most thoroughly analyzed. However, this is not the case in the
setting of nonlinear hyperbolic conservation laws, e.g., for compressible,
inviscid flows and many other applications. The goal of the first project is to
develop stable, efficient, and accurate finite element methodologies for this
setting. It involves the use of hierarchical finite element bases (HFEBs). The
principles used are similar to those that serve to define spectral viscosity
methods. The goal is to maintain, at least away from discontinuities, the full
accuracy of the finite element discretization while simultaneously suppressing
unwanted and unstable oscillations. HFEBs have important advantages over both
standard finite element bases and spectral bases. The separation of scales
inherent in HFEBs (but which is totally absent from standard bases) allows for
the selective application of artificial viscosity to only the high frequency
components of the discrete solution. On the other hand, HFEB functions defined
with respect to the finest grid levels are locally supported. This leads to the
easy identification of the positions of discontinuities (something difficult to
do with spectral bases) which, in turn, enables the efficient implementation of
grid refinement strategies and the spacially selective application of artificial
diffusion. All of these desirable features lead to the possibility of developing
stable, high-accuracy methods for hyperbolic conservation laws. Analytical and
computational studies will be carried for multi-dimensional hyperbolic
conservation laws. Among the important algorithmic questions that need to be
answered are how to best choose the frequency and spacially-dependent artificial
viscosity coefficient and how to efficiently implement higher-order HFEBs. The
second project deals with exact controllability problems for hyperbolic PDEs
that impact, among many other applications, the stabilization of vibrating
structures and the reduction of aerodynamically induced noise. Some preliminary
studies have resulted in efficient finite difference algorithms for one-
dimensional and geometrically simple two-dimensional wave equation problems. The
algorithms are based on discretizing the wave equation and the initial and
terminal conditions to produce and underdetermined linear system. This system
acts as a constraint for an optimization problem which is defined in order to
extract particular solutions of the controllability problem. Compared to
previous approaches, the new method does not require regularization to obtain
convergent approximations. The proposed work includes the extension of the new
algorithmic approach to the finite element setting so that more complicated and
realistic geometries can be treated. Extensions to equations with variable
coefficients and to systems of hyperbolic PDEs, e.g., the equations of linear
elasticity, will also be considered. The algorithmic studies will be
complemented with analyses of the convergence properties of the optimization-
based methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed projects are directly related
to important problems in many applications so that their completion should have
significant impact on how those problems are solved. For example, although huge
efforts have been devoted to developing computational techniques for supersonic
flows, there is still a need for developing high-accuracy methods that can be
implemented for general geometries such as flows about airplanes. The first
proposed project has exactly this goal, and its successful completion would
directly impact the way problems are solved in the aerospace, nuclear,
geophysics, and other communities. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, for the setting of
controlling the unstable motions of structures or for the reduction in noise
produced by engines, there are few existing algorithms, despite the fact that
that setting is directly related to problems in the design of bridges,
airplanes, buildings, transmission towers, etc. Thus, the successful completion
of the second project, which has as its goal the development, implementation,
and analysis of efficient and accurate computational methods, would have great
impact on these and other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;