* 0308067
* Toward Dynamically Stable Mobile Robots in Human Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Ralph Hollis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 12/31/2007
* USD 283,094.00

Robotics and Human Augmentation
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 308067&lt;br/&gt;Title: Toward Dynamically Stable Mobile Robots in Human
Environments&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hollis, Ralph&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to gain deeper
understanding of how dynamic agility can be achieved in mobile machines
interacting with people and operating in normal home and workplace environments.
The work develops and utilizes a novel dynamically stable rolling machine
research platform. To illuminate many of the issues surrounding the operation of
agile machines in human environments, in particular the ability to traverse
narrow, cluttered rooms and to function robustly in the presence of people, we
are investigating what could be one of the simplest possible dynamically-stable
mobile robots: a machine whose body locomotes using only a single spherical
wheel. This enables the machine to be tall and narrow, have a high center of
mass, respond compliantly to nudges and shoves, and rapidly move in any
direction. The machine will have a vestibular system based on an inertial
measuring unit and other sensors with an on-board computer to provide closed-
loop control of movement and balance. The efficacy of this new type of rolling
locomotion will be evaluated in the context of human environments. Insights will
be gained toward the development of agile motive platforms that in the future
could be combined with the research community's ongoing work in perception,
navigation, and cognition, to yield truly capable intelligent mobile robots for
use in physical contact with people. Such robots, if realizable and economically
viable, would function as aids to elderly or disabled persons; provide guidance
and assistance in public spaces; help with education and entertainment; perform
domestic cleaning and housekeeping; or fetch and carry everyday objects. Many
other uses such as entry into hostile environments, rescue, and automated
surveillance to safeguard people or property can be
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;