* 0308045
* Nanoscale Examination of Electronic States in Molecular and Atomic Wires
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Ali Yazdani, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2005
* USD 230,000.00

This project uses atomic-scale engineering to produces materials for the study
of one-dimensional electronic states. Because of their simplicity and
uniformity, carbon nanotubes and related nanoscopic peapod structures offer
unique advantages for controlled experiments. Other one-dimensional structures
are based on atomic wires fabricated by self-assembly of atomic adsorbates or by
direct manipulation of single atoms on a surface. Scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) will be used to directly visualize, and locally characterize and modify
matter on the scale of single atoms and molecules. The electronic states will be
studied in order to address issues relevant to the development of molecular and
atomic-scale electronic devices. The detailed structural and transport studies
will help develop more accurate theoretical models needed to understand the
general problem of correlation among electrons in complex coupled systems. The
project combines technologically relevant research in nanoscale science with
investigations of fundamental problems at the forefront of condensed matter
physics. Until the basic electronic properties of nanostructures can be
reproducibly measured and understood, applications will not be realized for
molecule-based electronic, biological, or chemical devices. The project
integrates research and education-in the technical training of students who
carry out the experiments, in the development of a undergraduate curricula in
nanoelectronics, and in outreach presentations of nanoscience and technology to
future students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate the electronic properties of novel wires, so-called single-walled-
nanotubes (SWNTs), that are so small that it would take 40,000,000 laying side-
by-side to span a dime. In such tiny wires, the electrons are forced to flow in
essentially one direction, in one-dimension only. In ordinary wires, electrons
actually move in three directions, while drifting in a single direction between
battery terminals. The SWNTs are be self-organized and grown on surfaces so that
their electronic properties are accessible for experimental studies.
Understanding and manipulating the electronic states of these tiny structures
may enable technological advances in nanotechnology and provide fundamental
understanding of the exotic nature of correlated electron systems. Cutting-edge
experimental techniques developed at the intersection of physics, materials
science, and nanotechnology should provide the building blocks for future
generations of electronic devices or biosensors. The project integrates research
and education-in the technical training of students who carry out the
experiments, in the development of a undergraduate curricula in nanoelectronics,
and in outreach presentations of nanoscience and technology to future students
and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;