* 0308589
* Partial Premixing by High-Intensity, High-Frequency Forcing of Jet Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Ofodike Ezekoye, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2008
* USD 373,000.00

This is an investigation of an essentially unexploited burner strategy that uses
high-intensity, high-frequency forcing of a fuel jet to achieve substantial
partial premixing of initially nonpremixed reactants. Preliminary results have
shown that it is possible to produce dramatic changes in the structure and
luminosity of a turbulent nonpremixed jet flame with the application of strong
forcing of the jet flow. Intense pulsations are achieved by modulating the fuel
flow with a high-speed valve at a frequency that coincides with the organ-pipe
resonance frequency of the fuel tube. The combination of rapid fuel-flow rate
modulation coupled with the organ-pipe resonance of the fuel tube results in
very large amplitude, high-frequency modulation of the fuel gas pressure and
velocity. The resulting flow exhibits a high degree of partial premixing of the
fuel and air, possibly due to the ingestion (sucking) of ambient air into the
fuel tube, vortex-ring entrainment, and turbulence generated by the
unsteadiness. While the effect of high-amplitude, high-frequency forcing has
been demonstrated, the underlying physical mechanisms that are responsible for
the significant changes in the flame structure are not known. The objective of
this work is to define the range of conditions where this phenomenon is
effective and to provide a clear conceptual model of the process through careful
experimentation. To determine the range of operating parameters that result in
strong partial premixing, a range of fuel-tube diameters, resonance tube lengths
(and hence excitation frequencies), fuel-jet Reynolds numbers, and fuel type are
investigated. Global parameters such as the blowout limits and mean flame length
are measured. Exhaust-gas pollutants such as nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide,
and hydrocarbons, are measured. Once the most interesting operating conditions
have been identified, a second phase of the study involves making careful flow-
field measurements with the aim of understanding the underlying physical
mechanisms. In this phase, a number of imaging diagnostics, including particle
image velocimetry (PIV), planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF), high-speed
Mie scattering and high-speed schlieren videography are used. PIV is used to
quantify the fuel-tube velocity fluctuations, to measure jet entrainment and to
reveal the flow-field structure at each phase of the oscillation cycle. The PLIF
of seeded acetone vapor is used to make quantitative mixing measurements to
reveal the degree of partial premixing, PLIF of OH and CH are used to
investigate the effect of forcing on the reaction zone structure, and the high-
speed imaging provides global information on characteristic frequencies in the
flames. The data obtained from these measurements aids in the development of an
analytical chemical-reactor-based model that is useful for predicting flame
lengths and pollutant formation in these types of flames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It may be
possible to use strong unsteady periodic forcing of the fuel stream to design
burners that produce less soot or smoke, and possibly lower pollutants such as
nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons, through partial premixing. The reduction of
environmental pollutants is the primary driver of research on industrial burners
at this time. This type of burner could have a significant impact on compact
burners used for process heating, stack flares, and even to augment conventional
gas turbine power generators. Furthermore, the unsteady operation may enable
burner control strategies that are not possible with conventional (swirl-
stabilized) combustion. Undergraduate and graduate students are taught skills in
advanced combustion burner development and characterization, and results from
this study are incorporated into courses on combustion theory and combustion
diagnostics. Students from under-represented minority groups are included in the
research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;