* 0308186
* Human-Robot Interaction in Safety-Critical Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2006
* USD 122,290.00

This is funding to support preliminary work related to the study of human-robot
interaction (HRI) in safety-critical situations, such as urban search and
rescue. The hope is that by bringing together researchers in HCI and Robotics,
it will be possible for the PIs to perform well-designed and rigorous studies of
HRI unlike any work that has been done in the past. The PIs will focus on the
effectiveness of techniques for making human operators aware of pertinent
information regarding the robot and its environment. By studying the best
practices in HRI, they will enable the creation of better interfaces that
provide decision support and reduce the workload of the operator. The PIs will
validate their findings by creating new interfaces for safety-critical robot
systems. They will also develop methods for testing and evaluating human-robot
interaction, which will result in better metrics, and will further develop best
practices and design guidelines for HRI in safety-critical applications,
validated through the testing of new and revised interfaces. It is important to
understand how to turn sensor data into information for decision support to
reduce the workload of the human operator and the potential for error, even when
the robot and its operator are physically separated.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of this work will allow the PIs to
develop course modules for the Robotics II (undergraduate/graduate) and
Evaluation of Human-Computer Interaction (graduate) courses at the University of
Massachusetts, Lowell. The research will be disseminated through conference and
journal articles; collected data will be made available to interested
researchers. All participants in the study will receive copies of the
evaluations of their systems, and will have the opportunity to discuss the
results with the PIs; it is expected that these systems will improve due to this
feedback, and participants will be encouraged to participate in a future study
phase to evaluate the revised interfaces. More generally, improving human-robot
interaction will benefit society as a whole; for example, the results will be
useful to the creation of better robotic systems for assistive technology and
for search and rescue. &lt;br/&gt;