* 0308097
* Tying Together Low-Level and High-level Planners with Cellular Decompositions
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Howard Choset, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2008
* USD 310,000.00

Title:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tying Low-level and High-level Planners together
with Cellular Decomposit&lt;br/&gt;ions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;One of the grand challenges in planning is tying together high-
level&lt;br/&gt;global planners with low-level local planners, often called
behaviors&lt;br/&gt;or control laws. Global planners provide provable guarantees
but are&lt;br/&gt;often too abstract to respect the details and dynamics
afforded by&lt;br/&gt;local planners, which in turn lack provable guarantees.
The proposed&lt;br/&gt;work aims to get the best of both worlds: inhereting the
provable&lt;br/&gt;completeness of global planners while respecting the local
details and&lt;br/&gt;dynamics with local planners. The real challenge is: how
does one tie&lt;br/&gt;together the high-level and low-level aspects of a
planner. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed work takes a topological approach towards
addressing this&lt;br/&gt;problem, addressing three focused problems -- planning
in narrow&lt;br/&gt;corridors with probabilistic methods, defining hybrid
control laws for&lt;br/&gt;navigating and mapping tasks, and sensor-based
exploration of highly&lt;br/&gt;articulated bodies. The broad impact of this
work lie in path planning&lt;br/&gt;for non-Euclidean configuration spaces and
developing control laws for&lt;br/&gt;those spaces, as well as further develop a
LEGO robotics lab module.&lt;br/&gt;