* 0308056
* Compliant Frame Modular Mobile Robotic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Mark Minor, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 06/30/2007
* USD 259,853.00

Robotics and Human Augmentation
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#0308056&lt;br/&gt;Title: Compliant Frame Modular Mobile Robotic
Systems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Minor, Mark&lt;br/&gt;University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compliant framed wheeled modular
mobile robots are the subject of this research. The system consists of rigid
differentially steered axle modules coupled by flexible frame modules that
provide compliant roll, pitch, and yaw for suspension and highly controllable
steering without added hardware. Modularity provides a structure that is easily
scaled and reconfigured for a variety of applications oriented around dissimilar
configurations. Preliminary studies focusing on a two-axle scout configuration
have derived curvature based planning algorithms optimizing energy usage and
control authority, developed a modular model structure for dynamic motion
control, and established sensor hardware and fusion algorithms for improved
postural evaluation. More complex configurations, however, introduce complicated
nonholonomic constraints and additional challenges for motion planning and
dynamic stabilization. Hence, this research investigates scalable motion
planning algorithms and dynamic controllers that provide functionality to
modular mobile robotic systems. These algorithms must operate within a
distributed modular environment where emphasis is placed on low-level
stabilization and planning algorithms, which also requires further
modularization of sensor fusion algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit of this research lies in the fact that it examines a novel, and previously
unexplored, methods of realizing scalable mobile robotic systems. The potential
of this system to expand the service of mobile robotics in space exploration,
military service, and even agriculture, mining, and forestry, are tremendous.
Broader impacts will be realized within the robotics community, the educational
processes at the University of Utah, and engineering outreach activities within
the state of Utah. Impact on robotics research will be realized in motion
planning, dynamic control, sensor instrumentation, and group behavior.
Laboratory experiments and design examples will be derived for the undergraduate
mechatronics curriculum, and graduate control courses will benefit from
practical examples and experimental platforms. Outreach activities where
students interact with mobile robots and learn more about underlying technology
have already been developed, and further advances will continue to be
made.&lt;br/&gt;