* 0308500
* Measurements of Active Tectonic Deformation Along the Pacific Coast of Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Maria-Teresa Ramirez-Herrera, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2004
* USD 83,589.00

This project is to obtaining field data, radiocarbon data and exposure ages on
coastal landforms and the geologic record (stratigraphy) along the Guerrero
Coast, on the Pacific coast of Mexico, to derive long-term rates of tectonic
deformation in this area of high seismic. combining geomorphic, stratigraphic-
sedimentological, radiocarbon and cosmogenic approaches are being used to assess
the long-term records of tectonic deformation retained on the landscape and in
coastal sediment sequences. Comprehensive assessment of the geomorphology and
geology give insights into the Quaternary long-term rates of deformation of this
active convergent margin. Measurements include precise surveying and dating of
markers in the coastal landscape and in the stratigraphy indicative of tectonic
deformation. The specific objective is to derive rates of tectonic deformation
from geomorphic and stratigraphic studies of the Guerrero coastal area to
generate a long-term deformation rate model of coastal tectonics and compare
with the short-term rates derived from geodetic and seismic data.

The specific work being carried out is: 1) Studies of geomorphic markers
indicative of tectonic displacement (e.g. marine terraces, emerged tidal
notches, marine platforms, beach ridges) on the Guerrero coast. These include
remote sensing and GIS analysis, field surveying of geomorphic markers
elevations, mapping, radiocarbon and cosmogenic dating of collected samples to
determine the ages of emerged landforms; 2) Stratigraphic-sedimentological and
radiocarbon studies of the coastal areas to assess the records of long-term
crustal movements; 3) Comprehensive data analysis and development of a long-term
rate deformation model of coastal tectonics.

This work adds to the understanding, modeling and quantifying long-term
(Quaternary) rates of tectonic deformation in an area of high seismic potential
where historic earthquakes such as the Michoacan 1985 event caused 3000 deaths
and hundreds of millions of dollars in economic and property losses. The
Guerrero gap represents an area of high seismic potential, probably accumulating
strain that could be released in a large magnitude earthquake.