* 0308765
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Morphological Integration in the Mammalian Skull
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* John Flynn, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,636.00

Abstract For DEB-0308765&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr.
John Flynn and Ms. Anjali Goswami of the University of Chicago, for a study of
the evolution of morphological integration in the mammalian skull. The study of
morphological integration examines sets of traits that are tightly correlated
with each other, often due to similarity in function (e.g., diet, braincase),
environmental adaptations, or developmental history. However, these sets of
traits have never been studied for their consistency across more inclusive
groups of organisms, over geological time, or for their influence on skull
evolution. This research explores the relationships between parts of the skull,
in their anatomy and developmental patterns, in both living and fossil species.
A wide range of species from the mammalian orders Carnivora (dogs, cats, etc.),
Primates (lemurs, apes, etc.), and Marsupialia (opposums, kangaroos, etc.) are
used to examine patterns of integration and to assess the influence of three key
factors: 1) diet, 2) brain size, and 3) reproductive strategy, on the
relationships among skull traits and diversity of form. Developmental
integration is explored through analysis of the order in which skull bones form.
Morphological integration is examined through statistical analysis of
correlations among skull landmarks, captured using a high-accuracy 3D
digitizer.&lt;br/&gt;This study bridges a long-standing gap between the fields
of genetics, development, and paleontology. Developmental and genetic studies
have produced many hypotheses of the importance of the correlated evolution of
traits, but these have never been tested. Using the extensive fossil record of
mammals and diverse collections representing all stages of development, this
study addresses questions about diversity, morphology, and the flexibility of
the evolutionary process, which are crucial to understanding the ability of
organisms to adapt to environmental change. This research also should shed light
on the consequences and primary factors in human craniofacial disorders, such as
craniosyntosis. &lt;br/&gt;