* 0308224
* Pattern Formation in Parts Sorting, Feeding, and Assembly
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Kevin Lynch, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 11/30/2006
* USD 220,751.00

Robotics and Human Augmentation
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#0308224&lt;br/&gt;Title: Pattern Formation in Parts Sorting, Feeding, and
Assembly&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lynch, Kevin&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to study the design
of shape and motion control strategies for nonprehensile robotic devices (e.g.,
vibratory surfaces) inducing self-assembly of parts. This includes designing
sensor-based motions to automatically (1) sort parts, (2) orient parts in
fixtures (feeding) and (3) bring two or more parts into a desired relative
configuration (assembly). Such systems are characterized by the complex dynamics
of repeated frictional impacts. We describe the behavior of the system dynamics
in terms of qualitative features from dynamical systems theory, such as stable
fixed points and limit sets, chaotic regimes, etc. This abstraction of the
descriptive mechanics allows us to use emergent behaviors, the existence of
which are robust to uncertainties in the mechanics model, to design sensor-based
motion plans to stabilize a desired sorting, fixturing, or
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of this work will lead to formal
strategies for automated design of industrial parts feeding and assembly systems
that are currently designed by trial and error. Our work on sensor design and
sensor-based control could find applications to self-assembly in other domains
(e.g., on the micro- or nano-scale where the low-level mechanics are quite
different). Formal sensor-based manipulation planning approaches, originally
developed in robotics, may be applicable to these other
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have an impact on undergraduate
education by involving undergraduates in the research. The project will also
impact graduate education through Northwestern's IGERT on Nonlinear Science and
the course ME 449 Robotic Manipulation taught by the PI. Results of the project
will be broadly disseminated through project websites, conference talks, and
journal papers.&lt;br/&gt;