* 0308063
* Collaborative Research:    Program Visualization:     Using Perceptual and Cognitive Concepts to Quantify Quality, Support Instruction, and Improve Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Eileen Kraemer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2007
* USD 303,606.00

Many programmers, instructors, and programming students have a strong intuitive
belief that visualization is valuable for communicating information about the
state and behavior of programs. In particular, in the area of algorithms and
data structures, traditionally regarded as a core area of computer science that
students find difficult, the advent of algorithm animation created great
expectations in the CS teaching community, as animation was seen as a better way
to portray the dynamic workings of algorithms than was the use of purely static
media. However, an apparent disconnect exists between the prevalence of a belief
in the usefulness of visualization and the extent to which visualization is
actually employed. In this project, the PIs will investigate the hypothesis that
present PV systems have failed to live up to expectations because they have
largely ignored the issue of appropriate perceptual properties for effective
viewing, and that in order to be effective PV systems must support perceptually
appropriate animation, graphical design and layout, as well as good pedagogical
design. In order to address this problem, the PIs will identify and evaluate
perceptual, attentional, and cognitive aspects of program visualization and will
quantify and categorize these results. They will perform observational studies
of how instructors teach in order to identify the tasks that instructors perform
in preparing and presenting visualization-based lesson, and will develop
improved presentation and interaction techniques for program visualization and
more generally for process visualization. The PIs expect that critical
evaluation of the effects of relevant attributes of PVs, the development of
metrics for quality of PVs, and the tuning and evaluation of models based on
these metrics through empirical studies, will serve to provide normalizing
parameters for future studies of the benefits of program visualization. More
importantly, this work will serve as the basis for design guidelines for the
effective use of PV and other forms of process
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will advance
the state of knowledge in human-computer interaction and perceptual psychology;
will provide design guidelines applicable to program visualization and process
visualization in particular, with potential benefit to all viewers of such
displays (students, scientists, and the general public); will engage both
undergraduate and graduate students in research in both computer science and
perceptual psychology; will include participants from under-represented groups
(the PIs students include African Americans, Asians, and women); and will result
in publications that will appear in journals and conference proceedings, and in
software and evaluation metrics that will be disseminated through the
web.&lt;br/&gt;