* 0308146
* Multi-Touch 2-D Tactile Human Computer Interface Design and Optimization for Individuals with Physical Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* John Elias, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 630,404.00

In this project the PI will explore issues relating to, and develop a prototype
of, a multi-touch tactile computer interface designed and optimized for
individuals with physical disabilities, for whom traditional input devices such
as the keyboard and mouse can pose significant challenges. Recent technological
advances support the manufacture of 2D multi-touch sensing arrays of arbitrary
size and dimension that utilize zero force interaction, are very thin, and
robust under a variety of operating conditions. This multi-touch sensing (MTS)
technology opens up new possibilities for a comprehensive tactile interface that
incorporates keyboard entry, mouse control, and powerful macro definition in a
gesture-based interface. This research addresses the core hardware and software
issues necessary to yield MTS interfaces that are fully accessible to
individuals with a wide range of disabilities, and that can accommodate
variations in hand size/configuration, range of movements, and movement
dynamics. Specifically, the PIs will focus on individuals with (1) limited
motion of the digits and wrist, (2) limited motion of the elbow or shoulder, and
(3) irregularity of movement trajectories. The project will consist of four
fundamental components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Image Model Development: Contact
with the MTS produces an "image" consisting of the areas of contact between the
user and surface. Current image models are based on full hand and finger
function. These models will be updated to handle palm, fist, and knuckle
gestures produced by individuals with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;2. Contact
Trajectory Modeling and Filtering: Models will be developed to track the spatio-
temporal characteristics of user contact images. Additionally, robust filtering
algorithms will be investigated and implemented to minimize the effect of
irregular movements due to unintended tremor or spasticity.&lt;br/&gt;3. Gesture
Definition and Recognition: Algorithms will be developed and implemented to
recognize an extensive collection of finger, knuckle, palm and fist gestures so
as to accommodate a wide range of functional limitations. Guidelines will be
created that help users identify which gestures are most appropriate for their
abilities. Configuration software will be created so that users can map these
gestures to the most critical actions for a given application environment.
&lt;br/&gt;4. Design and Construction of Integrated MTS Interfaces: MTS
interfaces that meet the particular needs of individuals with disabilities will
be designed and constructed. Designs will include an MTS interface integrated
into a wheelchair lap tray and Bluetooth based wireless MTS interfaces. These
integrated interfaces will enable users to control multiple devices, such as
PDAs, computers, and ECUs, through a single, customized
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rigorous evaluation procedures will inform all
research components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will
afford individuals with disabilities more accommodating&lt;br/&gt;and efficient
access to computer, PDAs, and the National Information Infrastructure, all of
which are now critical in such diverse pursuits as business, education, travel,
and leisure.&lt;br/&gt;