* 0308535
* Talking Biology: Active Learning in the Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Daniel Klionsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 305,000.00

This project aims to invigorate the introductory biology core course by
implementing an active-learning format. It is based on an appreciation that
knowledge must be constructed, and learned, by each individual, and that while
the responsibility for teaching rests upon the instructor, the responsibility
for learning rests with the students. The PI aims to move away from the standard
lecture/note-taking format and implement an active-learning approach that he has
been developing for the past few years, a strategy he thinks it is critical to
implement starting with introductory biology. With the active-learning format
proposed, students are held responsible for the basic reading prior to the start
of each day's class. The use of reading quizzes provides a positive
reinforcement for ensuring that active learning begins prior to class. The
majority of class time then can be spent on group problem solving. In this
format, students collaborate, rather than compete, in the learning process.
Concept quizzes provide rapid feedback and allow both the student and instructor
to follow the students' progress in learning the material. The major emphasis is
on keeping up, thus allowing the class to build on material that was covered in
a previous session. This active-learning format is being used for the large
introductory classes of approximately 450-500 students. A smaller class of 60 is
being offered for students who are enrolled in the honors program. A revised
laboratory course (and a new lab course for the honors class) complements the
"lecture" class. The laboratory is designed around one scientifically
interesting topic and incorporates opportunities for individual thinking. The
main goals/outcomes of this approach include: 1. Students gain an understanding
that it is their responsibility to learn by taking an active role in the
process; 2. Students who are introduced to a scientific method of thinking both
through in-class problem solving and the laboratory; 3. Students who develop
higher-order thinking skills because they use the information they learn in
problem solving, and learn to synthesize the material in a conceptual manner,
rather than simply memorize facts. Intellectual merit: The proposal advocates a
substantial modification of the current approach to teaching/learning for
undergraduates at research universities. The methodology can be applied by any
instructor, including research-active faculty. The essence of the proposal is to
move away from passive learning to an active, inquiry-based approach. Broader
impact: The targeted group for this proposal is freshmen and sophomore students
taking a class in introductory biology. Approximately 1,000 students per year
take the introductory course at the University of Michigan. The "lecture" part
of the course in particular could easily be implemented at other schools,
increasing the target audience to hundreds of thousands of students across the
nation.