* 0308070
* IDEA: Land/Ocean Biogeochemical Observatory for Nutrient and Carbon Cycling
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Kenneth Johnson, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,770,700.00

Land/Ocean Biogeochemical Observatory for Nutrient and Carbon
Cycling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of complex, biogeochemical processes in
oceans, lakes and rivers are often hindered by a lack of sensor systems that can
be deployed for long-term, continuous observations. This is particularly true
for chemical sensors. While a variety of chemical sensor systems have been
demonstrated, there are few that can operate unattended for long periods (&gt;3
months) in aquatic systems. Here, we propose to develop and refine a variety
chemical sensor or sampler systems for extended endurance, autonomous
observations. The operation of these instruments will be verified by deploying
them in an experimental Land/Ocean Biogeochemical Observatory (LOBO) in the
Elkhorn Slough National Estuarine Research Reserve (ESNERR) at the head of
Monterey Bay. LOBO will be an array of moorings equipped with autonomous
chemical and physical sensors and water samplers that will be operated in near
real-time. A key element of this project will be verification of the long-term
performance of the sensor systems by utilizing the observatory to perform
fundamental observations of biogeochemical cycles. The initial operation of the
observatory system will be demonstrated with two nitrate sensor systems, which
we have developed, that can operate for 3 to 4 month periods without
intervention. These sensors will be augmented with additional detection systems
for phosphate, silicate, ammonia, iron, pH and CO2 that are in various stages of
development. The observatory will consist of an array of 6 mooring 'nodes'
deployed along a transect from the ocean into and along the channel of Elkhorn
Slough. Each mooring will incorporate several chemical sensors, as well as basic
physical (T, S, depth, Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler) sensors. In-situ water
samplers will also be mounted on the moorings to collect samples for chemical
concentration and isotope analyses that will allow us to independently validate
sensor measurements and the biogeochemical processes that are inferred from the
observations. A coupled hydrodynamic model of Elkhorn Slough will allow us to
calculate mass balances and source and sink terms for chemical cycling. The
sensor array will be linked to the Internet in near real-time through a wireless
Local Area Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here can be
generalized to a broad range of coastal environments, many of which are subject
to coastal environments. As such, our system should be considered a pilot
project to assess the feasibility of operating biogeochemical observatories for
scientific, environmental management and educational purposes. "The network is
the sensor". Our goal is only met when we demonstrate this to be true with
substantial and novel results that enhance our ability to study, manage and
utilize ecosystems for education. In order to accomplish this, we must design a
chemical sensor network that can operate continuously, remain in calibration,
and assimilate data within short enough periods to facilitate focused studies
and training exercises. Such a real time system will provide unique educational
opportunities to inform the public about biogeochemical processes in the coastal
zone, and will provide valuable data to be used for wetland management
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;