* 0309515
* New Multi-Dimensional Solutions for Water Flow Through Heterogeneous and Unsaturated Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Paul Ferre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 113,258.00

Warrick&lt;br/&gt;0309515&lt;br/&gt;We propose new multi-dimensional solutions
for water flow through heterogeneous and unsaturated porous media. Geometrical
discontinuities and inclusions will be taken &lt;br/&gt;within an otherwise
homogeneous system. The approach combines two successful lines of pursuit: 1.
use of the analytic element method, which has recently found numerous
applications for steady-state flow through saturated media containing
heterogeneities; and 2. solution of the Helmholtz equation, which has been
applied to flow around a single obstruction in an unsaturated medium. Inspired
by the simpler saturated flow case, the proposed work extends the analytic
element method to include numerous, even hundreds of inclusions for unsaturated
soil. This allows flexibility to describe complex realizations of heterogeneous
flow fields. A limitation of the method is an assumption of a "Gardner" soil for
which the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity of material is exponentially
related to the pressure head. Thus, a critical component of the study is a
comparison of results using the Gardner soil to solutions based on other
hydraulic functions. This will identify which results are generic and which are
dependent on the exact form of the hydraulic functions chosen. In addition to
the analysis of flow through heterogeneous soils, an important application of
the new solutions regards flow around measurement devices, such as tensiometers,
TDR probes and collection devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
FULL PROPOSAL AND SCALED-DOWN &lt;br/&gt;PROJECT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary differences between the revised and original project are that the new
plan eliminates all lab work (under the old Objective I) and the development of
particle tracking schemes (planned under the original Objective 4). The new
emphasis will be on completion of Objective 2 and the first three bullets of
Objective 3. Thus, the all important comparisons of how well the Gardner soils
can be used to identify universal results common to other unsaturated hydraulic
functions (e.g., "van Genuchten" and "Brooks and Corey") would be complete.
Also, the revised project still includes development of new analytical solutions
a,.,; related to measurement devices and source/sinks as included in Objective
3. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;