* 0309480
* Research in geometric topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Kiyoshi Igusa, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 124,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0309480&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Kiyoshi Igusa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
proposes to develop and use his three&lt;br/&gt;new formulas for the Miller-
Morita-Mumford classes on the&lt;br/&gt;cohomology of the mapping class group to
investigate some of the&lt;br/&gt;main problems in geometric topology, in
particular the question&lt;br/&gt;of whether these invariants are nontrivial on
the Torelli&lt;br/&gt;group. Igusa also plans to integrate the basic ideas into
the&lt;br/&gt;first year graduate topology course at Brandeis. The
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;concept being used is that of an A-infinity functor.
Since&lt;br/&gt;ordinary homology and cohomology have intrinsic
A-infinity&lt;br/&gt;structures and since A-infinity functors give an
alternative&lt;br/&gt;approach to spectral sequences, it would be both feasible
and&lt;br/&gt;appropriate to introduce this concept at an early stage and
to&lt;br/&gt;engage beginning graduate students and gifted undergraduates
into&lt;br/&gt;research related topics at an early stage. The lecture
notes&lt;br/&gt;would be made available online and expository papers would
also&lt;br/&gt;be posted on preprint servers to explain and disseminate
the&lt;br/&gt;current uses of this old concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is about graphs and surfaces. The study of the space&lt;br/&gt;of all
graphs and the space of surfaces is an active area of&lt;br/&gt;research in
Topology and Algebraic Geometry which has captured the&lt;br/&gt;attention of
mathematicians and theoretical physicists in recent&lt;br/&gt;years because of
the work of Ed Witten and Maxim Kontsevich both&lt;br/&gt;of whom received
Fields Medals for their influential work. Igusa&lt;br/&gt;brings an innovative
approach to this field by apply new methods&lt;br/&gt;in high dimensional
Algebraic Topology to the study of these one&lt;br/&gt;and two dimensional
objects. Igusa's methods have already solved&lt;br/&gt;several previously
unanswered questions, both theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;computational. In this
project Igusa plans to tackle some of the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental theoretical
problems in this field which his&lt;br/&gt;preliminary research has found to be
amenable to his methods. He&lt;br/&gt;also proposed to educate the Mathematical
public to demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;the accessibility of these exotic methods. The
impact of this&lt;br/&gt;research will be to accelerate the expansion of this
important&lt;br/&gt;area of research and to make basic Topology more exciting to
the&lt;br/&gt;students who study it by incorporating topics of current
research.&lt;br/&gt;