* 0309825
* Energy-Aware Synthesis of Embedded Systems on Multiprocessor Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Project Summary: Energy-aware Synthesis of Embedded Systems
on&lt;br/&gt;Multiprocessor Platforms &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sanjoy Baruah James
H. Anderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two evident trends in the real-time embedded
systems domain are (i)&lt;br/&gt;the proliferation of multiprocessor platforms,
and (ii) the&lt;br/&gt;proliferation of applications for which energy
consumption must be&lt;br/&gt;minimized. In the years ahead, it is reasonable to
expect these two&lt;br/&gt;trends to converge: indeed, one major advantage of
multiprocessor&lt;br/&gt;implementations over uniprocessor ones is that the
former tend to be&lt;br/&gt;more energy-efficient. To date, however, the little
work that has&lt;br/&gt;been done on energy-aware multiprocessor designs has
been limited to&lt;br/&gt;relatively simple table-driven scheduling schemes; a
precise&lt;br/&gt;characterization of the energy savings realized by moving to
a&lt;br/&gt;multiprocessor implementation is not
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These observations point to a significant need for
research to be&lt;br/&gt;conducted on the tradeoffs that exist when designing
energy-aware&lt;br/&gt;multiprocessor systems. This project proposes to fill
this need by&lt;br/&gt;developing and experimentally evaluating design
methodologies and&lt;br/&gt;scheduling algorithms that facilitate the synthesis
of embedded&lt;br/&gt;real-time systems upon multiprocessor platforms, with the
primary goal&lt;br/&gt;of minimizing energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. Based partially on the results
of this project, two&lt;br/&gt;new courses will be developed: an introductory
graduate course on&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems, and a graduate seminar on
multiprocessor embedded&lt;br/&gt;designs. The introductory embedded-systems
course will be created as&lt;br/&gt;a follow-on to current real-time systems and
advanced operating&lt;br/&gt;systems courses. The seminar course on
multiprocessor designs will be&lt;br/&gt;a follow-on to the introductory course.
A concerted effort will be&lt;br/&gt;made to involve underrepresented groups in
our research. Results from&lt;br/&gt;the algorithmic research will be
disseminated through publications.&lt;br/&gt;Any software of general utility
that results from this project will be&lt;br/&gt;made publically available on
the web.&lt;br/&gt;