* 0309576
* Spectral-Element Simulations of Seismic Wave Propagation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Jeroen Tromp, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 685,547.00

Tromp&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0309576&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use and
extend a numerical technique called the `spectral-element method' (SEM) to model
seismic wave propagation. The method incorporates complications due to lateral
variations in compressional-wave speed, shear-wave speed and density, a 3D
crustal model, ellipticity, topography and bathymetry, the oceans, attenuation,
anisotropy, and, at long periods, rotation and self-gravitation. They propose to
use these capabilities to investigate tradeoffs between isotropic and
anisotropic structure in surface-wave modeling, and to analyze long-period PKIKP
waveforms associated with an anisotropic inner core. They will also implement
fully 3D centroid-moment tensor (CMT) inversions based upon numerically
calculated Frechet derivatives. The SEM can handle finite rupture models, which
turns out to be quite important for several large recent events that exhibit
strong directivity. When modeling amplitude anomalies there exist significant
tradeoffs between elastic focusing and attenuation. The SEM can accommodate
lateral variations in both elastic and anelastic structure, which provides a
quantitative means of assessing this tradeoff. The investigators will extend the
SEM to simulate seismic wave propagation in sedimentary basins. Based upon a
detailed 3D Los Angeles basin model developed by Prof. John Shaw and his co-
workers at Harvard, they are embarking on waveform modeling of TriNet data. At
the end of the proposed research period the basin software package will be made
available for use by other research groups. Finally, the investigators have
established a collaboration with Dr. Seiji Tsuboi of JAMSTEC (Japan), which
involves SEM simulations on the Earth Simulator, the world's largest and fastest
computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal include open-
source software packages for the simulation of seismic wave propagation in
sedimentary basins and the entire globe. Simulations based upon these packages
can be used to investigate seismic hazard and aid in the determination of
earthquake source parameters. The SEM can also be used to assess and improve the
quality of tomographic models of the mantle, an endeavor that will enhance our
understanding of the physics of the Earth's interior. Finally, the proposal
would support the education and training of two graduate students and one
postdoc.&lt;br/&gt;