* 0309657
* Complex Structures in Spatially Extended Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Hermann Riecke, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 239,951.00

Proposal: DMS-0309657&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hermann Riecke
[h-riecke@northwestern.edu]&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Complex Structures in Spatially Extended Dynamical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research funded
by this grant will contribute to the understanding of complex spatio-temporal
structures in two types of dynamical systems with many degrees of freedom. 1)
The impact of near-resonant forcing with multiple frequencies on spatially
extended continuous oscillatory media will be investigated using analytical and
computational methods. Multi-frequency forcing affords substantially greater
control of the system and may give access to dynamical labyrinthine patterns and
may allow the annihilation of spiral waves; by allowing to tune the interaction
between spatially periodic modes it may stabilize and select spatial structures
exhibiting multiple length scales such as superlattices or quasipatterns. In
contrast to the well-studied Faraday waves in vertically vibrated fluids, the
oscillators may loose their phase-locking relative to the forcing, which may add
temporal complexity to the superlattices and quasipatterns. Multi-frequency
forcing of oscillatory media can be implemented in the light-sensitive chemical
reactions currently investigated experimentally. 2) The importance of networks
comprised of discrete elements and exhibiting complex topology has been
increasingly appreciated. Most attention has been given to their geometrical
properties. The second project will elucidate how the dynamics of a network of
locally coupled discrete excitable elements is impacted by the addition of
random long-range connections, which transform the network into a small-world
network. The research is inspired by studies of cortical brain tissue in which
neural networks with local and non-local connectivity exhibit persistent
activity without external input. Can the long-range connections induce the
persistent activity in the absence of external input? How does it depend on the
network topology? How robust is the bistability between the active and the
quiescent state with respect to noise? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical
theory of dynamical systems provides powerful tools to understand and predict
the dynamical behavior of systems in many areas of science and engineering. The
work of the PI and his collaborators will focus on two distinct classes of
systems that are comprised of a large number of interacting dynamical elements.
1) Spontaneous oscillations occur in many spatially extended natural systems,
e.g. chemical systems. They can lead to the propagation of waves that have
important biological functions. For instance, cAMP-waves provide the signaling
between Dictyostelium cells when they aggregate to form a multi-cellular
organism, and calcium waves provide communication inside a wide variety of
cells. It is important to understand how such oscillations respond to a
variability of their environment. The variation has strongest impact when its
frequency is close to a multiple of the natural frequency of the oscillation.
The first project will identify various consequences resulting from such near-
resonant variations. It is expected that the results on spiral dynamics will
also be relevant for excitable media like heart muscle. In view of the
significance of spirals during life-threatening ventricular fibrillation the
question whether multi-frequency forcing can annihilate spirals is of particular
interest. 2) Self-sustained activity of networks of neurons is essential for
various tasks of the brain such as its ability to quickly store information for
a brief duration while performing a task based on that information (e.g. when
dialing a phone number) and then deleting it. The second project will shed light
on what kind of connectivity between the neurons is favorable for tasks like
that. - Teaching graduate students analytical and computational methods and
their application as well as communication skills is an integral part of both
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;