* 0309264
* Late Cretaceous Osmium Isotope Stratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Gregory Ravizza, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2007
* USD 209,530.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osmium isotope analyses will be performed on a
suite of marine sediment samples in order to reconstruct seawater 187Os/188Os
variations during the Maastrichtian and late Campanian. This sample suite will
provide the global coverage required to determine empirically whether the
resulting composite Os isotope record is representative of whole-ocean changes
in 187Os/188Os. The specific study sites will include both outcrop samples
collected from classic Scaglia Rossa sections in the Italian Apennines, and
samples from archived ODP/DSDP material recovered from the Western Pacific,
South Atlantic and Southern Ocean. Os isotope analyses will be performed by
single collector magnetic sector ICP-MS at the University of Hawaii. This high
through-put method is essential for this study in order to achieve the high
temporal resolution required to resolve the influence of specific geologic
events. Preliminary results reported in the text of the proposal demonstrate the
viability of this approach, and indicate that there is a step-wise decline of
approximately 50% in sediment 187Os/188Os ratios during the last 3 million years
of Maastrichtian time, prior to the K-T boundary event. The specific phenomena
this study focuses on are (1) emplacement of the Deccan Traps in the latest
Maastrichtian and (2) a putative eustatic sea-level fall in the early
Maastrichtian. &lt;br/&gt;Numerous stable isotope studies of benthic and
planktic forams reveal evidence of a brief episode of global warming 200-300
thousand years prior to the K-T boundary. Several investigators suggest that
this warming is caused by Deccan volcanism. The marine 187Os/188Os ratio is
expected to decline as a result of unradiogenic, mantle-derived Os (low
187Os/188Os) associated with Deccan volcanism. By directly comparing Os isotope
and oxygen isotope data from the same cores it will be possible to test the
hypothesis that Deccan volcanism played a causative role in global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;Published sequence stratigraphic data from the New Jersey
continental margin documents a significant regression near the base of
magnetochron C31R. This sea-level low stand is coincident with a shift to
heavier oxygen isotope ratios in several published planktic and benthic foram
records, an association that is suggestive of continental glaciation. Previous
Os isotope work across the Eocene-Oligocene transition, and in recent glacial
moraines, indicate that glacial cycles enhance the delivery of radiogenic
continental Os (high 187Os/188Os) to the ocean. This study will seek evidence of
high seawater 187Os/188Os coincident with the putative early Maastrichtian
glaciation. If such evidence is found this will strengthen the case for
Cretaceous glaciation, a controversial claim with broad implications for our
understanding of Earth's climate evolution. It will also lay a foundation for
seeking Os isotope evidence for older Cretaceous glacial events.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research effort include heavy emphasis of graduate
education and an opportunity for undergraduate participation in research at the
University of Hawaii, a culturally and ethnically diverse university.&lt;br/&gt;