* 0309995
* Collaborative Research (USC and UCSB): Direct Observation of Depth Variation in Fault Zone Structure Through and Below the Seismogenic Crust
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Bradley Hacker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2007
* USD 116,316.00

James Dolan (USC), Brad Hacker (UCSB), Charlie Sammis (USC), Ann Blythe (USC),
and their German collaborator Lothar Ratsbacher (Frieberg) are studying the
relationship between earthquake mechanics and fault-zone structure through
multi-disciplinary analysis of the exhumed, Miocene-aged Salzach-Ennstal-
Mariazell-Puchberg [SEMP] fault zone in Austria. One of their major goals is to
understand whether seismic ruptures always occur on a well-defined planar
structure or whether the complexity observed in exhumed fault zones plays an
important role in the nucleation and propagation of earthquakes. Stated another
way, is earthquake mechanics fundamentally a problem in granular mechanics, or
should it be viewed primarily in terms of frictional sliding along a single slip
surface? These issues are critical for the question of scaling laboratory
experiments to the Earth. A related issue is the role of fault-zone structure in
the long- and short-term transport of fault-zone fluids, and their role in the
faulting process. Although much has been learned about these issues from
structural studies of exhumed faults, seismic studies of active fault zones, and
laboratory studies of the mechanics of earthquake nucleation, this overall set
of issues has proven extremely difficult to address in a systematic fashion on a
single fault. In their analysis of the SEMP fault zone, the PI's are exploiting
a unique example of a major strike-slip fault that has been tilted during
exhumation, such that a continuum of exhumation levels-from the near-surface
down into the lower crust-are now exposed along strike. Moreover, the SEMP fault
system has participated in its own exhumation to a limited extent, reducing
potential structural overprints related to younger faulting. Their research will
characterize the geometry and internal structural architecture of the SEMP fault
zone throughout the entire depth range of the seismogenic crust, with a focus on
the recognition of depth-dependent changes in fault-zone structure. Field
studies are focusing on structural transects across the SEMP fault zone at
exhumation levels ranging from the near-surface at the eastern end of the fault
(Vienna pull-apart basin), within the seismogenic crust (central Austria), and
down into the ductile lower crust exposed in the Tauern window of western
Austria. In addition to detailed field mapping of structural fabrics, fluid-rock
interactions, relative timing relationships, and variations in fault geometry,
the PI's are conducting detailed analyses of fault-zone rocks designed to
explore deformation at a wide range of scales using petrographic microscopy,
cathodoluminescence microscopy, fluid-inclusion studies, scanning electron
microscopy, and transmission/analytical electron microscopy.

