* 0309330
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Female Fitness Consequences of Polyandry in an Orb-Web Spider, Argiope Trifasciata
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Daniel Rubenstein, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Beecher
* 01/31/2006
* USD 11,942.00

Rubenstein-Sundaresan Doctoral Dissertation Improvement
Grant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual Behavior and Female Associations in
Fission-Fusion Equid&lt;br/&gt;Societies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal societies
result from the sum of all relationships that develop
among&lt;br/&gt;individuals within populations. Many studies have demonstrated
how&lt;br/&gt;environmental circumstances, both ecological and social, influence
the benefits&lt;br/&gt;and costs associated with the various behavioral options
available to&lt;br/&gt;individuals and thus how they these factors structure
animal societies. Yet in&lt;br/&gt;species where potential relationships are
many and those that form are fluid,&lt;br/&gt;the link between environmental
features and the relationships that develop are&lt;br/&gt;poorly understood.
This project explores how ecological features, such as
the&lt;br/&gt;distribution of food, water and predator-free sites, together with
the&lt;br/&gt;demographic and social features, such as population density and
sex ratio,&lt;br/&gt;shape individual relationships in the Grevy's zebra and
wild ass, two&lt;br/&gt;evolutionarily closely related species exhibiting
'fissioning' and 'fusing'&lt;br/&gt;social systems. We have developed a novel
model that predicts rules for the&lt;br/&gt;formation and breakdown of
relationships in such 'open-membership' societies&lt;br/&gt;and forecasts the
impact these rules will have on population-wide social&lt;br/&gt;patterns and
processes. Data will be gathered on two endangered equid
species,&lt;br/&gt;Grevy's zebra and Onagers, from four sites. The four sites
provide natural&lt;br/&gt;variation in the key environmental and social forces
and will serve as an ideal&lt;br/&gt;system for testing the predictions of our
model. The study will also provide&lt;br/&gt;useful information needed to
improve conservation strategies for these species&lt;br/&gt;by educating
students and the local populace and by demonstrating to
natural&lt;br/&gt;resource managers how fundamental behavioral research can
assist in designing&lt;br/&gt;effective management plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;