* 0309626
* Hydrological Characterization and Petrophysical Analysis of Saturated and Unsaturated Soils from Electrical Response Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Fred Boadu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2009
* USD 144,713.00

0309626&lt;br/&gt;Boadu&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface characterization whether in the
saturated or unsaturated zone for the purposes of aquifer characterization,
transport of contaminants and design of contaminant remediation strategies,
demand accurate and reliable prediction of the petrophysical and hydraulic
properties. The primary goal of the proposed research is to develop an
integrated approach, which incorporates physico-chemically based model
developments, laboratory measurements and interpretational tools using
artificial neural networks, to predict saturated or unsaturated hydraulic
conductivity, porosity and moisture content of the earth's subsurface from
frequency dependent resistivity measurements. Models describing the frequency
dependent resistivity of soils based on physico-chemical principles will be
developed that will include hydraulic and petrophysical parameters as primary
variables. In the first two years, laboratory experiments will be designed to
measure frequency dependent resistivity as well as the petrophysical and
hydraulic properties of over 100 soil samples from different geological
environments. The soil samples will be fully characterized by measuring their
hydraulic conductivity, porosity, density, moisture content and particle size
distribution (clay and organic matter content) in the laboratory. Acceptable
Pedo-transfer functions will be used to provide useful information on both
saturated or unsaturated hydraulic conductivities. In the final year, the
capabilities of artificial neural networks (ANN) to adapt, generalize and
identify non-linearities in relationships among complex and coupled variables,
will be explored to determine the functional relationships between the spectral
electrical response of soils and their hydraulic and petrophysical properties.
Uncertainties in the predicted variables in the proposed prediction method due
to noise and model parameter misrepresentations and inefficiencies in the
training method will be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;