* 0309444
* Charge Photogeneration and Recombination in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 349,170.00

The goal of this project is to gain fundamental understanding of charge
photogeneration and recombination in organic semiconductors. The approach is to
use fresh experimental approaches designed to answer basic questions and to
provide mechanistic insight. A time delayed field collection technique will be
used to quantify charge generation in conjugated polymers without the
ambiguities of photoconductivity or spectroscopic measurements. Theories for the
wavelength, field and temperature dependence of charge generation yield will be
tested. Transient pump and dump experiments that address the mechanism of charge
generation are included. To study recombination, time-gated and thermally
stimulated luminescence will be used to interrogate recombination of
photogenerated charges that have lost spin correlation. This approach makes the
results relevant to electroluminescent devices but is free from the difficulties
of quenching at contacts and freezeout of transport at low temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;An important impact of the project is in education and
human resource development through the integration of research and education.
The project involves graduate and undergraduate students, including visiting
summer students from a minority serving institution, CCNY, with undergraduates
doing senior theses taking part in our research. The PI is also active in
outreach activities hosting high school students to do research. Participants at
all levels will present their work orally and in writing as a part of their
experience and to disseminate knowledge obtained in the research. The PI and
students also interact with several retired and active industrial colleagues who
participate in group research. Their input assists connections to
technologically relevant issues where basic research can have important impact.
One such thrust is to improve understanding of charge photogeneration in
conjugated polymers as it pertains to development of solar cells and
photovoltaics based on organic materials. A similar goal is to identify the
states resulting from recombination of charges with uncorrelated spins as it
pertains to selection of materials for polymer LEDs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;