* 0309289
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Structure of Heritable Variation in Developmental Gene Expression in the Purple Urchin
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/2004
* USD 11,310.00

Heritable variation in gene expression is raw material for the evolution of
development, yet almost nothing is known about the distribution of such
variation in nature. This proposal outlines a plan to estimate the structure of
heritable variation in developmental gene expression in a natural population of
purple sea urchins, a model system for developmental biology. Through the use of
quantitative genetic techniques, the pattern of heritable variation in the
abundance of gene products will be estimated for 120 genes at each of four
stages in embryonic development. The resulting estimates will help answer
several outstanding questions: How much heritable variation exists for early
developmental gene expression? What is the timecourse of genetic variation and
covariation? How do maternal effects influence variation in gene expression?
Finally, how do networks of regulatory gene interactions influence the
architecture of developmental variation, and hence the possibilities for
developmental evolution? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to
the synthesis of evolutionary and developmental biology, validate a new approach
to studying heritable trait variation, and introduce quantitative genetics into
sea urchin research. In addition, a deeper understanding of the patterns of
genetic correlations among developmental gene expression traits could have
applications to animal breeding and medical association studies. &lt;br/&gt;