* 0309148
* Postseismic Processes Following the 1999 Chi-Chi, Earthquake and Models of Active Crustal Deformation in Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2006
* USD 203,129.00

EAR-0309148&lt;br/&gt;Segall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postseismic
Processes Following the 1999 Chi-Chi, Earthquake and Models of Active Crustal
Deformation in Taiwan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mw = 7.5, 1999 Chi-Chi, Taiwan
earthquake occurred in the center of a dense GPS network. In the first 200 days
after the earthquake displacements of as much as 10 cm accumulated in both the
horizontal and vertical components. The dense spatial coverage and extraordinary
signal to noise ratio make the postseismic deformation field of the Chi-Chi
earthquake arguably the best ever recorded. Preseismic displacement rates
provide unique information on the geometry and slip-rates of active faults, the
earthquake loading cycle, and tectonics of an active arc continent
collision.&lt;br/&gt;Afterslip, viscous flow, and poroelastic relaxation have
all been proposed to explain transient postseismic deformation. The data from
the Chi-Chi earthquake is of such high signal to noise ratio that it is possible
to discriminate between these processes. The early postseismic transient (3
months) is best explained by afterslip, however analysis of deformation over the
subsequent years may reveal viscoelastic and/or poroelastic relaxation.
Inversion results reveal that afterslip encircled the zone of large coseismic
slip, consistent with stable slip being driven by stress changes caused by the
earthquake. Inferred afterslip at seismogenic depths raises the question of why
this slip occurred slowly rather than rapidly during the earthquake. Space-time
inversions combined with mechanical models of slip consistent with laboratory
derived friction laws will help to address this and should also elucidate fault
zone properties and stresses. &lt;br/&gt;Inversion of both the coseismic and
postseismic GPS data are consistent with a ramp-flat geometry for the Chelungpu
Fault. The geometry of active faults at greater depths is, however, not fully
resolved. One difficulty has been that mechanically consistent models of
interseismic deformation in compressional orogenic environments are needed. We
propose to develop physical 2D viscoelastic models of the earthquake cycle in
Taiwan, which include the first order effects of gravity, and in which the slip
rates on faults are driven by far field plate motions rather than imposed
kinematically. These models, combined with the available velocity field, will
allow estimates of the geometry and slip-rates on active faults in
Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;