* 0309747
* Investigation of a Unique Mississippian Tetrapod Locality and Its Paleofauna
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Michael Coates, Cincinnati Museum Center
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 186,000.00

A new fossil locality in Hancock County, KY includes the world's oldest fully
terrestrial depositional environment preserving tetrapod fossils. It presents a
unique opportunity to investigate early tetrapod morphology and phylogeny while
providing important insight into contemporaneous fossil vertebrate faunas. This
project will allow extensive excavation of this internationally significant
locality and detailed preparation and preliminary study of the fossils derived
from these efforts. The information will provide an unparalleled view of a
unique Mississippian fauna and allow future broad-scale studies of fish and
tetrapod phylogeny and functional morphology.&lt;br/&gt;Non-marine fossils at
the Hancock Site are derived from three distinct facies: a heterolithic
sandstone, a carbonaceous shale, and a paleosol. A rich and diverse fauna is
represented by both fish (Gyracanthus, rhizodonts, dipnoans, palaeonisciforms,
and xenacanths) and tetrapods (a new colosteid temnospondyl, a new embolomere,
and others). Preservation in the shales and paleosol facies is exceptional and
three-dimensional, a rare situation for early tetrapod and rhizodont fossils.
Indeed, the discovery of a Mississippian tetrapod-bearing paleosol is unique. As
early tetrapod phylogeny is presently contentious, material from the Hancock
Site will ultimately enable large-scale phylogenetic analyses of early tetrapod
relationships. Its fossils will also provide an unprecedented opportunity to
reexamine the morphology and systematics of Rhizodontida as a sister group to
Osteolepiformes plus Tetrapoda.&lt;br/&gt; Abundant dipnoan material (c.f.
Tranodis) occurs in apparent aestivation burrows in the carbonaceous shale.
These are the oldest confirmed lungfish in burrows and their excavation and
conservation stand to add significantly to our knowledge of dipnoan functional
morphology, habitat occupation, and respiratory evolution.&lt;br/&gt;