* 0309799
* Testing Models of Crustal Growth in the Neoproterozoic Arabian-Nubian Shield
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 159,801.00

EAR-0309799&lt;br/&gt;Stern&lt;br/&gt;The Arabian-Nubian Shield (ANS) in
northeast Africa and western Arabia contains a large portion of Earth's
Neoproterozoic (1000-544 Ma) juvenile crust. This crust formed by processes
indistinguishable from those of modern plate tectonics, as witnessed by well-
defined tectonostratigraphic terranes separated by ophiolite-decorated sutures.
The ANS is therefore ideal for testing the central controversy facing our
understanding of continental crust formation: the importance of magmatic
contributions at convergent margins vs. those of mantle plumes, either as
accreted oceanic plateaux or as underplated material. This project will test the
viability of the plume model for continental growth in the ANS by focusing on
the origin and evolution of the terranes adjacent to the Bi'r Umq suture in
western Saudi Arabia. The primary objective is to combine locally detailed
structural, lithostratigraphic, and petrological information with comprehensive
geochemical, isotopic, and geochronological constraints on the tectonic setting
and source regions of major volcanic and magmatic units. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed research promises to contribute fundamentally to scientific
understanding of the mechanisms and timing of continental crust formation in the
Neoproterozoic, with significant implications for modern processes. Broader
Implications: This project was developed by and for a doctoral student and so is
a confluence of research and education. Understanding Neoproterozoic crustal
growth has important implications for understanding global atmospheric,
hydrospheric, and biospheric changes during this time, and so will contribute to
understanding Earth systems and processes. The results of this study will also
contribute to the MARGINS "Rupturing Continental Lithosphere" experiment, as the
opening of the Red Sea (a MARGINS focus site) is largely controlled by
reactivation of Precambrian structures such as the Bi'r Umq suture. The project
also promotes international collaboration between scientists from the U.S. and
the newly formed Saudi Geological Survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;