* 0309448
* Water-Induced Fabric Transitions in Olivine
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 354,417.00

EAR-0309448&lt;br/&gt;Karato&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
experimental studies during the previous funding periods have demonstrated that
the deformation fabrics (lattice preferred orientation: LPO) in olivine under
high water content conditions are markedly different from those under water-poor
conditions. Some of the fabrics in naturally deformed peridotites and some of
the observed seismic anisotropy in the upper mantle may reflect these water-
induced fabric transitions in olivine. However, previous research has major
limitations in that the scaling laws for fabric transitions have not been
quantified and the roles of other minerals such as orthopyroxene have not been
explored. In this new proposal, the investigator proposes to extend the previous
studies in the following directions. First, they will determine the scaling laws
of fabric diagram with a focus on the effects of temperature. Second, they will
investigate microscopic mechanisms controlling the varieties of microstructures
with the emphasis on deformation mechanism boundary. Their preliminary results
suggest that water may enhance diffusion-related processes more than
dislocation-controlled processes. The large-strain shear deformation technique
developed in the investigator's lab together with a newly installed high-
resolution SEM (scanning electron microscope) will be utilized in this study.
The results will have important implications for interpreting deformation
fabrics of naturally deformed rocks as well as for the interpretation of seismic
anisotropy. The research described in this proposal will comprise a major
component of Phil Skemer's Ph D thesis.&lt;br/&gt;