* 0309537
* Development and Feasibility Study of an Integrated High-speed Photonic Search Engine with Applications to Information Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Ahmed Louri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 199,999.00

Searching is a fundamental and pervasive operation in information processing. It
can be expressed in a variety of forms such as (a) equivalence search (exact
match search, not-equal-to search, similar-to search) (b) magnitude comparison
search (smaller than, greater than, not-smaller-than, not-greater-than), (c)
between limits search (search within a range or outside a range), (d) ordered
retrieval search (ascending order, descending order), (e) extreme search
(finding the maximum, the minimum, and the median), and (f) lookup search. These
types of searches can be found in many information technology (IT) applications
including database processing, artificial intelligence, pattern matching,
security, and communications. In addition to its widespread use in information
processing, searching plays a major role in data communication and routing where
it serves as the basis for routing table lookup and classification necessary for
packet routing. Conventional processors are often designed for numerical
processing and search operations are delegated to software. Consequently, and
for many applications, search operations are the most time consuming and create
a major performance bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project,
we propose to investigate the development and detailed analysis of novel
photonic search engines, that can implement search operations in hardware as
directly as possible, and thereby as efficiently as possible. This will not only
provide for minimum execution time but will also increase efficiency in other
areas. These engines can be used as co-processing assists within a larger
electronic processing node for computation and/or communication or as stand-
alone search accelerators. We propose a novel approach that will combine device
technology with architectural innovations in an efficient and practical manner
with the aim of achieving a significant improvement in performance as well as
reduction in system size. Our approach differs significantly from any on-going
research on the subject. It represents a paradigm shift where search functions
are directly executed in hardware instead of coded as lengthy subroutines using
low-level instructions. It is anticipated that this approach will provide
parallel search engines with low-power operation, high-speed processing (in the
Terabits/second range), high degree of parallelism (due to the exploitation of
several degrees of freedom in optics), and small monolithically integrated
system size. The proposed research will have a broader impact on information
technology. It is likely that a new field of study, multi-wavelength guided-wave
integrated optical processing, will emerge for designing smaller processing
systems while providing even more computing power than before.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;