* 0309975
* Quantifying Climatic Controls on Sediment Production and Hillslope Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Joshua Roering, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Joshua J. Roering (EAR-0309975)&lt;br/&gt;University of
Oregon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sedimentary deposits proximal to hilly and
mountainous terrain record significant variations in sediment delivery over the
last 2-3 million years. These fluctuations have been associated with climate
change although the responsible mechanisms are poorly known. In such landscapes,
analyses of lake-sediment cores often reveal a complex temperature and moisture
history as manifested by the temporal pattern of vegetation regimes. While the
influence of vegetation on hydrological processes has been well studied, the
role of vegetation in the mobilization and transport of soil into channels is
not well understood. Because recent evidence suggests that the mixing and
disruption of soils by the activity of biological organisms may play a dominant
role in the downslope movement of soil, hillslope evolution may be closely tied
to temporal changes in ecosystem properties. As a result, current hillslope
characteristics reflect a complex history modulated by climate-related changes
in vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI will quantify the influence of climate-
related vegetation changes on sediment production and hillslope evolution by
documenting and modeling the transport of soil and naturally-occurring tracers
in field sites with variable paleo-environmental records. At our loess-mantled
study sites in New Zealand and the Columbia Plateau, USA, we will use soil
stratigraphy, high-resolution topographic data, and detailed characterizations
of tephra deposits to quantify paleo-hillslope geometry and characterize soil
transport processes. Along hillslope transects, he will use buried tephra
deposits as both a marker bed for recording exhumation and a tracer for
documenting how hillslope processes mix and displace soil. When combined, soil,
paleo-environmental, topographic, and tephra datasets will enable him to test
soil transport models and reconstruct how climate change regulated transport
rates and hillslope dynamics in the late Quaternary. PI's results will be useful
for newly emerging carbon sequestration and transport calculations as well as
land management strategies.&lt;br/&gt;