* 0309221
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny and Natural History of the Flanged Bombardier Beetles (Coleoptera: Carabidae: Paussinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* David Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 8,806.00

A NSF Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant has been awarded to Dr. David R.
Maddison and Ms. Wendy Moore of the University of Arizona to fund research on
ant-loving bombardier beetles, known as paussines. Bombardier beetles have
remarkable chemical attributes and behaviors. They deter predators by excreting
toxic chemicals at 100 degrees Celsius, the boiling point of water. Paussines
are one of only two groups of bombardier beetles. Many paussine species are
obligate guests of ants. Circumstantial evidence suggests that the beetles may
communicate with their ant hosts via chemicals and substrate borne vibrations.
Adult beetles live inside their host ant nests where they feed on ant larvae.
Female beetles lay their eggs inside of the ant nest and the ants raise the
beetle larvae as if they were their own young. In return, the beetles excrete an
unknown substance that the ants consume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Using DNA
sequence data, the grantees will determine if the ability to bombard evolved
once or twice within beetles. They will also infer the pattern of evolutionary
relationship among the major groups of paussine beetles. This work will result
in the publication of a branching diagram depicting the evolutionary history of
these beetles that will set the foundation for subsequent studies of paussine
chemistry and natural history. This grant will also help fund a collecting
expedition to Africa to acquire necessary beetle specimens. During this visit
Ms. Wendy Moore will present her research on paussine beetles to a variety of
audiences at Universities and Natural History museums in Africa. She also helps
to enlist African graduate students to join her in the field. Thus this
expedition will facilitate relations between US and African academics and
institutions, and greatly enhance her graduate training.&lt;br/&gt;