* 0309212
* Exchange-Corrected CFC Dating of Stream Flow
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* D. Kip Solomon, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2007
* USD 231,030.00

0309212..&lt;br/&gt;Solomon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mean transit time of
groundwater is a fundamental and robust characteristic of a subsurface flow
system. In unconfined aquifers, the mean groundwater transit time is related to
(1) the volume of water stored in the aquifer and (2) the flux of water into or
out of the aquifer. Environmental tracers such as tritium have been used to
estimate the mean transit time, but generally require a time series of
measurements from the early 1960s to approximately 1980 and such data sets are
very rare. Precise groundwater dating using dissolved gases such as
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) has become relatively common. If CFC groundwater ages
were preserved in the base flow of streams it might be possible to obtain flow-
weighted mean transit time estimates even when long-term time series are not
available. Although one might think that CFCs in streams would equilibrate with
the atmosphere, samples collected from a variety of streams during base flow
conditions are NOT in equilibrium with atmospheric CFCs (at the temperature and
elevation of the stream) suggesting that exchange with the atmosphere is
sluggish.&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of the proposed research is that
gaining streams will not equilibrate with CFCs in the atmosphere provided that
the flux of non-modern groundwater can offset the rate of exchange with the
atmosphere. It is further hypothesized that by quantifying the rate of gas
exchange in a particular stream, the mean concentration of CFCs in groundwater
can be estimated. If these hypotheses can be validated, a new tool will exist
for obtaining integrated hydrologic properties in the subsurface. Such
integrated values can then form the basis for transforming properties measured
at the scale of boreholes to the scale of a groundwatershed (i.e.
upscaling.)&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted primarily in the Red Butte
watershed in the Wasatch Mountains, Utah, along with an application of the
results to regional streams draining the Colorado Plateau. Gas exchange
mechanisms, including the effects of bubble formation, will be evaluated by
conducting gas tracer tests in streams. The spatial variability of aquifer
properties (thickness, specific yield, etc.) and preferential (macropore) flow
will be considered by comparing groundwater ages in short-screen piezometers
with integrated values obtained in stream baseflow.&lt;br/&gt;The development of
a tool to evaluate the mean transit time of a subsurface watershed will provide
the basis for developing new paradigms for the regulation and protection the
Nation's water resources that are based on measurable values for the average
transit time of water and solutes in the subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;