* 0309672
* An Investigation of Vortex-based Hydropropulsors: Effect of Nozzle Contractility
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Morteza Gharib, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 246,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0309672&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR INITIATED&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATORS: MORTEZA GHARIB&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: CALIFORNIA INST. OF
TECH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AN INVESTIGATION OF VORTEX-BASED HYDROPROPULSORS:
EFFECT OF NOZZLE CONTRACTILITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What do jellyfish and the
human heart have in common? They both use a simple but reliable method to pump
fluid, a process that is the focus of this research program. State-of-the-art
experimental hydrodynamics techniques to uncover how these pumping systems are
designed by Nature. Such advances will help in detecting malfunctions in these
biological systems, potentially leading to earlier diagnosis of certain heart
diseases. In addition, the researchers have created computer algorithms to
rapidly "evolve" the naturally-occurring designs for use in biologically-
inspired machines with specific performance requirements. &lt;br/&gt;The
relative simplicity of the pulsed jet mechanism and its apparent success in
nature suggests serious consideration of these principles for use in man-made
systems. Studies of this question to date have relied on experimentation and
modeling of a piston ejecting fluid from a rigid cylindrical orifice to generate
vortex rings. This paradigm alone is insufficient for understanding the
governing processes of vortex formation in biologically relevant cases, due to
the paramount importance of wall deformation in their propulsive mechanisms. It
is proposed to examine the general case of a wall-contracting vortex generator
of arbitrary shape. Experiments will be conducted using a piston-cylinder
arrangement with a modified nozzle designed to facilitate time-variation of the
orifice exit area. A time-dependent parameter space consisting of piston
velocities and orifice exit areas will be interrogated to determine an optimal
parameter set for a given cost or fitness function (e.g. maximum thrust,
efficiency, etc). The objective is to discover the fundamental physical
processes governing thrust generation in variable-area pulsed jet propulsion
systems. &lt;br/&gt;With this technology, the researchers are aiming to develop
new strategies for designing systems ranging from artificial heart valves to
advanced underwater vehicle concepts. The research team combines resources from
the Aeronautics and Bioengineering departments at Caltech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;