* 0309103
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Species Boundaries and Phylogenetic Relationships in Chromosome Races of the Sceloporus grammicus Complex (Squamata).
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Jack Sites, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,953.00

A grant has been awarded from the National Science Foundation to Dr. Jack Sites
and Mr. Jonathon Marshall, Brigham Young University, to study "Species
boundaries and phylogenetic relationships of chromosome races of lizards of the
Sceloporus grammicus complex in central Mexico." These lizards represent one of
the most chromosomally variable of all non-mammalian vertebrate groups, and they
have been described as textbook examples of how chromosomal mutations may
facilitate the speciation process. Dr. Sites has spent over two decades of his
research career studying speciation mechanisms in this group, and has
accumulated a sufficiently large data base to make these lizards a "model
system" for selected kinds of research. The objective of this study will be to
test species boundaries across the eight chromosome 'races' known from central
Mexico, using a minimum of four different methodologies. This will be
accomplished by analyzing three different kinds of genetic markers, chromosomes,
enzyme products analyzed by gel electrophoresis, and DNA sequences from three
gene regions. Concordance among methods and data sets will be used to infer
species boundaries, which should allow determination of causes for any possible
conflicts among methods.&lt;br/&gt; This study has broad implications in the
following context. Two frequently stated objectives of systematic biology are
to: (1) discover the major 'natural groups' (= clades) of living species and how
these are related, and (2) to discover species. The literature in systematic
biology is very large with respect to theory and methods of tree-reconstruction
to accomplish objective 1, but it is surprising limited with respect to
objective 2, although the issue of delimitation of species is now getting
increased attention. To date only a single study has been published comparing
the performance of several methods (three), but the data set was limited, and
Sites and Marshall can capitalize on the large data base for the S. grammicus
complex to go far beyond anything previously attempted, and to contribute to the
larger debate on delimiting species. &lt;br/&gt;