* 0309226
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Phylogeny of Poison Dart Frogs (Anura: Dendrobatidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Darrel Frost, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 12/31/2005
* USD 11,548.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Darrel Frost and Mr. Taran Grant of the American
Museum of Natural History to study the evolutionary relationships of poison dart
frogs, a family of over 200 species from Central and South America.
Investigations over the past 40 years have led to detailed knowledge of many
aspects of the biology of these frogs. In contrast, little progress has been
made in understanding their phylogeny, which is a minimal requirement for a
predictive interpretation of the many discoveries that have been made. This
study will undertake a phylogenetic analysis of evidence from mitochondrial and
nuclear DNA sequences, morphology, skin toxins, behavior, and vocalizations for
approximately 100 species of poison dart frogs and their relatives. The
resulting phylogeny will be used to test hypotheses about the evolution of
toxicity, habitat preference, vocalizations, and morphological diversification.
The phylogeny will also serve to guide natural products chemists by indicating
potential sources of alkaloids. The diverse, powerfully toxic alkaloids found in
the skin of many poison dart frogs are employed in biomedical research with
clear benefits to society. Given that the dietary source of most of these
alkaloids remains a mystery, the only source of both known and novel compounds
is the frogs. Obtaining and analyzing samples of all species of poison dart
frogs is prohibitively costly, but, because the ability to sequester alkaloids
is an evolved attribute, the discovery that an untested species is nested within
a group of alkaloid-possessing species provides a prediction that the untested
species may also possess alkaloids. Furthermore, several species of dendrobatids
are critically threatened. Knowledge of dendrobatid phylogeny will allow policy
makers to design conservation strategies to protect not only those species known
to be toxic, but also any close relatives that have not yet been tested.