* 0309513
* Continued Paleoanthropological Research in the Laetoli area, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 06/30/2007
* USD 253,832.00

Paleontological research over the past fifty years has demonstrated the
significance of sites in East Africa for documenting the earliest stages of
human evolution. Laetoli in Tanzania is renowned as one of the most important of
these sites. Previous research at Laetoli has led to fossil finds that have
contributed significantly to an improved understanding of the evolutionary
history of humans. The site is critically important for several reasons: (1) it
has yielded one of the largest collections of the early hominid Australopithecus
afarensis, and is important for understanding its anatomy, paleobiology and
phylogenetic status. (2) The remarkable discovery of fossilized footprints
provides crucial evidence for documenting the origins of bipedalism. (3) The
hominid-bearing Upper Laetolil Beds, dated at 3.5-3.8 Ma (million years ago),
sample a time period that is generally poorly represented in East Africa, and
are therefore critical in discussions of variation, temporal trends and
evolutionary change in early hominid lineages. (4) Fossils have also been
recovered from the Lower Laetolil Beds (3.8 Ma to older than 4.3 Ma) and the
Upper Ndolanya Beds (2.6-2.7 Ma), which suggests that Laetoli has the potential
to contribute to a broader understanding of hominid evolution between 2.5-5.0
Ma. (5) Laetoli has a diverse fauna that serves as a well-dated reference for
comparisons with other sites in Africa. (6) The paleoecological context of the
hominids at Laetoli provides important information on hominid habitat
preferences and on ecological changes during the Plio-Pleistocene. The aim of
the project is to continue with long-term geological and paleontological
investigations at Laetoli. The main objectives are to recover additional fossil
hominids and to obtain further information on the paleontology, geology, and
paleoecology. The specific goals are: (1) to conduct systematic surface
collections; (2) to prospect for productive new paleontological occurrences; (3)
to conduct further geological investigations, in order to gain a better
understanding of the stratigraphy and geological history; (4) to obtain further
radiometric dates to more narrowly constrain the ages of the fossil-bearing
horizons; (5) to more accurately reconstruct the paleoecology; (6) to better
document the taxonomy, evolutionary relationships, and paleobiology of the fauna
and flora; and (7) to recover additional fossil hominids to improve our
understanding of their anatomy, paleobiology and phylogeny. Scientific merits:
Results from these investigations will be used to address several key issues in
paleoanthropology: (1) a better appreciation of the anatomy, paleobiology and
phylogenetic relationships of Australopithecus afarensis and Paranthropus
aethiopicus; (2) a more detailed and critical assessment of the paleoecological
associations of the Laetoli hominids; and (3) a more comprehensive knowledge of
the geology, geochronology, and paleontology. Broader impacts: Continued
research and exploration at Laetoli offers the potential to yield critical new
data that will contribute significantly to a better understanding of the fossil
evidence for human evolution. In addition, the project provides an important
opportunity for graduate student training in field methods, geology and
vertebrate paleontology. The international scope of the program also provides
collaborative educational and research links with Tanzanian and other foreign
scientists and institutions.