* 0309287
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Karyotypic Diversity and Species Radiation in the Genera Agrodiaetus, Lysandra and Plebicula (Lepidoptera: Lycaenidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Naomi Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,535.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Naomi E. Pierce and Mr. Nikolai Kandul at
Harvard University to study the role of chromosomal evolution in species
radiation. The karyotype, or number and structure of chromosomes in the nucleus
of the cell, typically does not vary much from species to species. Humans, for
example, have 23, while our closest relative, the chimpanzees, has 24. In
contrast to this general pattern, three groups of butterflies, the genera
Agrodiaetus, Lysandra and Plebicula, possess the greatest karyotype diversity in
the animal kingdom, with chromosome numbers ranging from 7 to 225 among closely
related species. Preliminary studies show that this chromosome diversity evolved
independently within each of these groups. Dr. Pierce and Mr. Kandul will use
this remarkable phenomenon to answer the following questions: Did karyotype
diversification in these genera cause the production of new species, or is it
merely the bi-product of other factors promoting speciation? What mechanisms
have promoted karyotype diversification within these genera? In the course of
the proposed research: (1) the evolutionary history of these genera will be
reconstructed using characters from their DNA; (2) karyotypes will be examined
and mapped on the evolutionary tree; (3) the amount of DNA in a single cell will
be measured for species with different karyotypes; and (4) factors driving
karyotype diversification will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of its
broader impact, the results of this research will illuminate mechanisms
underlying genome instability. This has practical applications in understanding
medical conditions; many cancers are correlated with changes in karyotype. The
proposed research will also enlarge our knowledge of mechanisms underlying
speciation. We read every day about extinction, and the crisis confronting the
natural world. But ecosystems are the product of two processes: speciation,
which adds new species to the mix, and extinction, which eliminates them. If we
are truly to grapple with today's conservation issues, we need to understand
both sides of the equation. Finally, the research has already involved
collaboration between U.S., Spanish, Australian, Turkish and Russian scientists,
and will continue to foster international communication and understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;