* 0309859
* Constraining Two Prominent Low-Velocity Anomalies in the Lower Mantle beneath Africa and Pacific
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Lianxing Wen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 208,305.00

Wen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes to map out detailed
structural and velocity features of the two prominent low-velocity anomalies in
the lower mantle beneath Africa and the Pacific. He will use extensive waveform
modeling by the 2D hybrid methods to constrain the seismic velocities, geometry,
and length-scale of the seismic anomalies from various directions using various
seismic phases. The PI also proposes to develop a three-dimensional hybrid
seismic code along the course of this research program. The three-dimensional
hybrid code will be used to forward verify the validity of the seismic results
obtained from the 2D-hybrid method waveform modeling. The intellectual merits of
the proposal include both observational and theoretical aspects of seismology.
The observational aspect of the proposal includes collection, identification,
interpretation and modeling of high-quality anomalous seismic data, with a
scientific goal of mapping detailed features of the two prominent low-velocity
anomalies in the lower mantle. The theoretical aspect of the proposal includes
systematic studies of seismic wave propagation in a heterogeneous mantle,
detailed modeling of the anomalous seismic data, and the development of a 3D
hybrid method. The proposed research has broad impacts on our further
understanding of the formation and evolution of the Earth, thermal-chemical
convection in the mantle, the nature of the core-mantle boundary, and the origin
of some geochemical reservoirs, such as "the DUPAL anomaly". The new 3D code
will have broad applications in the seismology community.