* 0309188
* Dispersion in Vegetated Flow
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Heidi Nepf, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2008
* USD 393,330.00

0309188 Nepf

Wetlands offer protection for surface water quality by transforming and
filtering a wide variety of water-borne contaminants. Yet, for many wetlands, we
have a poor understanding of the physical transport that controls these
functions. In particular, there are no models for dispersion in wetlands. This
project combines an analytical framework with experimental observations to
develop a model to predict dispersion in wetland systems. Once incorporated into
transport models, the Broader Impact of this work will be to enable resource
managers to predict changes in wetland function with land-use change, and to
design constructed wetlands that mimic natural function. The Intellectual Merit
will be the development and test of a new framework for predicting dispersion in
vegetated flow, and in other multi-body or two-phase flows. Within a vegetated
zone the velocity field is heterogeneous at the stem-scale. Directly behind each
stem is a recirculation zone, in which the mean velocity is zero. Downstream of
the recirculation zone is a wake in which the velocity is positive but
diminished from the spatially averaged flow speed, U. Finally, between wakes and
stems is a region of gap flow which, by conservation of mass, must be greater
than U. Now consider a group of particles released together into the vegetated
zone. Over time the particles become longitudinally dispersed, because each
particle experiences a different series of velocities as it traverses multiple
recirculation zones, wakes and gaps. The magnitude of the dispersion can be
predicted from the following parameters that define the transport in each zone.
1) The mean residence time within the recirculation zones, 2) the size of the
recirculation zones, 3) the stem drag coefficient, which defines the magnitude
of the wake deficit and through continuity the gap augmentation, and 4) the
lateral turbulent viscosity and diffusion. The first step in this study will be
to measure these parameters in a laboratory model (cylinder array) over a range
of flow and stem density found in the field. The second step will be to measure
longitudinal dispersion in the cylinder array and compare the observed values to
those predicted by theory. Application of the model to more complex canopies
will be examined using dispersion measurements made in a marsh of Spartina
alterniflora. Finally, we will combine the results from this study and
EAR-0125056: Exchange Between Channel and Vegetated Zones to predict transport
in partially vegetated channels and then test by observation.

