* 0310606
* Evolution of Hydrogen-Based Microbial Communities in Deep Hydrothermal Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Francis Chapelle, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 11/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The hydrothermal systems underlying the Snake River plain in Idaho present an
opportunity to directly observe how microbial communities in deep subsurface
hydrothermal systems change over time. The Snake River plain was formed as the
North American plate has moved west over the Yellowstone Hotspot producing a
time-transgressive series of volcanic fields and associated hydrothermal systems
that range in age from the 2.0 million year old (Ma) Yellowstone volcanic field
to the 16.1 Ma McDermitt volcanic field. Recent studies show the presence of a
predominantly autotrophic, hydrogen-based microbial community at Lidy Hot
Spring, associated with the 6.6 Ma Heise volcanic field. Preliminary studies
suggest the presence of heterotrophic microorganisms in spring waters associated
with older volcanic fields on the Snake River plain. It is proposed to
systematically characterize changes in the microbial ecology and organic
geochemistry of progressively older hydrothermal systems underlying the Snake
River plain of Idaho. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how autotrophic,
hydrogen-based microbial communities in subsurface hydrothermal systems change
over time, and understanding the accompanying changes in the reactivity and
composition of organic matter in spring waters could yield insight to
understanding the progression of life on the early Earth. Specifically, the
relative proportion of Archaea and Bacteria present in spring waters will be
determined, and the proportion of Bacteria capable of specific types of
heterotrophic metabolism (i.e. sulfate-, iron- and nitrate reduction) will be
assessed with quantitative PCR using primer sets specific for appropriate
phylogenetic or functional genes. Parallel to this effort, the chemical and
isotopic composition of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the spring waters will
be documented to assess changes in the bioavailability of substrates and to
determine how this material reflects the composition of the resident microflora.
The apparent transition from autotrophic to heterotrophic microbial communities
provides an opportunity to investigate the roles of specific biological
processes in the diagenesis of DOM and the production of refractory organic
matter that is preserved in the environment. These data will be used to describe
the variability and ecological progression of deep hydrothermal systems over a
timeframe of approximately ten million years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;