* 0310357
* Kilometer-Scale Fault Zone Structure and Kinematics Along the San Andreas Fault near Parkfield, California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* J Ramon Arrowsmith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2005
* USD 187,955.00

Earthquakes are an increasing threat to societies globally because of continued
urban development into earthquake-prone areas, yet our understanding of
earthquake behavior is limited. Fundamental understanding of faulting requires
detailed description of the geometry of rock bodies and structures and their
motions within and adjacent to fault zones. This project is providing such an
explanation for the heavily instrumented and geophysically-imaged Parkfield
section of the San Andreas Fault in south-central California.by defining the
positions, attitudes, and characteristics of the major rock bodies along the San
Andreas Fault, and determining the rates of active deformation associated with
the principal structures of the fault zone. The detailed geologic and geomorphic
data sets and geometric and kinematic models are valuable for addressing
questions related to landscape development along strike-slip fault zones, the
motions of blocks in the upper crust within and adjacent to strike-slip fault
zones, and the material properties as defined by geologic history within and
adjacent to this important fault zone. In addition, the data and inferences are
essential for a complete understanding of the results from the EarthScope
element: San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD).&lt;br/&gt;Geologic and
geomorphic mapping (1:6000 scale or greater) in an area within a 10 km radius of
SAFOD is being performed. At a lower but still relatively detailed scale
(1:24000 or greater), selected portions of the Parkfield region are being mapped
to enhance interpretations of the structural geology, geomorphic, and
geochronologic data. An apatite fission track study on samples from the Tertiary
sedimentary rocks and the granitic rocks permits inference of the exhumation and
rock uplift history for the area. The geomorphic analyses help document the
geometries and rates of active geologic structures in the area, including the
main San Andreas Fault, subsidiary strike-slip faults, and nearby dip-slip
faults and folds. Such structures may be identified by their disruption of
landforms and young deposits, and their geometries inferred by interpretation of
the areal distribution of deformation associated with them. These investigations
include establishing a terrace chronosequence for the major drainage system of
the area, determining rates of deformation along the active tectonic structures,
and improving the paleoseismic record. Rates of transport associated with
landslides are being compared with exhumation rates inferred for the same blocks
based on the apatite fission track thermochronology. The geologic and geomorphic
mapping results and remotely sensed imagery will be compiled in a digital
geospatial data system.