* 0310149
* Collaborative Research: Testing Precambrian Siberia-Laurentia Geologic Connections with U-Pb Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Kevin Chamberlain, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2006
* USD 251,947.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstruction of a
Siberia-west Laurentia craton, in accordance with paleomagnetic data, basement
piercing points, and the best fit of the rift margins, aligns Proterozoic
dike/sill swarms and juxtaposes Proterozoic basins. In this collaborative
Russian-American project, the PI's test the restoration by examining the
crystallization ages of igneous rocks and the stratigraphy and detrital zircon
systematics of sedimentary rocks that are truncated at the west Laurentian and
east Siberian cratonic margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, they plan the following tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) U-Pb dating of a dike-sill swarm that may link the
Anabar massif of north Siberia with the Belt-Purcell basin and adjacent basement
of southwest Montana and Wyoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) U-Pb dating of
detrital zircons from clastic rocks of northern Siberia that may link to the
well-dated Belt-Purcell Supergroup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) U-Pb dating of sill
swarms and flows in the middle Uy Group of southeast Siberian and Kingston Peak
Formation of Death Valley that may have formed one large igneous
province.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) U-Pb dating of detrital zircons from clastic
rocks in the Uy and Yudoma groups of southeast Siberian and potentially
correlative Kingston Peak Formation and Noonday Dolomite of Death Valley that
may have comprised parts of one basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Requested funds will cover reciprocal geological
excursions to Death Valley and southeast Siberia, to be followed by U-Pb
geochronological lab work. The PI's will also date samples previously collected
by Russian geologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have significant geological impact should it conclusively demonstrate the
validity of the Siberia-Laurentia restoration because this is a critical
component of the broader Rodinia supercontinent hypothesis, and has implications
for several geologic and geodynamic problems, including global ice ages, true-
polar wander, formation of Gondwana, and the Cambrian metazoan revolution.
Should the results prove negative, the study will remove one potential
interpretation for Rodinia, and will also provide valuable new constraints for
Siberian and Laurentian Proterozoic geological evolution. Broader impacts
include the advanced training of geoscience students supported by the grant, the
promotion of peace and advancement of science through international scientific
collaboration, and support of the Russian scientific infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;