* 0310865
* Integrating the Petrographic Microscope, Cathodoluminescence, and Digital Image Analysis into the Undergraduate Geology Curriculum: Experiential Learning and Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* James Day, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Geology (42) Traditional microscopy exercises in Geology often force students
into isolation as they&lt;br/&gt;study minerals, rocks, and textures using
individual microscopes. Group interaction is possible, but not easy, as students
must take turns looking into classmates' microscopes. An interactive and
engaging classroom environment is more conducive to student learning and the
development of analytical thinking skills. The intellectual merit of this
proposal is to redesign the undergraduate curriculum at Illinois State
University to&lt;br/&gt;incorporate innovative, inquiry-based learning
techniques utilizing polarizing microscope workstations and digital imagery.
This project is adapting the interactive mineralogy and petrology program
developed at Hamilton College. The goals and broader impacts of the project are:
1) to expose students to modern research and instructional equipment, 2) to
enhance student analytical reasoning and problem solving skills, 3) to encourage
more students to engage in research utilizing petrographic methods, and 4) to
encourage a higher percentage of our students to continue their educations at
graduate school, particularly in petrology.&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve these
goals, we are establishing digital workstations for polarized light microscopy
and image analysis. Each course using the new microscopy digital workstations is
developing cooperative learning exercises that are inquiry-based and emphasize
critical thinking. Groups of students are working with a microscope and video
monitor to deliver a live image. These workstations also are equipped with a
digital camera to capture still images for subsequent analysis and are being
used for in-class presentations. A Luminoscope for cathodoluminescence work is
also being included in classroom activities to expose students to an additional
technique for examining rocks and mineral textures. This aspect of the project
is adapting strategies developed by Patricia Videtich at Grand Valley State
University (NSF-9650073).&lt;br/&gt;