* 0310961
* Construction of Low-Complexity, Capacity-Achieving Code Families from Expander Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2006
* USD 233,713.00

The purpose of the project is to explore one of the new&lt;br/&gt;directions in
coding theory: code families constructed from bipartite&lt;br/&gt;graphs which
afford iterative decoding of complexity proportional to&lt;br/&gt;(the first
degree of) the number of transmitted bits. Potential&lt;br/&gt;applications of
expander codes include forward error correction in&lt;br/&gt;high-speed optical
lines, wireless lines, and deep-space applications.&lt;br/&gt;It is known that
there exist easily constructible code families that&lt;br/&gt;reach capacity of
the channel under iterative decoding and ensure&lt;br/&gt;exponential decline of
the error probability of decoding. A&lt;br/&gt;distinctive feature of these code
families is that convergence of&lt;br/&gt;decoding to the correct decision is
established relying on expanding&lt;br/&gt;properties of the underlying
graph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concentrates on constructing families
of expander codes&lt;br/&gt;(parallel concatenations) that match or surpass the
error performance&lt;br/&gt;of serially concatenated codes in the sense of G. D.
Forney, while&lt;br/&gt;bringing the decoding complexity down from quadratic to
linear-time,&lt;br/&gt;and studying the error probability of codes of moderate
length (up to&lt;br/&gt;10,000) constructed from bipartite graphs. The specific
problems&lt;br/&gt;being addressed are: (a) to establish improved estimates of
the error&lt;br/&gt;probability and of the number of errors correctable under
various&lt;br/&gt;versions of the basic iterative decoding procedure; (b) to
study the&lt;br/&gt;error probability of expander codes for code rates in the
neighborhood&lt;br/&gt;of the channel capacity; (c) to construct practical codes
of moderate&lt;br/&gt;length based on bipartite graphs and specific short binary
codes and&lt;br/&gt;to perform computer simulations of their error probability;
(d) to&lt;br/&gt;generalize the expander code construction from two levels to
a&lt;br/&gt;multilevel version; to study the error performance of the
multilevel&lt;br/&gt;construction.&lt;br/&gt;