* 0310674
* Heterogeneous Oxidations of Organic Molecules:  Mechanisms &amp; Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* G Ellison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 410,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Barney Ellison at the University of Colorado at Boulder will explore
the reactivity of hydrocarbon films at a solid/gas interface and at a liquid/gas
interface. These experiments are aimed at the identification of reactive
radicals that mediate the oxidation of hydrocarbon films. Alkylperoxyl radicals,
ROO, will be produced that must be thoroughly characterized. Ellison plans to
use hyperthermal supersonic jets to produce beams of the CH3CH2 radical and to
generate matrix-isolated ethylperoxyl radicals, CH3CH2OO. The polarized infrared
spectroscopy of matrix-isolated EtOO radicals will be completely studied. An
important fate of aerosol-bound peroxyl radicals will be reaction with NO
followed by either fragmentation to NO2 and an alkoxy radical, or isomerization
to an alkyl nitrate. Consequently, Ellison proposes to produce the CH3OO-NO
adduct in a matrix and use an FTIR to explore its properties. In collaboration
with Dr. D. Ray at the DOE's EMSL labs, Ellison will use a Ti:Sapphire laser to
detect surface-bound peroxyl radicals at a liquid/atmospheric pressure interface
via the non-linear optical process of second harmonic generation (SGH). The SHG
experiment will search for ROO radicals at an interface between an aqueous
solution and air. In collaboration with Prof. B. Koel at USC, Professor Ellison
plans to explore the oxidation of alkene films with O3 and to study the
mechanisms of olefin oxidation with O3 at an interface. In the study of O3 with
olefin films, Ellison &amp; Koel will produce samples of the simplest Criegee
intermediate, CH2OO, and study it in matrices using FITR. Experimental studies
of the sort proposed here will provide a basis for theorists to predict and
model real aerosols and to understand the oxidation mechanisms of hydrocarbon
films in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program supports Professor Barney Ellison at the University of
Colorado at Boulder who has a long history of joint research efforts with other
chemists. Ellison's lab collaborates regularly with atmospheric chemists at
NOAA's Aeronomy Labs and the NSF's NCAR labs. The inverted micelle model was a
collaboration with V. Vaida (University of Colorado) and A. Tuck (NOAA) and was
inspired by NOAA's field data. Ellison continually works with chemists studying
biomass burning at the DOE's NREL labs in Golden, CO and with surface chemists
at the DOE's EMSL labs in Richmond, WA and at USC in Calif. All of these groups
are pursuing hypercomplex chemical problems having to do with the tropospheric
fate of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), the chemical analysis and dynamics of
organic aerosols in the atmosphere, and the chemical and spectroscopic
properties of gas/solid and gas/liquid interfaces. Ellison and his students
provide these labs with an "organic chemistry point-of-view."&lt;br/&gt;