* 0310973
* Blind Image and Video Quality Assessment Using Natural Scene Statistics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Alan Bovik, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2006
* USD 219,655.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0310973&lt;br/&gt;Alan Bovik&lt;br/&gt;University of
Texas @ Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods for automatically assessing
the quality of image and video data emphasize measuring fidelity relative to a
reference. Thus a "reference" image/video is assumed available, and loss of
quality is measured as deviation from the reference. However, it is desirable to
dispense with the reference video for practical applications, such as video-on-
demand, streaming web video, video services to wireless units, and digital
television. Thus No-Reference (NR) quality assessment (QA) is important.
However, little progress has been made on NR QA since the models used have been
simplistic and largely limited to applications involving block-based compressed
visual data. However, successful algorithms for correctly predicting the quality
of signals that have been distorted with other types of artifacts, such as
ringing and blurring resulting from JPEG2000 image compression, remain
nonexistent.&lt;br/&gt;We are working on a new approach that makes use of the
fact that natural scenes belong to a small set in the space of all possible
image/video signals. We are developing and adapting innovative statistical
models that describe natural scenes. We have shown that distortions in
image/video processing systems are unnatural in terms of such statistics. Thus
we are applying Natural Scene Statistics (NSS) models for the NR QA of visual
signals that are assumed to derive from the sub-space of natural scenes. We have
already shown that NSS model are effective for NR QA of still images compressed
by wavelet-based methods (e.g., JPEG2000). We are developing new NSS models for
both wavelet-based video compression and for modeling distortions in wireless
video streams from channel burst errors and fast-fading
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;