* 0310697
* Enhancement of Computational Engineering within an Undergraduate Mechanical Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Thomas Hauser, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 09/30/2005
* USD 68,224.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;Our project addresses issues in undergraduate
education at research universities highlighted in the 1998 Boyer Commission
Report. Our aim is to incorporate advances in information technology into the
curriculum, and is consistent with recent increased emphasis in the applied
areas of information technology by the National Science Foundation. This has
been accomplished by developing an option to the department's undergraduate
Mechanical Engineering degree in the area of Computational Engineering. We have
worked with faculty from the Engineering Research Center at Mississippi State
University to adapt the curricula from their undergraduate minor in
Computational Engineering to our Utah State University program. We have also
built a PC Beowulf cluster consisting of 5 server and 20 compute nodes to
support the Computational Engineering option. This will be accomplished by
adopting a cluster design process developed at the University of Kentucky.
Undergraduate students are being exposed to cluster designs and programming
models through a week long seminar, which will be offered on a yearly basis.
Results of our efforts will be disseminated through the national ASEE conference
and through publication in an engineering education journal. In addition,
materials from the cluster workshop will be made available through our
Department's website.