* 0310335
* Collaborative Research: Cascadia Tilt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2008
* USD 341,367.00

EAR-0310335&lt;br/&gt;Bilham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:
CASCADIA TILT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Great subduction earthquakes occur beneath
the Pacific Northwest every few hundred years, and damaging but smaller
earthquakes every few years. One surprising discovery (from GPS geodesy) is that
every 13-14 months, an incremental shift of roughly 10cm occurs between the Juan
de Fuca plate and North America some 20 km beneath the surface. This slow shift
has a duration of 1-3 weeks, generates a low sub-sonic rumble (2s-5Hz), and most
importantly, stresses the future rupture zone incrementally towards the next
great earthquake. That is, a future slow slip episode may well be the final
straw that breaks the camel's back - a possible Richter M=9 earthquake damaging
both Seattle and Vancouver, and generating tsunami damage as far as Hawaii and
Japan. In an attempt to learn more about these slow slip events, ten 1-km-long
water pipes (tiltmeters) are being installed in Washington state each terminated
by sensors that can detect 1 micron of relative water height change (a tilt
equivalent of San Francisco rising the thickness of a sheet of paper relative to
New York). The tiltmeters will monitor the next four slow episodes to ascertain
precisely how and where slip occurs, and the relationship between these slow
slip events and moderately damaging shallow earthquakes that appear to follow
them. The data will be available in near real time in a web accessible format to
engender public awareness. Graduate students at Central Washington University
and the University of Colorado at Boulder will be involved in the not
inconsiderable processing of the data. The project includes several aspects of
public outreach, both to make the public aware of the details of the scientific
method, and to ensure that the public, engineers, and urban planners in the
region know the seismic hazards of the Pacific Northwest. Each slow event will
be an opportunity to deliver news-breaking data, accompanied by a tailored
message to the general public about the measurements and their significance to
seismic hazards. At 14 months, the time interval between alerts is almost
perfectly designed to remind the public that seismic safety is an ongoing issue,
without overexposing them to false alarms. The end of two of the last several
slow events has been marked by shallow, felt earthquakes, one of them (the
Nisqually earthquake 28 Feb 2001), resulting in $250M of damage.&lt;br/&gt;