* 0310188
* Studying Situated Learning and Knowledge Transfer in a Multi-user Virtual Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Christopher Dede, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2005
* USD 784,244.00

(1) classroom-based situated learning and (2) the ways in which virtual
environments may aid the transfer of learning from classroom contexts into real
world settings. Situated learning, a major theory about cognition and education,
centers on apprenticeship in "communities of practice" (moving from newcomer to
expert within a sociocultural structure of practices). MUVEs are a promising
medium for fostering and assessing classroom-based situated learning because
they can support immersive, extended experiences incorporating modeling and
mentoring about problems similar to those in real world contexts. This project
will extend an educational MUVE developed with prior NSF funding; its curriculum
is based on a problem-solving community in which students gain knowledge through
co-interpreting data with other participants who have varied levels of skills.
This project will study whether such a virtual environment can sufficiently
replicate authentic contexts and multi-leveled communities of practice to
provide students with classroom experiences in situated
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the limited ability of students to
apply school-acquired knowledge to real world settings is a longstanding,
crucial problem that a controlled study of instructional design for situated
learning could help to clarify. "Transfer" is the application of knowledge
learned in one situation to another situation and is demonstrated if instruction
on a learning task leads to improved performance on a transfer task, typically a
real world setting requiring expert performance. MUVEs provide a unique
experimental vehicle for studying how situated affordances (supports for
particular activities created by relevant properties of the situation) and
constraints (regularities that are invariant under the transformation that
changes the learning situation into the transfer situation) affect students'
capabilities for learning and transfer. Situated learning involves
constellations of architectural, social, organizational, and material vectors
that shape particular settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
and study multiple variants of a learning environment in which these vectors are
manipulated, allowing investigation into near and far transfer. The project will
develop MUVE-based curricula centered on alternative models of situated or
constructivist learning and will assess their differential outcomes for student
motivation and learning, as well as interface usability and classroom
implementation. The project will implement these alternative curricula in Boston
Public School (BPS) classrooms with high proportions of ESL and free-and-
reduced-lunch students, matching experimental to control classrooms to determine
the relative efficacy of our approach.&lt;br/&gt;