* 0310477
* Application-specific Instruction Set Processor Synthesis for Low Energy and High Performance using Extensible Processor Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 306,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to investigate and develop a
comprehensive framework for the automatic synthesis of custom processors. The
scope of the proposed framework includes all the necessary steps to generate the
custom processor's architecture, starting from one or more embedded software
programs that it is required to execute. The problems that we will tackle are as
follows. We will develop techniques for efficient automatic generation of
hardware extensions -- custom instructions and co-processors -- to a base
processor platform, for large hierarchical application programs. The complexity
of realistic application software, together with the multi-granular nature of
the hardware extensions, necessitate the development of new techniques that
start from a hierarchical program representation and identify custom
instructions and co-processors that maximize performance or minimize energy
consumption under given design constraints. The number of individual candidate
custom instructions and co-processors can be quite large for even moderately
sized programs, and hence the number of combinations thereof is even larger. We
will develop techniques to efficiently explore the unified custom instruction
and co-processor design space, and select an optimal combination of custom
instructions and co-processors (from individual candidates) that maximizes
performance or energy efficiency. High levels of hardware re-use are critical
for deriving efficient implementations of custom processors. Various custom
instructions derived for a given application may exhibit commonality that can be
exploited to either reduce the area overhead or improve performance/energy
impact under a given area constraint. In addition to conventional fine-grained
resource sharing techniques, we will develop new coarse-grained sharing
techniques to obtain high quality designs. Software transformations, if
appropriately applied to the target application program before attempting to
derive hardware extensions, can facilitate the generation of higher quality
custom instructions or co-processors, leading to much higher performance and
energy gains. We will develop a method to automatically apply a suitable
sequence of enabling transformations to the application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficiency and flexibility are two major requirements
driving embedded system design. Unfortunately, these two requirements are
typically at conflict with each other - performance and energy efficiency are
often obtained by hardwiring functionality and optimizing the system in an
application-specific manner, which limits flexibility, while flexibility is
obtained through configurability and/or programmability, which carry associated
overheads. Negotiating this tradeoff is critical in a wide variety of
applications, ranging from high-performance systems to battery-driven systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application-specific instruction set processors (ASIPs)
offer a good tradeoff between efficiency and flexibility by realizing only the
critical operations in the application(s) of interest using custom hardware.
Conventional approaches to ASIP design are based on designing and implementing a
new instruction set and processor architecture from scratch for each
application. Unfortunately, the design turnaround time for such approaches may
be large and is comparable to design cycles for custom hardware implementations.
The recent evolution of customizable and extensible processor technology, such
as Tensilica's Xtensa and ARC's ARCTangent processor cores, has provided
embedded system designers with a mechanism to design ASIPs with rapid turnaround
times through the use of re-targetable software development tool flows, and
configurable soft intellectual property (IP). However, the task of customizing
the processor and extending it with custom hardware (instruction units, co-
processors, peripherals) are still largely manual and left to the designer's
expertise. In order to realize the potential for energy efficiency as well as
flexibility that ASIPs offer, it is necessary to develop high-level
methodologies that automatically identify application hot-spots and map them to
custom hardware that extends the underlying configurable platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No algorithms or tools exist for extensible processor
platforms that address any of the above problems. We have taken the first step
in this direction by developing algorithms and a tool to automatically identify
custom instructions for extensible processors. This tool results in an average
performance improvement of 3.4X (up to 5.4X) and an average energy-delay product
improvement of 12.6X (up to 24.2X).&lt;br/&gt;