* 0310705
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH PROPOSAL: Hybrid Modeling for Geometric Design, Estimation, and Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Richard Riesenfeld, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 03/31/2008
* USD 606,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative research project between the
Universities of Utah and North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The project is advancing
the state of the art in geometric modeling by constructing a set of new surface
representations that are sufficiently general to solve a wide range of problems
in geometric surface design, estimation, and analysis. This work is founded on
the assertion that no single representation is adequate to solve efficiently and
accurately the myriad computational and analytical problems arising in modern
applications. The strategy, therefore, is to develop a framework that
systematically combines parametric and implicit surface representations. This
project will examine the complementary nature of two particular representations:
non-uniform B-splines (NURBs) and level sets. It will develop methods which
provide: mutual tracking of the representations, analysis of the topology and
singularities which occur, and mechanisms for communicating important
topological events between representations. This project will also examine
applications of this framework to computer aided design and terrain modeling and
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When modeling 3D objects with surfaces, one is
faced with a wide range of different surface representations. Each
representation has corresponding drawbacks and advantages. Many modeling
applications, such as computer-aided design and terrain analysis, require shapes
to be modified in order to match some input data or to suit the needs of a user
or designer. Therefore, one of the most important aspects of a surface
representation is how it affords a user or a computer algorithm the facility to
modify a shape, i.e. to deform one shape into another slightly different shape.
Some representations provide a user with a great deal of control, but are
constrained to a limited specific set of shapes. Other representations can
represent a wide range of shapes, but only with a limited accuracy. An important
concern in modifying a shape is how the representation handles cases where the
surface folds back and touches itself. This is called a singularity and it
indicates that the surface might be transitioning from one class of shapes to
another. Different surface representations handle such singularities in
different ways. This work will try to improve the technology for modifying
shapes and handling singularities by combining two different shape
representations and extending relevant singularity theory. This exploration
should yield new tools for designing shapes and new tools for building and
analyzing the shapes of measured surfaces, such as those generated from
terrains. The collaboration between Utah (031075) and the University of North
Carolina Chapel Hill (0310546) provides this project with specialized skills in
singularity theory and unique educational opportunities for computer science
students to learn more about this important subject in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;