* 0310656
* Numerical Techniques for Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with Non-Gaussian Noise
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* David Saunders, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,823.00

The goal of this project is to develop and analyze numerical
methods&lt;br/&gt;for parabolic stochastic partial differential equations
(SPDE's)&lt;br/&gt;driven by non-Gaussian noise. As a first step, work will
focus on the&lt;br/&gt;stochastic heat equation in one dimension, with an
additive noise term&lt;br/&gt;given by a Poisson random measure. The research
will proceed along&lt;br/&gt;two paths that will be developed in parallel:
mathematical analysis&lt;br/&gt;and numerical experimentation. These techniques
will be used in order&lt;br/&gt;to study the application of both finite
difference methods (including&lt;br/&gt;the explicit and fully implicit Euler
methods and the Crank-Nicholson&lt;br/&gt;method) and finite element methods.
Once the analysis of the heat&lt;br/&gt;equation is complete, it will be
generalized to quasi-linear second&lt;br/&gt;order SPDE's with non-Gaussian
noise. After the analysis of the&lt;br/&gt;one-dimensional case is complete,
equations in many spatial dimensions&lt;br/&gt;will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic partial differential
equations (SPDE's) are used to model&lt;br/&gt;many phenomena in the natural and
social sciences. SPDE's are applied&lt;br/&gt;in a wide variety of applications
in oceanography, neurophysiology,&lt;br/&gt;quantum physics, economics, and the
physics of porous media (as&lt;br/&gt;applied, for example, in the geology of
oil extraction). The purpose&lt;br/&gt;of this research is to develop and
analyze techniques for the&lt;br/&gt;simulation of such equations where the
randomness assumes the form of&lt;br/&gt;a series of discrete "shocks" (as is
often the case in scientific&lt;br/&gt;applications). The development of the
mathematics, computer&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and software for the analysis and
simulation SPDE's will&lt;br/&gt;have a broad impact on the fields mentioned
above, since simulation and&lt;br/&gt;numerical solution are an important part
of the application of any &lt;br/&gt;stochastic model in science and
engineering. Most current models using&lt;br/&gt;SPDE's make use of continuous,
"Gaussian" noise. This is not&lt;br/&gt;necessarily due to the suitability of
such a specification, but rather&lt;br/&gt;to its ease of application and
implementation (and wider familiarity&lt;br/&gt;among scientists and engineers).
The study of SPDE's driven by noise&lt;br/&gt;terms that are not Gaussian, and
methods for their numerical solution&lt;br/&gt;in particular, will make an
important new tool available to&lt;br/&gt;researchers in many disciplines.