* 0310413
* Structural and Geochronological Investigations of Neoproterozoic Rifting in Southwestern Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Brian Wernicke, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 11/30/2004
* USD 89,340.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cambrian explosion and its Neoproterozoic
precursors occurred in a context of extraordinary environmental perturbations,
including extreme fluctuations between warm and cold climate, possible True
Polar Wander, and the reorganization and eventual breakup of a supercontinent.
The tectonic events may have been primary causes of both climatic and polar
wander events. Despite significant progress over the last decade, the lack of
absolute age control on most of these successions has severely limited testing
new ideas owing to a lack of reliable global correlations and a chronology of
rifting and continental plate motions on a par with the Phanerozoic. The PI
proposes to continue a program of geological mapping, stratigraphic studies, and
U/Pb dating of the relatively complete Neoproterozoic succession in southwestern
Laurentia. Thus far, he has established a rudimentary structural and
stratigraphic framework in a key area where the section records two major
glacial intervals and their cap carbonate sequences (presumably correlative with
the Sturtian and Marinoan events in Australia), as well as tectonism that led to
the development of the southwest Laurentian passive margin. In addition, he has
discovered three new ash horizons within this sequence, and found abundant
authigenic xenotime in some ten major sand bodies spanning the Neoproterozoic.
He will attempt to date these units with conventional TIMS analysis and
microbeam analytical techniques on both zircon and
xenotime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include: i)
graduate training of a doctoral student in geology at Caltech; ii) involvement
of multiple institutions, including St. Andrews University, UCLA, MIT and the
University of Arizona in the research effort, including improvement of national
infrastructure for dating authigenic minerals in sandstones; in particular,
development of a xenotime analytical standard in the course of this research, if
we are successful, will be of immediate benefit to many researchers around the
world; iii) presentations to the public in Death Valley National Park, which
will contribute to greater public understanding of the significance of the
natural resources in the park; and iv) the research may contribute to
understanding how the biosphere responds to the extremes of global change, and
therefore contribute to evolving international debate regarding global warming
and related issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;