* 0310509
* CAD/CAM Laboratory: Integrating Computer Numeric Controlled Instrumentation in Undergraduate Studio
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Paul Wright, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,996.00

Engineering Technology (58)

Integrating computer numeric controlled (CNC) technologies in design education
is a rapidly growing curricular field intended to complement the increased use
of computer aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) in the architecture and
construction industries. This project develops a comprehensive CAD/CAM
laboratory in the College of Environmental Design to facilitate undergraduate
laboratory based coursework centered on making links among CNC techniques and
the design, development and construction of buildings. CAD/CAM effectively
blends upstream and downstream processes that are typically compartmentalized,
eliminating steps between building design and final production. Because this
computerized process streamlines production, it is becoming a pervasive
construction technology. This project gives students hands-on laboratory
experience with CNC instrumentation, ensuring they keep abreast of current
developments in the field, and stay competitive in a global marketplace. The
project draws from curricula based on the use of the CAD/CAM lab at the Harvard
Design School. Students learn how to use CNC instrumentation and are given
experience working through design problems at prototyping and full-scale
construction phases. The process allows for increased visualization and
accelerated design development. Students gain firsthand knowledge of computer
aided building techniques, and are given a unique and invaluable learning
experience within the context of more traditional design studios.