* 0310200
* A F-19 NMR Probe of Mineral Surface Reactivity
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Brian Phillips, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 259,759.00

EAR-0310200&lt;br/&gt;Phillips&lt;br/&gt;This research project will study the
molecular-level structure of aluminum oxyhydroxide mineral surfaces and their
fundamental reactivity with water. A primary goal of this work is to develop a
spectroscopic technique for characterizing the mineral surface in terms of the
types of reactive surface sites and their concentrations. Aluminum oxyhydroxides
are common in soils and acid-rock drainage areas and provide a simplified model
system for the reactive sites in clay minerals. The experimental approach is to
react mineral surfaces with dissolved fluoride under carefully controlled
conditions, and then determine the resulting fluoride distribution on the
surface using F-19 NMR spectroscopy. Previous work on large dissolved molecules
with similar structure show that fluoride ions substitute for oxygen in both
terminal- and bridging-type surface sites, and that F?19 NMR spectroscopy can
resolve these distinct coordination environments. If successful, this technique
can be applied to study the surfaces of other heterogeneous disordered solids.
Further time-resolved experiments will test the hypothesis that initial fluoride
substitution occurs at terminal sites, followed by migration to bridging sites
on crystal edges and basal surfaces at longer reaction times. The timescale for
fluoride migration among these sites will provide estimates for the fundamental
reactivity of the surface oxygens. Additional experiments on dissolved Al-
oxyhydroxide nanoclusters, using NMR kinetic techniques, will attempt to
determine detailed mechanistic pathways for the fluoride substitution reactions.
The results of this study will contribute a deeper understanding of fundamental
processes governing bulk geochemical behavior of mineral/fluid systems.
Reactions at mineral surfaces control the ability of soil minerals to adsorb and
sequester contaminants in near-surface geochemical environments. Significant
changes in the mineral surface structure and reactivity toward contaminants can
occur through surface rearrangement during reaction with water and dissolved
constituents. Techniques developed in this study can allow these changes to be
quantified at the molecular level.