* 0310342
* Experimental Studies of Volatile-Bearing Minerals and Rocks Relevant to Subduction Zones, the Mantle and Core
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Quentin Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2008
* USD 486,917.00

EAR-0310342 Knittle Abstract

The investigator's high pressure studies are oriented towards constraining the
behavior of volatiles (particularly water, hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen) within
planet Earth. The objectives are to derive constraints on: (1) the volatile
content of Earth's core, as evaluated from the high pressure behavior of
volatile-bearing iron alloys; (2) how hydrogen and carbon are bound into
crystalline assemblages at mantle conditions; and (3) the structure and
properties of volatile-rich magmas at high pressures. The methods employed in
this work combine vibrational spectroscopy (infrared and Raman spectroscopies)
and x-ray diffraction as probes of samples held within the diamond anvil cell,
which generate ultra-high pressures. Heating at high pressures is accomplished
with either external heaters or laser-heating of samples. The intellectual
merits of the proposed experiments include producing fundamental insights into
the carbon and hydrogen budgets of planet Earth; evaluating the means by which
atmospheric and hydrospheric constituents are degassed from the Earth's interior
and then reintroduced into the planet through subduction; and the phase
relations and properties of Earth's iron-rich core. The broader impacts of this
study includes developing a better understanding of the genesis of Earth's
oceans and atmosphere, as well as developing a framework for assessing how two
of the most cosmochemically abundant elements, hydrogen and carbon, behave under
the extreme conditions of planetary interiors.