* 0310217
* The Middle to Late Jurassic Terrestrial Vertebrate Faunal Transition in Northwestern China:  A Paleontologic, Stratigraphic, and Geochronologic Study
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* David Eberth, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 302,999.00

The late Middle through early late Jurassic (Callovian through Oxfordian) is one
of the most poorly known intervals in the terrestrial vertebrate fossil record.
The Shishuqou Formation of the Xinjiang Autonomous Region of northwestern China
preserves a rich sequence of fossils spanning this period. This is an important
time in the history of modern terrestrial vertebrates because many group
(mammals, birds, crocodilians, squamates, frogs, salamanders) were just
beginning to diversify and the single supercontient of Pangea with its
cosmopolitan fauna was just beginning to divide. Furthermore, several groups of
dinosaurs that would diversify and dominate the Cretaceous (i.e., sauropods,
ornithopods, stegosaurs, ankylosaurs, and coelurosaurs) first appeared and
radiated during Middle and Late Jurassic. Thus, fossils from the Shishugou
Formation can contribute to an understanding of the most basic relationships and
early evolution within the major groups of modern tetrapods and dinosaurs and
the beginning of modern faunal provinciality. The four year project proposed
here combines palentological studies of the fossils with stratigraphic,
peleoenvironmental, and geochronological studies of the sediments and volcanic
deposits to document the fauna and establish a calibrated stratigraphic
framework for faunal change within the formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support
is requested for 1) further field work to collect more vertebrate fossils,
including a program of screenwashing for microvertabates; 2) field work
establishing the stratigraphic and palenivornment distributions of taxa in the
formation and any correlations between them 3) museum studies documenting these
in the and related fossils and laboratory studies dating the tuffs and
bentonites and determining their geochemical composition. These separate lines
of research will be synthesized into a calibrated model for fanual and
environmental change in the formation that is integrated with existing regional
tectonics and paleoclimatic interpretations. &lt;br/&gt;