* 0310118
* Origin and Crustal Expression of Active Lithospheric Delamination in the Vrancea Zone, Romania
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* James Knapp, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 362,604.00

Funds from the U. S. National Science Foundation are being used for acquisition
and analysis of ~260 km of deep seismic reflection data to illuminate the
origin, crustal structure, and three dimensional geodynamic setting of the
Vrancea seismogenic zone of Romania. Project DRACULA (Deep Reflection
Acquisition Constraining Unusual Lithospheric Activity), a collaboration between
the University of South Carolina, the University of Bucharest, and the National
Institute for Earth Physics in Romania, is employing deep seismic reflection
techniques to (1) map the main structural detachment(s) of the Eastern
Carpathians, and their westward continuation into the hinterland, (2) provide
reliable constraints from the geometry of crustal reflectors on the postulated
existence, position, and polarity of a Miocene-age subduction zone within the
Transylvanian crust, (3) elucidate the geometric relationship between active
faults in the Carpathian foreland and the seismogenic volume in the mantle, in
order to (4) test the hypothesis of mechanical coupling of the foreland crust
with Vrancea seismicity, and ultimately, (5) evaluate competing
subduction/delamination geodynamic models for the origin of mantle seismicity in
the Vrancea zone based on these results. With such data, the Vrancea zone may
prove to be a unique setting in which to establish evidence for active
continental lithospheric delamination.