* 0310316
* How Complex are Geomagnetic Reversals? Tracking the Steens Reversal in Yellowstone Hotspot Lavas to Construct a Composite Record
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Jonathan Glen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 307,824.00

EAR-0310316 Robert Coe

Some evidence suggests that geomagnetic reversals may be far more complex than
currently believed. This proposal to conduct a paleomagnetic and geochronologic
study of the widespread Yellowstone hotspot (YSHS) flood-basalt volcanism, which
occurred between 17 and 15 Ma in Oregon and its four bordering states, will
enable a critical examination and reconstruction of what happens during a
reversal. There are numerous reversed-to-normal (R-N) polarity transition zones
in sections of YSHS lava flows, including the well-known, unusually detailed one
recorded at Steens Mountain in southeastern Oregon, others that are known only
at the reconnaissance level, and still others yet to be discovered. Because no
N-R zones have been found, it seems probable that most of these sections record
this same Steens reversal. The few such sections that have been studied at the
reconnaissance level indicate transition records that are similar overall, but
they also exhibit some directions that are distinctly different from the Steens
record. Working outward from Steens Mountain with detailed paleomagnetic
determinations of direction and Ar/Ar dating will allow positive identification
of the sections that record the same reversal yet include some different lava
flows that carry new transitional directions. In this way a more comprehensive
record of what happens during a reversal can be pieced together. Furthermore,
recent studies show that eruption of the Steens Basalt marks the beginning of
YSHS volcanism. Thus, identifying the sections that contain the R-N Steens
reversal will also delineate the spatial extent over which YSHS eruptions began
almost simultaneously and indicate how rapidly the onset of volcanism
propagated. This will improve understanding of how plumes and hotspots interact
with the lithosphere to emplace their magmas.

Even though neither geomagnetic reversals nor flood basalt eruptions are likely
to occur in the near future, they are societally relevant because of their
large-scale environmental effects. These include increased electromagnetic
disturbances and radiation at the earth's surface during the former and climate
change and possible species extinctions during the latter. Therefore, it
behooves us to learn as much as possible about them. Moreover, the genesis of
the economically important epithermal ore deposits in this region is best
understood in terms of the extent and timing of YSHS rifting and magmatism.