* 0310845
* Internet-Enabled Laboratory Experiences for Undergraduate Civil Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Vernon Matzen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 06/30/2006
* USD 134,058.00

Engineering - Civil (54)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at
adaptation of recent developments in information technology for implementation
of internet-enabled laboratory experiments in undergraduate Civil Engineering
courses. Faculty and students are able to remotely observe, conduct, control,
and analyze experimental data either in or outside a classroom. The project
improves student learning through real-time visualization of theoretical
concepts and fosters creative thinking by providing a first-hand exposure to
conducting, controlling, and analyzing laboratory experiments. In addition to
enhancing the quality of courses offered to on-campus students, one of the
objectives is to develop the capability for offering these experiments via
distance learning. Such offerings are likely to assist non-traditional students
such as underrepresented minorities, working parents, part-time students,
career-changing adults, etc. who are seeking a career in Civil Engineering. The
adapted information methodologies are developed in such a way that they can be
easily applied to experiments other than those considered in this project. New
software interfaces to be developed are made available to instructors in other
institutions for free downloads through a project web site. Supplementary
documentation needed to avoid potential pitfalls in future implementations is
also disseminated. Project team members collaborate with faculty at North
Carolina A&amp;T University, historically a black college, by providing them
access to conduct and control these experiments for teaching purposes.
Effectiveness of the project is evaluated using both formative and summative
approaches. Benefits of distance learning courses are addressed with respect to
retention and increased participation of non-traditional students.&lt;br/&gt;