* 0311833
* SGER:  Mathematical Modeling of Living Cell Membranes:  Application to AFM-Based Recognition Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Eveline Baesu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 02/28/2005
* USD 61,386.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this SGER award
addresses the quantification of the response of the in vivo cell membranes
probed with Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). The long-term objective is to
understand the extent to which the membrane of a cell mirrors certain
biochemical processes within the cell and how the biophysical properties of the
membrane provide insight into the health of a cell. At the heart of such an
investigation is a theory capable of modeling the complex interaction between an
AFM probe and the soft cell membrane. Such a theory then renders the AFM a
powerful tool for characterizing the biomechanical properties of cell membranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation proposed here is based on a general
continuum theory derived from first principles of fluid membranes endowed with
local bending resistance. In accordance with the physics of the problem the
membrane is assumed to enclose a fluid medium, which transmits hydrostatic
pressure to the membrane, and a point load is applied at the pole of the
membrane to simulate the effect of an AFM probe. Both types of loading are
associated with a potential and the problem is then cast in a variational
setting, which is used to obtain the equations that describe axisymmetric
equilibrium states of the cell membrane. Further refinements associated with
global constraints on the enclosed volume and contact with a rigid substrate are
proposed together with a solution strategy that relies on an iterative scheme
for calculating the associated Lagrange multipliers. The main goal then is to
use the numerical implementation of the model to identify the material constants
associated with the mechanical behavior of the cell membrane through correlation
with AFM data and further refinement of the model. The expected outcome of this
seed grant project would be the first experimentally validated model that
characterizes the nonlinear interaction between an AFM probe and a cell
membrane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research is
the development of new technology for biological research, by including Atomic
Force Microscope among the tools used in cell investigation. The proposed
theoretical/computational approach together with the experimental program has
far reaching potential applications. Using this method, the effect of pathogens
on healthy cell membranes can be studied resulting in physical methods for
identification and detection of these pathogens (for e.g. in developing
defensive measures against biological and chemical agents). A promising area of
investigation would be to investigate changes in the membrane of tumor cells
that enable cells to divide and metastasize. This could potentially lead to
earlier detection and confirmation of malignancy. Yet another fruitful avenue of
research would be to use this method to gain a deep understanding of the
underlying mechanics of cell motility. Finally this method could facilitate a
deeper understanding of the relationship between membrane properties and
disease, i.e. how changes in membrane properties and membrane-bound proteins
leads to (or are indicative of) disease, which in turn could lead to alternative
treatment strategies.&lt;br/&gt;