* 0311572
* Optimizing Computer Design Using Knowledge of Inter-Operation Value Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Gurindar Sohi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,046.00

Optimizing Computer Design Using Knowledge of Inter-Operation Value
Communication

This project will investigate novel ways of optimizing value communication in
microprocessors. The objective is to improve upon current value communication
mechanisms that are typically agnostic of the communication requirements of the
values being communicated. The researchers propose to develop and investigate
novel value communication mechanisms that are optimized for the communication
behavior of specific values, with the aim of greatly increasing processor
performance.

The research will consider register and memory values in microprocessors. There
will be two main themes in the research. The first theme will be to develop
predictive techniques to learn about the communication requirements of values.
The second theme will be to develop techniques that use knowledge of a value's
communication requirements to optimize its communication. Specific schemes that
will be investigated include optimizations to the register file, bypass network,
dynamic scheduling window, load-store queue, and the cache hierarchy.

The research methodology will make extensive use of simulations using cycle-
level simulators. The investigators will use a wide variety of benchmark
programs including standard benchmark suites as well as other programs,
including commercial workloads, written in a number of different programming
languages.

