* 0311590
* Exact Computational Biology Algorithms with Small Parameters
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sing-Hoi Sze, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Many computational biology problems are NP-hard. For a large portion
of&lt;br/&gt;these problems, approximation algorithms seem to be
improper,&lt;br/&gt;since either the approximate solutions are too far away from
the optimal&lt;br/&gt;or the high computational complexity prevents them from
being practical.&lt;br/&gt;As a result, researchers are forced to use
heuristic&lt;br/&gt;approaches. However, it is likely that important information
is&lt;br/&gt;missed which could otherwise be obtained from exact
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Recent study has observed that in
many&lt;br/&gt;biological problems, it is possible to identify a parameter that
is small in&lt;br/&gt;most instances. The notion of fixed-parameter tractability
(FPT) was&lt;br/&gt;introduced which provides feasible
exact&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for intractable problems with small
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FPT framework has not enjoyed widespread
success in computational biology&lt;br/&gt;since most of the research efforts
are from people who were originally&lt;br/&gt;computer science theoreticians.
Without the participation of biologists,&lt;br/&gt;the formulations may not be
accurate and realistic.&lt;br/&gt;By employing biologically adequate
formulations, computational&lt;br/&gt;techniques such as FPT stand in a perfect
position to bridge the gap between&lt;br/&gt;theory and practice. Furthermore,
the availability of huge&lt;br/&gt;genome sequences requires the study of a
tighter class of&lt;br/&gt;fixed-parameter algorithms with strictly or nearly
linear time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the research is to bring
FPT techniques&lt;br/&gt;into mainstream use in computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the project are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;(1) identify important computational biology problems which
can be&lt;br/&gt;addressed by the FPT framework;&lt;br/&gt;(2) develop
algorithms for these problems, trying to lower the time&lt;br/&gt;complexity as
much as possible; and&lt;br/&gt;(3) obtain biological data and test the new
algorithms on real-life data.&lt;br/&gt;The research will apply the algorithmic
techniques that have&lt;br/&gt;proven to be successful in parameterized
computation to solve problems&lt;br/&gt;that seem intractable but important and
realistic in computational&lt;br/&gt;biology. The results of the research have
the advantages of being&lt;br/&gt;precise and effective, compared to the
traditional approaches such as&lt;br/&gt;approximation and heuristic
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the
project:&lt;br/&gt;The research is highly inter-disciplinary, which
involves&lt;br/&gt;heavy collaborations in both computational and life sciences,
and&lt;br/&gt;will provide an excellent educational environment for
students&lt;br/&gt;who have mutual interests in both fields.&lt;br/&gt;