* 0311339
* Bringing Industry Practices in J2ME Development to an Undergraduate Wireless Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* James Cross, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 07/31/2006
* USD 174,719.00

Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the state of education for
wireless system software developers by adapting and implementing wireless
industry best practices in the classroom. Nokia is the leading manufacturer of
wireless handsets worldwide. This project adapts and implements a software
quality assurance program CE Nokia's OK Java 2 Platform Micro Edition (J2ME)
application certification process CE in a core set of wireless software
engineering courses. Auburn University initiated the nation's first
undergraduate wireless engineering degree program in August, 2002. These courses
make up the software engineering track of the wireless engineering
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project are 1) to adapt Nokia OK application standards for&lt;br/&gt;classroom
use as examples of what is expected of industry-quality software; 2) to
incorporate Nokia OK software development tools into a student-friendly software
development environment; and 3) to implement in-house Nokia OK certification
procedures as a basis for assessing student projects and providing
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our anticipated outcomes are 1) students who will
have been immersed in a technology similar to what they are likely to encounter
in their first years of work; 2) wireless industry standards adapted to the
classroom, J2ME development capabilities incorporated into an existing popular
software tool, and an industry testing process implemented in an academic
setting; and 3) evidence of the effectiveness of using wireless industry
practices in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;