* 0311174
* Prefix-Free Vertex Coloring for Channel Assignment in OVSF-CDMA Wireless Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Peng-Jun Wan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 199,474.00

Orthogonal variable spreading factor (OVSF) code provides a means of support of
variable rate data service at low hardware cost in CDMA wireless systems. In an
OVSF-CDMA wireless ad hoc network, a code assignment has to be conflict-free,
i.e., two nodes can be assigned the same codeword or two non-orthogonal
codewords if and only if neither of them is within the transmission range of the
other and no other node is located in the intersection of their transmission
ranges. In this proposal, we propose to study various optimization problems on
conflict-free channel assignments in OVSF-CDMA wireless ad hoc networks. The
proposed studies include conflict-free channel assignment for maximum
throughput, for maximum bottleneck rate, and for both at the same time, and
transmission scheduling for minimum schedule duration when all nodes have
specified transmission rate. All these optimization problems are expected to be
NP-hard even when all nodes have the uniform transmission radii. We will prove
the NP-hardness of these problems and develop provably good polynomial-time
approximation algorithms. These studies are both theoretical challenging and
practical important for the deployment of OVSF-CDMA wireless ad hoc networks.
Furthermore, since wireless ad hoc networks support applications related to
disaster relief, public event coordination, and military and law enforcement
operations, increasing their throughput and communication bottleneck has vast
societal impact.