* 0311588
* Adaption, Implementation &amp; Enhancement of Multidisciplinary MEMS Curriculum for Undergraduate Electrical, Mechanical &amp; Microelectronics Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Sergey Lyshevski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 169,974.00

Electrical Electrical (55)-This project is adapting and enhancing the course
contents and accompanying laboratories of successful micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS) curricula developed at UM Ann Arbor and UC Berkeley. MEMS
fundamentals and applications are being covered in a new introductory
multidisciplinary "MEMS Design" course (with accompanying MEMS CAD Module
Laboratories). This course is preparing students for a sequence of two courses -
"MEMS Fabrication" and "MEMS System Evaluation"-with MEMS CAD and Fabrication
Module Laboratories. These MEMS laboratories are being performed in the existing
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) Microsystems Fabrication Facilities. The
"MEMS Fabrication" and "MEMS System Evaluation" courses are adapted and enhanced
versions of UM Ann Arbor "Introduction to MEMS" and "Integrated Microsystems
Laboratory" courses. The resources to be adapted include class notes, various
laboratory experiments, CAD tools, manuals, projects as well as other course
materials and teaching tools to attain our educational objectives. A set of
stylistically coherent and pedagogically consistent courses is being developed
for undergraduate Electrical, Mechanical and Microelectronics (MicroE)
engineering students in a well-defined material, topics and courses sequence.
Specifically, the courses and modular MEMS curriculum structure integrate MEMS
into the teaching of the basic concepts of MEMS, starting from an introductory
level and progressing to advanced topics in concurrent design and fabrication of
complex MEMS. The course lectures and laboratories are being developed for use
in an interactive classroom environment, implementing interactive learning
strategies and classroom practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of evaluative
techniques are being designed to assess pedagogical objectives compared with the
traditional lecture-based courses. Class testing and evaluation of materials are
being conducted over six quarters. In addition to the mastery of MEMS, the
laboratory and project assignments are improving student competencies in
communication, teamwork and project management, thereby developing skills for
lifelong learning. The effectiveness of student-centered and guided exploration
methods is being assessed through advanced topics (abstract MEMS synthesis, CAD,
etc.) and through comprehensive laboratory experiments (fabrication,
integration, packaging and testing). As a part of our dissemination efforts, an
interactive web site summarizing the MEMS curriculum and allowing free
downloading of all course materials is be developed and effectively maintained.
Purdue University, Notre Dame and other universities have expressed interest in
implementing the RIT MEMS curriculum. The developed curriculum is being
evaluated by UM Ann Arbor, Purdue University and Notre Dame faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the project are demonstrated in the
advance MEMS theory and engineering practice that are promoted in education
emphasizing teaching, training, learning and scholarship. Also, there is broad
participation of women and minorities in the new MEMS curriculum through
multidisciplinary undergraduate research and education. Finally, the maintaining
and enhancement of the shared user Microsystems Facilities at RIT provide an
impact on the MEMS community.&lt;br/&gt;