* 0311434
* An Undergraduate Robotics Course Emphasizing Integrated System Design and Multidisciplinary Team Work
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* William White, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 08/31/2005
* USD 84,000.00

59 Engineering-Manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
develop a multidisciplinary robotics course that emphasizes the integrated
system development nature of robotics and cross-functional teamwork. The project
adapts aspects of the General Robotics course at CMU, the Robot Building
Laboratory Project developed jointly at Swarthmore College and Bryn Mawr
College, and robotics tools developed at Drexel University. This General
Robotics course is available for undergraduate students of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Mechanical Engineering, and Industrial
Engineering. Accordingly, it emphasizes the multidisciplinary nature of robotics
by surveying the different fields with respect to robotics. The course uses a
hands-on approach to teaching the subject where laboratory exercises complement
lecture material. This provides students in the different engineering fields an
opportunity to experience how their discipline interfaces with other
disciplines. Another aspect of the course is to create cross-functional teams
comprised of students from the different areas to develop a robotics project.
This is an important experience that provides students opportunities to learn
about functioning in multidisciplinary teams. To enhance this learning
experience, material is presented that teaches students principles of teamwork
and group dynamics. The adaptation of the materials includes two major
innovations. The first is to include material specifically on teamwork and
integrated system design. The second innovation is the way the course is taught.
This involves the material being developed with sufficient detail for each area
so that any one or two engineering faculty members may teach the course.