* 0311713
* Development of a Laboratory Curriculum Devoted to the Thermal Management of Electronics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Tai-Ran Hsu, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 08/31/2007
* USD 105,757.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cooling of electronics
has emerged as a constraining problem of the new century. The challenges posed
by ever-increasing computer chip heat fluxes, smaller enclosures, and stricter
performance standards have made thermal management vital in microelectronic
systems. To combat this problem, an undergraduate laboratory curriculum devoted
to the thermal management of electronics is developed. The curriculum has two
aspects. First, a laboratory including both experimental and commercial
computational capabilities is developed for use in four classes taken by
mechanical, electrical, and computer engineering students. Experiments focus on
measurement methods, chassis impedence and fan performance, thermal resistance
measurements in an air-cooled computer, heat transfer coefficient determination,
liquid cooling using microchannels, and heat pipes. Second, a new elective
addressing an overview of the thermal management problem, air-cooling
technologies, computational design methodologies, and emerging technologies
(including cooling of nano-scale devices) is developed. It includes lecture and
laboratory components. The project adapts materials regarding electronics
cooling from Stanford University, and University of Maryland. The project
component regarding thermal management of electronics is adapted from Purdue
University, University of Minnesota, UC Berkeley, and University of Reno. This
project provides Mechanical Engineering students with an understanding of the
basic issues in the thermal management of electronics and the design and testing
of simple electronics cooling systems. The students taking the new elective
enter the work force prepared to work on electronics cooling.