* 0311768
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Eluicidation of Growth Plate Dynamics via Immunohistochemistry of the Mammalian Metacarpal
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Owen Lovejoy, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 05/31/2006
* USD 9,132.00

Skeletal proportions are primary to locomotor pattern, habitat, and feeding
strategy in primates. A more complete understanding of their evolution requires
better knowledge of the mechanisms that govern their development, and by
extension, better comprehension of their underlying cellular growth. To this
end, the researchers plan to help elucidate the molecular signaling pathways
affecting structures known as growth plates and their behavior during ontogeny.
The mechanisms that regulate cartilage growth and maturation during
embryogenesis (and thus guide formation of the skeletal system) have recently
been greatly clarified. However, the role of these same mechanisms in normal
postnatal growth is still largely unknown. Some bones grow by direct addition of
material while others have specialized areas for longitudinal growth called
growth plates. The mammalian metacarpal forms only a single growth plate, such
that the other end behaves like bones which lack them. Therefore, it provides an
excellent model with which to explore how the molecular signals involved in the
regulation of cartilage growth and bone formation via these two separate
mechanisms differ, and especially how the environment potential affects each.
Comparison of protein expression (immunohistochemistry) between the proximal and
distal ends of metacarpals at multiple postnatal age stages in the mouse can
illuminate these signals and provide a better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying growth specification in mammals. A more thorough
understanding of postnatal behavior of growth plates will directly improve our
understanding of both human and primate skeletal evolution (as well as similar
processes in the base of the skull), and how changes in bone length (and shape)
are genetically expressed. Thus, this study will aim to uncover genetic targets
available to natural selection for the modification of skeletal
proportions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has a broader impact on
science in general because it requires collaboration and interaction between
anthropological and biomedical researchers, an increasing necessity as the
biological subfields become more diverse and specialized. As always, an improved
knowledge of normal biology greatly improves our ability to enhance clinical
care; given the variety of growth disorders in humans, the present case is
certainly no exception to this general rule. In addition this award will
facilitate the education of a promising graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;