* 0311044
* An Affordable Molecular Modeling Curriculum for Organic Chemistry Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Harry Ungar, Cabrillo College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 95,601.00

Chemistry (12) We intend to accelerate the spread of computational molecular
modeling through sophomore/junior level organic chemistry courses by lowering
the barriers which have so far kept it from fulfilling its educational
potential. We are adapting and implementing the newly-developed and very
affordable computational chemistry program, WebMO, which is a WWW-based,
professional-level graphical &lt;br/&gt;interface to three state-of-the-art
computational chemistry programs: Mopac, Gamess, &lt;br/&gt;and Gaussian. We are
collaborating with the developers of WebMO to combine the power of its
computations with the power of existing Chime based visualization tools, and to
deliver the combination of these two in a low-cost and globally accessible
manner. We are writing web-based tutorials and a series of linked exercises
appropriate to the needs of students in the organic chemistry course. Students
are providing assistance in making, testing and implementing the exercises. The
aims of this curriculum are to improve students' skills in using software, their
understanding of MO theory and appreciation of the scope and limitations of
computational chemistry. We are implementing the tutorials and exercises through
the establishment of a consortium of local community colleges including Monterey
Peninsula College, Gavilan College, Hartnell College, San Jose City College,
DeAnza College, and Diablo Valley College. Students at those institutions have
free access to WebMO on a Cabrillo College server. We are providing support to
participating college faculty through professional development workshops, a web
site and personal communication. The results of this project have the potential
to be disseminated nationwide through adoption of the new curriculum materials
and replication of the consortium model. &lt;br/&gt;