* 0311473
* Collaborative: A Multi-Tier Model for Adaptation of Grid Technology to CS-based Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Bharat Jayaraman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 149,157.00

Computer Science (31) This project involves collaboration between two
institutions: SUNY at Buffalo, a research university, and SUNY College at
Geneseo, a four-year school. A model for adaptation of grid technology into an
undergraduate curriculum is implemented by this project and represents its
intellectual merit. The target audience includes: computer science (CS) majors -
juniors and seniors; non-CS majors from all levels, ranging from novices to
domain experts; and information technology workforce. The National Science
Foundation (NSF) has publicized grid computing and related technologies through
the NSF Middleware Initiative (NMI2). NMI2 offers a rich collection of
publications and software downloads for disseminating grid-related information.
This project adapts the core components of NMI2 grid technology: grid
architecture, grid services, and grid applications. Motivation for this project
comes from the fact that tremendous work is being carried out at the research
end of grid computing, whereas no formal structure is available for educating
undergraduate students about the grid. This model provides a flexible and easy-
to-use set of laboratory exercises based on grid computing. Broader impact is
achieved through the use of multiple tiers of adaptation of the grid. Tier 1
exposes the concept of grid from the novice user point of view. Tier 2 is for
the serious designer and applications. This tier is aimed at junior and senior
level undergraduate students who have sufficient background in Computer Science.
Tier 3 involves technical training for information technology professionals in
industry. Disseminated through a special web site, workshops and a textbook
contribute to the impact process.