* 0311063
* Bridging Mind And Body: An Integrative Laboratory for Psychology and Interdisciplinary Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Bernard Beins, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2006
* USD 98,591.00

Psychology (71). Within the Ithaca College psychology department, student-
faculty collaboration in research is a well-established tradition. Prior to the
implementation of this project, however, student exposure to modern systems of
measurement was limited. In this project we are creating the capacity for
faculty and students to use modern, scientific approaches to studying body and
mind connections through the use of modern mind-body laboratory technology. The
laboratory is equipped with a JVC digital video system that is used to create
visual stimuli and record subject responses, with Biopac units, a Qualisys
precision motion analysis system, and six SuperLab workstations. The laboratory
is being used for student-faculty collaborative research and also for classroom
demonstrations. We are also automating experiments. The students who benefit
from use of the mind-body laboratory include those enrolled in psychology
courses and also those working with faculty in other departments seeking to
provide their students with an interdisciplinary approach to the scientific
study of health and human performance. Many of these latter students, for
example, from theater, dance and music, do not typically participate in a hands-
on scientific approach to studying human functioning.

This project is following APA guidelines for building into coursework and
student experiments the use of equipment that is proven in psychology. In
particular, it is adapting Alma College's successful approach in using Biopac
units both in student research in its psychology department and in an
introductory course in anatomy and physiology. (See: Glynnis Beagley and William
Beagley, "Using Micro-computer Based EG to Enable and Encourage Student Designed
Projects," Behavior Research Methods, Instruments & Computer, Vol. 30, No. 2,
1998, pages 223-226, and J. Lundmark and A. Salmi, "Inquiry-Based Labs Using the
Biopac Student Lab System: Results from an NSF-CCLI Grant Supported Project,"
paper presented at the HAPS Conference, Maui, HI, 2001.) It is also adapting
ideas developed in the biology departments at Wagner College and Marymount
College. (See: T. Jackson, et al., "Physiological Responses to Guided
Relaxation," poster presented at the Eastern Colleges Science Conference, Ithaca
College, 2003, and J. Sutherland and C. Hoegler, "Effects of Higher Brain
Functions on the Diving Response in Humans," Poster presented at the Eastern
Colleges Science Conference, Ithaca, College, 2003). The project is leading to
an increase in student-faculty collaborative research and we expect this
activity will lead to publications and be reported at student and professional
conferences. The principal investigators are training other faculty at Ithaca
College in the use of the laboratory.