* 0311862
* SGER:  In Vivo Hemodynamic Mapping Using DPIV
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Jay Hove, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 10/31/2004
* USD 78,489.00

&lt;br/&gt;Normal heart development is a result of a complex interplay between
the genetic program, hemodynamic forces and the inter- and intracellular
processes that link them. Steady progress is being made in unraveling the role
of genetics in both normal and pathophysiological cardiogenesis but
investigations into the effects of hemodynamics on heart development are far
less common. This discrepancy is likely due to recently acquired genetic
accessibility of several animal models and to the difficulty in making
sufficiently detailed flow measurements inside a living, beating
heart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this study is to break through
existing technological barriers by applying a powerful new flow visualization
technique (digital particle image velocimetry [DPIV]) and state-of-the-art
confocal imaging to create a map of the intracardiac hemodynamic environment in
the most genetically accessible vertebrate model, the zebrafish (Danio rerio).
To accomplish this objective the standard DPIV technique will need to be
substantially modified: i) for application in microscopy; ii) for collection of
micro-EKG data concomitantly with flow data in order to temporally "gait" the
system; iii) for separation of the motions of red blood cells from the moving
chamber walls and; iv) for better accounting of the use of a planar measurement
on a 3-dimensional flow. The constrictions delineating the boundaries between
the early zebrafish heart chambers are small in cross-section and will
experience the most dynamic flow conditions. In addition, they are the sites of
predictable, future heart remodeling (i.e. valve formation) and thus represent a
logical anatomical location to apply our flow mapping technique. The embryos
appropriate for this developmental stage will be approximately 2 days post-
fertilization (dpf) and maintained at 28.5 C. Successful redefinition of DPIV
technique to in vivo use will offer an unprecedented look into the heart as it
develops, and will provide us with a tool for beginning to understand how
epigenetic factors influence the timing and eventual morphology of Natures most
celebrated pump.&lt;br/&gt;