* 0311824
* Collaborative Research: Hydrogen Isotope Biogeochemistry of Anoxic Environments - Field and Laboratory Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Alex Sessions, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 11/30/2006
* USD 299,743.00

Valentine/Sessions Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing compound-
specific hydrogen isotope analyses as a tool for process-oriented biogeochemical
studies of anoxic environments. Research is focusing on sulfate-reducing
bacteria (SRB) due to their quantitative importance for carbon cycling in marine
settings. Preliminary measurements of fatty acids from sediment traps in the
Black and Arabian Seas indicate dD values as low as -350. This project is
testing the hypothesis that consumption of molecular hydrogen (H2) by anaerobic
prokaryotes leads to lipids strongly depleted in deuterium (D), because H2
itself is isotopically depleted (typically -600 or more) relative to water.
Field studies is focusing on dD in biomarker lipids extracted from suspended
particulate matter and sediments collected in the Black Sea and Santa Monica
Basin. The results of this work will represent the first substantial survey of
compound-specific dD values in anoxic environments, and should provide an
indication of the biota responsible for the large isotopic fractionations.
Laboratory experiments are focusing on the sources of lipid hydrogen (i.e., H2
versus water) and hydrogen-isotopic fractionations through manipulation of SRB
cultures. Effects of metabolic rate, H2 concentration, species, and substrate
are being examined. &lt;br/&gt;