* 0311211
* Enhancing Student Understanding of Environmental Systems with Ion Chromatography
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jeanette Jerz, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 28,285.00

Geology (42) The broad, pedagogical objective of this project is to enhance
student learning of environmental systems by introducing modern, sophisticated
instrumentation into discovery-based exercises at all levels of the curriculum.
A DX-320 ion chromatograph (IC) is being purchased and installed at DePauw. NSF-
supported projects at Calvin College, Coe College, Bates College, and other
small, undergraduate schools are the models being adapted. The successful
methods and materials developed at these institutions are being adapted and
implemented into introductory and advanced courses in Geology, and supporting
student research in Geology, Chemistry, and Biology. The IC is also being used
in the newly introduced Environmental Geoscience major. The goals of this
project are 1) to improve non-science majors' understanding of environmental
systems and to increase the science literacy of all students, 2) to train
environmental geoscience majors in the use of standard analytical
instrumentation, 3) to develop critical thinking skills about instrumentation
and data analysis at all levels of the curriculum, 4) to increase the diversity
of research projects available to students, and 5) to support teaching and
student research projects in other science departments. The effectiveness of the
IC and its impact on enhancing student understanding of environmental systems is
being determined using quantitative and qualitative assessment techniques. The
materials and exercises developed during this project are being made available
for global distribution through the DePauw's web site, student presentations at
regional and national meetings, and publication in peer-reviewed journals.