* 0311263
* Free Boundary Problems for Systems:  Toward a Comprehensive Theory of Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Joseph Jerome, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 60,756.00

This proposal investigates a new class of systems, formulated in terms of
&lt;br/&gt;time dependent and stationary partial differential equations. The
systems&lt;br/&gt;have inherent switching properties, leading to their
interpretation as free&lt;br/&gt;boundary problems. What defines them as new is
their characterization as&lt;br/&gt;systems rather than scalar equations,
underscoring interlocking, complex&lt;br/&gt;dependencies. This work, part of
which is joint with Siegfried Carl,&lt;br/&gt;extends the work of many
mathematicians who have worked on free boundary&lt;br/&gt;problems for scalar
equations during the last four decades. Systems of &lt;br/&gt;free boundary
problems are associated with such diverse models as&lt;br/&gt;change of phase,
semi-classical band gap theories, threshold switching, &lt;br/&gt;and
combustion. Using significant models for illustration, we employ&lt;br/&gt;a
multi-tiered analysis, permitting the development of an
infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;for analysis and computation. The principal
investigator and Michael Rose&lt;br/&gt;introduced the initial comprehensive
finite element study of the two-phase &lt;br/&gt;Stefan problem in 1982. In this
proposal, iteration and discretization &lt;br/&gt;are studied as companion
entities. A particularly significant aspect is &lt;br/&gt;the identification of
the system map and its efficient approximation &lt;br/&gt;via smoothing and
linearization. The cooperation of Monica Torres has been&lt;br/&gt;secured to
study the interface of these systems with homogenization&lt;br/&gt;theory and
the theory of fully nonlinear partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical models of free boundary problems
build upon a rich tradition.&lt;br/&gt;Free boundary problems were studied
intensively during the 1970s and&lt;br/&gt;1980s. A major impetus in the U.S.
was the construction of the trans-Alaska&lt;br/&gt;pipeline, which required
knowledge of the complex process of melting&lt;br/&gt;of permafrost. The free
boundary refers to the so-called mushy region&lt;br/&gt;between solid and liquid
phases. A mathematical model of temperature,&lt;br/&gt;called the two-phase
Stefan problem, was employed for this purpose. One of&lt;br/&gt;the principal
contributors to this effort was John Wheeler of the Exxon
&lt;br/&gt;Corporation. Progress was slow in coming in the modeling of
systems,&lt;br/&gt;where several effects may be present. Associated free
boundary problems may&lt;br/&gt;arise in many application areas, due to
discontinuous switching induced by&lt;br/&gt;sources or sinks within the system.
An environmental example is the&lt;br/&gt;discharge of a contaminant species
into a river, the regulation of the&lt;br/&gt;discharge, and the ensuing
response of control mechanisms to ameliorate the&lt;br/&gt;discharge.
Sophisticated systems of partial differential equations,&lt;br/&gt;incorporating
physical principles describing the contaminant density and&lt;br/&gt;the river
temperature, are utilized, and include the switching phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;The
incorporation of quantum principles into models of nanostructures
also&lt;br/&gt;induces switching and free boundary problems, as does the study
of certain&lt;br/&gt;processes of combustion. Another application of these
ideas, which &lt;br/&gt;is not pursued in this proposal, is the pricing of
certain financial&lt;br/&gt;instruments. An area of broader impact of the
proposal has been identified &lt;br/&gt;in relation to the international
community sponsoring the Workshops on&lt;br/&gt;Computational Electronics. The
principal investigator has been an advisory&lt;br/&gt;panel member since 1990,
and details of some of this work, part of the &lt;br/&gt;effort toward making
quantum computing possible, will be disseminated to&lt;br/&gt;the community at a
regularly scheduled workshop, and in the journal,&lt;br/&gt;Computational
Electronics. Publication will also occur in regular&lt;br/&gt;mathematics
journals.&lt;br/&gt;