* 0311738
* A Framework for Speeding Up Mobile Code Execution in Embedded Systems Using Superoperators and Annotations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Alexander Veidenbaum, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2008
* USD 298,887.00

Embedded platforms are increasingly used to connect to the Web and are executing
mobile code. These platforms are a resource-constrained environment in which
interpreted execution of mobile codes is the norm because dynamic compilation is
not feasible. At the same time, the performance of the executed code is of
critical importance and is often a limiting factor in both the capabilities of
the system and user perception. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the research
proposed here are 1) to significantly improve interpreter performance for mobile
code on embedded platforms without increasing resource requirements and 2) to
design a resource constrained dynamic compilation system to be used with an
interpreter for adaptive optimization to further improve the performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals will be achieved by using extensive compile-time
analysis and by passing the results of the analysis to the interpreter running
on a client system via code annotations. Annotations will identify super-
operators, groups of instructions that can be executed as a unit and optimized
together. This will allow a more efficient interpretation by minimizing
communication overhead and dispatch costs. Annotations will also permit adaptive
dynamic optimization requiring fewer resources and little or no overhead.
&lt;br/&gt;