* 0311349
* Collaborative Experimentation and Simulation: A Pathway to Improving Student Conceptualization of the Essentials of System Dynamics and Control Theory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Javier Kypuros, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 196,181.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) &lt;br/&gt;Our project involves the development of
innovative solutions to the major challenge of improving students'
conceptualization of system dynamics concepts. Students struggle to understand
application of seemingly abstract mathematics to predict and visualize the
dynamic response of physical systems. The work we have adapted is from the work
on Virtual Laboratories done by Moseterman and his team. In addition, the work
of Johansson and his team is being utilized to develop pre-laboratory exercises
and eventually have these experiments serve as stand-alone fully developed
laboratories for the virtual laboratory format. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inter-
university laboratory formats utilizing virtual systems and remotely-accessible
experiments are being developed to complement the mechanical engineering
curricula at the University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA) and the University of
Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) - institutions that serve significant populations of
non-traditional students that struggle with strict time constraints. Hispanic
students constitute 87% and 46% of the student populations at UTPA and UTSA,
respectively. Over 70% of UTPA's and 40% of UTSA's entering freshmen are first-
generation college students, and a significant percentage work at least part-
time. The majority of these students enter college with limited exposure to
physics and calculus and must catch up rapidly to compete. Our goal has been to
effectively engage students in the engineering process of modeling and
controlling dynamic systems. The objectives have been to develop and evaluate
laboratory formats that: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. enhance conceptualization and
use of fundamentals using multiple means of visualization;&lt;br/&gt;2. increase
participation through improved dissemination, accessibility, and availability of
experiments via the Internet to students at many institutions; and&lt;br/&gt;3.
engage students collaboratively to improve understanding of system
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With aid from the Office of Institutional
Effectiveness at UTSA, the PI and his team have been evaluating the new
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;