* 0312709
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Modeling and Display of Haptic Information for Enhanced Performance of Computer-Integrated Surgery
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Alan C. Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 03/31/2007
* USD 234,817.00

Information Technology is making great progress in the operating room. In the
practice of minimally invasive surgery, three-dimensional modeling techniques
are enabling preoperative planning, new image acquisition and display
techniques, and superior dexterity through teleoperated robotic systems.
However, one sensory channel is presently ignored in these technological
improvements: touch. In manual surgeries, haptic feedback is crucial for
palpation, suture manipulation, and detection of puncture events. Sensation of
forces is particularly important for invasive tool-tissue interaction tasks such
as grasping, cutting, dissection, and percutaneous (GCDP) therapy. Lack of
haptic information overloads the visual sensing required of the surgeon,
requiring a demanding level attention. For information technology to truly
enhance the practice of surgery, multiple sensory channels must be utilized. We
propose to develop instrumentation and algorithms for modeling the haptic aspect
of tool-tissue interaction in four common surgical tasks, namely: grasping,
cutting, dissection, and percutaneous therapy. This system will significantly
enhance information display in three ways. First, data acquired in real time
will be used to provide feedback to the surgeon during model-based teleoperated
procedures, increasing the transparency. of the robot-assisted surgical system.
Second, real-time modeling techniques will enable model-based teleoperation,
removing the strict constraints imposed by time delays in traditional, direct
teleoperation. Third, realistic surgical simulations will improve training,
increasing surgeon competence and patient safety. The instrumentation and
modeling algorithms will be used to determine parameter values for different
tissue types, particularly liver, prostate, spleen, and kidney. Ex-vivo tissues
and phantom hydrogel tissues will be used in these experiments. Once the
instrumentation and modeling techniques are developed, we will proceed to
extensive validation of the three applications of enhanced information display.
Performance experiments will verify improvements in accuracy and precision for
direct and model-based teleoperation, and a computer vision/force sensing system
will determine the realism of force and deformation models developed for
surgical simulation. This proposal addresses the ITR challenge for developing an
information-enhanced display with computational, simulation, and data analysis
methods for modeling common surgical GCDP tasks for which currently there is no
systematic model. Intellectual merit: The specific goal of this project is to
significantly improve the information-enhanced operating room through the
sensing and acquisition of models representing haptic information during tool-
tissue interactions in minimally invasive surgery. This research will
significantly impact: (a) tool-tissue interaction models that reflect the actual
forces and deformation occurring during surgery, (b) haptic feedback to the
surgeon during direct or modelbased teleoperation, thereby improving surgical
outcomes, c) the development of realistic simulations for training current and
future health care professionals, and d) the development of instrumented smart
tools for both traditional minimally invasive and robot-assisted surgeries.
Broader Impacts: The PIs from both institutions have an excellent history of
involving undergraduate students (both men and women) in research projects
through Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU). Additionally, the Drexel
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) site proposal recommended for funding by
NSF, along with an established RET program at Johns Hopkins, will involve high-
school math and science teachers from high schools to participate in summer
research projects related to this proposal. These activities will enhance
participation of underrepresented groups from inner-city schools and lead to
broader dissemination of scientific and technological education of the students
and teachers. For graduate students, the interdisciplinary nature of this
research offers new opportunities in education, broadening the interaction of
mechanical engineers and medical professionals. Finally, the proposed research
will lead to improvements in surgical outcomes, benefiting the patient and the
society at large. Due to the diverse areas of research required by this project,
the proposed research will benefit from the collaboration of PIs from Drexel and
JHU. Drexel has expertise in haptics, FEM modeling, grasping/dissection tasks,
and phantom tissues while JHU has expertise in reality-based modeling for
cutting/percutaneous therapies, haptics, and validation experiments for human-
machine systems. The unique facilities and collaborations at both institutions,
along with strong ties to medical professionals, make this work appropriate as a
collaborative research project.

