* 0312710
* ITR Collaborative Research: Diversity of Biogeochemical Processes: Modeling Multiple Biomes on Multiple Flow Scales in the Eastern Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Scott Doney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary research project will explore and expand the
frontier of Information Technology capabilities by incorporating variability
across a large range of spatial scales (through innovative embedded griding and
advanced code architecture) and generalized adaptive ecological food webs
(through multiple planktonic size classes, functional groups, and limiting
nutrients) in realistic model configurations for the Pacific Ocean. This
proposed combination of elements is unprecedented and thus pushes against the
limits of simulating reality. The simulations of oceanic circulation and
biogeochemistry will be based on the continued development of the Regional
Oceanic Modeling System (ROMS), a relatively new computational code with
innovative space-time discretization, sub-gridscale transport parameterizations,
open-boundary conditions, and embedded griding capabilities. The computational
research will focus on: 2-way embedding and flux-consistency across embedding
levels, parallelization performance and portability, and software protocols for
code architecture. The biological component will derive from a new global
ecosystem model that explicitly treats iron limitation, nitrogen fixation, size
structure, and diatom blooms. The strategy will be to simulate the entire
Pacific Ocean circulation and biology at coarse spatial resolution (i.e., not
resolving the eddies) and then investigate mesoscale influences at fine
resolution in three productive, regional subdomains along the eastern boundary-
tropical, subtropical and subpolar-with distinctive biomes. The coupled
solutions will be analyzed to determine the rectification of mesoscale
biological-physical variability to larger scales, the emergence of distinct
biomes from a generalized set of ecological rules, and the level of biological
complexity required to match observations based on information theoretic model-
selection techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Although these
studies are focused on particular places with particular oceanic behaviors, they
will provide a generic prototype for oceanic processes globally and for the
important challenge of downscaling planetary-scale climate simulations to
determine their regional-scale consequences. This project is a multi-
disciplinary collaboration between UCLA and Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. The personnel have expertise in physical, biological, and chemical
oceanography and in the algorithms and procedures required for high-end
computational modeling at the national supercomputing centers and they will
train a post-doc and a graduate student in using these complex
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;