* 0312655
* ITR/Collaborative Research:      Intelligent Topology Control and Energy Provisioning for Wireless Video Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Thomas Hou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2006
* USD 225,006.00

Wireless video sensor networks have important applications. In addition to their
traditional surveillance and monitoring applications, these networks have
recently found many new applications for enhancing national security, reducing
the impact of security breaches on the nation's critical infrastructure, and
improving the government's ability to prevent, detect, respond to, and recover
from both man-made and catastrophic events. This project will examine a wireless
video sensor network that is designed for surveillance over an extended period
of time. Consequently, this project will explore several definitions for network
lifetime, taking into account the percentage of nodes required to remain alive
(corresponding to network coverage) and the different priorities of nodes based
on their locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will consider several
important factors that affect network lifetime, including base-station placement
and network connectivity topology. An analysis of power dissipation behavior at
video sensor nodes suggests that communication consumes significantly more
energy than any other node activity. This power consumption can be controlled
effectively by monitoring and adjusting the power level of the transmitter and
the network traffic routing topology. By adjusting the topology of the network
through intelligent base station placement and network connectivity among the
video sensor nodes, we can optimize the transmitter power of video sensor nodes,
thus extending network lifetime. We have found that techniques and algorithms
developed in the field of computational geometry can help us obtain a good
understanding of the nature of the problem and identify where difficulties lie.
More important, such approaches enable us to develop very useful performance
bounds to characterize properties of wireless video sensor networks, which is
the basis to further development of customized solutions. In this research, we
plan to further explore algorithms and techniques from computational geometry to
study the impact of topology control (base-station placement, temporal topology,
traffic routing) on network performance and characterize basic properties for
wireless video sensor networks. Proposed research components include, among
others, joint problems of base-station placement and multihop routing,
considerations of constraints on base-station placement, and dynamic varying
network topology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to theoretical
study, a software toolkit will also be developed to implement the intelligent
topology control techniques that are developed in this research.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will also foster the integration of research and education at
the investigators' institutions and will have a significant impact on education.
Students working on this project will have a unique opportunity to explore
creative approaches and innovative methods for solving IT problems. In addition,
some results from this research will be incorporated into an advanced topics
class on wireless and sensor networks at the PIs' institutions.&lt;br/&gt;