* 0312510
* ITR: Large-Scale Applications and Theory of Extremal Optimization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Stefan Boettcher, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 284,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. The Divisions of Materials Research and
Mathematics jointly fund this grant. It supports the application of the extremal
optimization heuristic, developed by the PI, to hard optimization problems,
ranging from the physics of disordered materials to combinatorial problems in
computer science and artificial intelligence. The PI aims to (1) measure ground-
state energies, entropies, and overlaps for spin glasses on networks and
lattices, and (2) elucidate the order parameter at the SAT/UNSAT transition in
combinatorial optimization problems. Extremal optimization has produced many
results for lattice spin-glasses, and agrees with recent theoretical predictions
on finite-connectivity Bethe-lattices to within 0.1%. A short-term objective is
to produce numerical results for spin-glass systems to test the cutting-edge
predictions of replica symmetry breaking on low-connectivity systems. Central to
the research is the investigation of hybrid methods, derived from experimental
and theoretical advances, which enable the study of much larger and more
realistic systems. Comparative studies will educate practitioners about the
potential of this approach to optimization with the hope of inspiring further
applications. &lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce students to computational
techniques and a spectrum of simulation methods in the process of experimenting
with optimization problems on networks relevant for many physical and cross-
disciplinary problems. Students will interact at the interface between computer
science and physics, and as part of their education will conduct student
research at Los Alamos National Laboratory's Computer and Computational Sciences
division under an existing collaboration. Assessing the potential of this novel
method in comparison with other optimization methods will afford undergraduate
students in particular with a comprehensive learning experience.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a 'small' category proposal
submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. The Divisions of
Materials Research and Mathematics jointly fund this grant. It supports research
and education in the statistical mechanics of disordered systems. The PI will
continue work on an optimization algorithm he developed and apply it to problems
ranging from the physics of disordered materials to combinatorial problems in
computer science and artificial intelligence. Successful algorithmic strategies
will be applied to realistic systems, for instance, to help settle long-standing
questions about three dimensional spin glasses.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
introduce students to computational techniques and a spectrum of simulation
methods in the process of experimenting with optimization problems on networks
relevant for many physical and cross-disciplinary problems. Students will
interact at the interface between computer science and physics, and as part of
their education will conduct student research at Los Alamos National
Laboratory's Computer and Computational Sciences division under an existing
collaboration. Assessing the potential of this novel method in comparison with
other optimization methods will afford undergraduate students in particular with
a comprehensive learning experience.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;