* 0312802
* ITR/CISE: Towards Organic Computing in Computer Vision and Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Stefan Schaal, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 12/31/2006
* USD 340,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0312802&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR:
Towards Organic Computing in Computer Vision and Robotics &lt;br/&gt;PI: Schaal,
Stefan&lt;br/&gt;U. of Southern California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing a methodology to advance a self-organizing
computing paradigm in flexible robotics and vision in natural environments.
These application domains require systems of tremendous complexity, as also
indicated by the fact that a large part of our brains, with a processing
capacity orders of magnitude larger than any technical system, is devoted to
vision and control of behavior. It is doubtful whether systems of the required
complexity can be designed by current computing methodologies. It is proceeded
with the realization that radically new design principles will have to be
developed, and are seeing this project as part of a broader effort to establish
the new computing paradigm Organic Computing (OC). OC aspires to understand and
emulate information processing in living systems, a form of information
processing that does not seem to follow traditional algorithmic control, but
rather mechanisms of evolution, adaptation, goal-oriented self-organization and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;The study will perform towards this goal by a series of
theoretical and experimental studies that will demonstrate the principles of OC
and how it can replace traditional programming in classical problems of computer
vision and robotic control. &lt;br/&gt;On the intellectual side, the project
will contribute considerably to robust large-scale intelligent and autonomous
systems in the future, and a better scientific understanding of the functional
principles that are at the basis of autonomous vision, motor control, and
visual-motor coordination, also with a view towards interdisciplinary exchange
with the neuroscience. The broader impact will be to profoundly transform the
style in which large software systems are developed and to open computer systems
to the direct creative influence of the non-technical user. The significance of
our particular sample applications will be progress with advanced sensing,
perception and actuation systems in unstructured environments, as a basis for
HCI systems and also for the emerging field of neuro-prosthetics and
rehabilitation engineering as well as robotics and autonomous vehicle
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;