* 0312084
* ITR:     Efficient Algorithms for Temporal Planning Under Nonlinear Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Benjamin Wah, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 06/30/2007
* USD 375,000.00

This research will develop formal mathematical conditions for reducing the
search space of planning problems, and will demonstrate performance improvements
in search engines of planners and other discrete searches. Based on the
observation that temporal planning problems can be arranged into stages by time,
they can be formulated as dynamic optimization problems with dynamic variables
that evolve over time. Due to the presence of general constraints that span
across multiple stages, path dominance in dynamic programming cannot be applied
to reduce the search complexity. This research will seek new node-dominance
conditions in each stage by developing the necessary or necessary-and-sufficient
conditions for local optimality and by partitioning the conditions into
distributed necessary conditions, based on local constraints in each stage and
constraints between adjacent stages. By partitioning the search into stages and
by finding only dominating states in each stage using the necessary conditions,
the search for feasible or optimal plans can be restricted to a much smaller
subspace in each stage, leading to a smaller number of combinations of possible
paths that need to be searched across multiple stages.

Three research tasks will be completed in this work. Based on the discrete-space
variational search implementing the stopping conditions, research will develop a
new planning system that fully supports PDDL2.1 language features, using the
constraint-based-interval representation. Temporal flexible scheduling will be
extended by formulating a temporal constraint network with flexible time points
into a constrained nonlinear optimization problem and by partitioning the search
space. Research will study algorithms for partitioning satisfiability (SAT),
mixed-integer optimization, and planning problems.

The research is on a new approach that reduces the computational complexity by
exploiting the locality of constraints in multi-stage optimization problems. By
developing node dominance conditions that identify dominating nodes in each
stage, it will lead to reduced search space in each stage and a significant
reduction in base of the exponential number of possible paths to be searched
across multiple stages. Although a similar approach has been studied in calculus
of variations in continuous space, the extension to discrete problems requires
the development of a completely new foundation in the theory of Lagrange
multipliers in discrete space. The approach developed is general and can be used
as stopping conditions in existing planners or integrated into new search
algorithms. It can also benefit the solution of other discrete optimization
problems, including SAT and mixed-integer optimization.

In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students in their research,
the project develops a fundamental approach that will be incorporated into
courses on optimization. The results will also carry significant impact on
autonomous vehicle planning and will be applied to planners currently developed
at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and Jet Propulsion
Laboratory. Improved planners will allow higher dependability of space missions
that will benefit society at large.