* 0312848
* Condensation Phenomena in Modified Micro/Nano-Scale Functional Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Yaxiong Wang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 04/30/2007
* USD 294,344.00

Peterson, G.P. 'Bud' Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

"Condensation Phenomena in Modified Micro/Nano-Scale Functional Surfaces" The
structural and physical properties of a surface can have a significant effect on
the condensation/evaporation phenomena that occurs on solid-vapor or solid-
liquid interfaces. Modern micro/nano fabrication and other surface modification
techniques make it possible to develop a series of multifunctional surfaces that
can enhance or suppress the condensation/evaporation by modifying the property
characteristics of the surface. Investigation of the condensation phenomena, in
or on functionally specified surfaces, has practical applications in many
fields, including phase change heat transfer devices such as heat pipes or
capillary pumped loops, microelectronics, biochemical devices, nuclear reactors,
bioreactors, capillary transport systems for spacecraft thermal control systems,
fuel cells, MEMS devices and geothermal applications. Through a better
understanding of the mechanisms that govern the fundamental transport phenomena
in these micro/nano scale porous structures, new techniques it may be possible
to develop new improved technologies for utilization in these fields and
devices.

Numerous theoretical and experimental investigations have been conducted on
surfaces modified either to promote dropwise condensation or to improve filmwise
condensation. The surface-modifying methods utilized include lowering the
surface energy to obtain dropwise condensation and changing the geometric shape
of the surface to reduce the thickness of a condensate, thereby enhancing the
heat transfer coefficient. In addition, the condensation/evaporation on or in
porous media has received increasing levels of interest in recent years.
However, research on the thin film condensation phenomena in or on micro/nano-
porous surfaces is not currently available. Because of the small-scale
structures and the special surface modifying methods employed, these modified
micro/nano-porous surfaces have novel properties related to the wetability,
surface tension and capillarity. The condensation phenomena that occur in these
modified micro-porous surfaces are not clearly understood and require intensive
study from both a theoretical and experimental perspective.

The objective of the proposed research is to develop multifunctional surfaces
and investigate the condensation phenomena occurring in and on those surfaces.
Analytical models describing the capillary condensation and fluid flow, coupled
with the characteristic parameters of the micro/nano-porous structures, surface
energy, interface tension, wetting characteristics and disjoining pressure, will
be established to predict the condensation heat transfer performance. A unique
experimental system, in which capillary phenomena is employed to pump the
working fluid and thereby maintain a thin condensate film, will be established
to evaluate the condensation performance. A series of micro/nano-porous
surfaces, which will be fabricated by sintering, chemical vapor deposition, or
glancing angle deposition techniques and modified by advanced technologies
developed in recent years such as dynamic ion-beam mixed implanting, low
temperature plasma polymerization, self-catalyzed chemical deposition, physical
vapor deposition and plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition, will be
investigated to examine the effect of micro-structural and physical properties
of the surface on the condensation and the induced fluid flow. The results of
the experimental investigation will then be compared with the theoretical
predictions in order to determine the fundamental parameters governing the
condensation phenomena occurring in and on the surfaces. State-of-the-art
measuring techniques will be used to monitor the formation of droplets or thin
liquid films in the micro/nano-porous cells, and to measure the physical
parameters such as characteristic length, porosity, permeability, surface energy
and wetability of the micro-porous surfaces, which all have a significant effect
on the condensation/evaporation phenomena and using the above methodologies are
all controllable. By carefully controlling the physical parameters, the
resulting thermophysical parameters, such as interface instability,
thermocapillary flow, and contact angle variation can also be adjusted, allowing
variations in the disjoining pressure, frictional shear stress, curvature of
liquid film and wetting characteristics.

The broader impacts of the proposed research consists of (1) advancing the
discovery and understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of the transport
phenomena in and on micro/nano-porous surfaces and the integration of this
information through the research and education of graduate and undergraduate
students; (2) establishing collaborations between engineering, advanced surface
science, transport phenomena and physics due to the interdisciplinary nature of
this research project and the sharing of multidisciplinary research facilities
and technologies; (3) disseminating the results of this investigation through
the conventional distribution methods, which include publication of refereed
journal articles, conference proceedings and presentations, invited lectures,
and periodic progress reports distributed to the NSF and the associated agency
facilities, and placing information on the Two-phase Heat Transfer Website at
http://twophaseheat.rpi.edu/ in which the latest research results on past and
ongoing projects underway in Two-phase Heat Transfer Laboratory are presented;
(4) development of extensive practical applications in many fields such as the
thermal control of microelectronic devices/system, capillary transport and
thermal control systems of aerospace, biochemical devices, nuclear reactors,
bioreactors, fuel cells, MEMS devices and geothermal applications.

