* 0312993
* ITR:     Fundamental Issues in Automated American Sign Language Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Barbara Loeding, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2007
* USD 397,849.00

Sign languages are complex, abstract linguistic systems, with their own
grammars, and their "articulation" involve not just the hands, but the face,
shoulder, and arms. In this project the PI and his team will push the state of
the art in scalable automated American Sign Language (ASL) recognition
formalisms. Presently, there are methods to recognize isolated signs and, to
some extent, continuous signs in short sentences from a single signer, mostly
using special equipment such as data gloves or magnetic markers or from visual
input against plain background and special clothing. The PI seeks to achieve
substantial advances in five areas:: (i) recognition against varied backgrounds
and different clothing, (ii) use of non-manual aspects such as facial expression
and head movement, (iii) recognition across signers, (iv) design of robust,
scalable formalisms, and (v) development of large ASL data corpus that exercise
variates such as viewpoint, background, time, and signer, to help benchmark
progress. To these ends, the PI will (i) develop robust manual and non-manual
(face) feature sets for ASL, (ii) construct formalisms to learn sign models from
example sentences, (iii) investigate if elemental forms of signs (signemes) can
be learned, (iv) employ Bayesian network based indexing schemes to limit the
combinatorics of recognition, and (v) explore techniques to incorporate grammar
and syntax information into the recognition
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: With the gradual shift to speech
based I/O devices for human computer interaction, there is great danger that
people who rely on sign languages for communication will be deprived access to
state of the art technology unless there significant advances in automated
recognition of sign language are achieved. Such advances will also enhance the
quality of life of persons with disabilities, by facilitating interaction with
the general populace in public situations, such as airports and grocery stores.
The PI will identify at least one deaf graduate student or a student with
communication disorder to participate in the project, to ensure the outcome is
relevant and appropriate to the intended user community. The large ASL data
corpus collected in this project will be distributed aggressively; this effort
will continue to be supported beyond the project end date.&lt;br/&gt;