* 0312079
* ITR: CAD Algorithms for Unified Prediction of Oscillator Mixing and Phase Noise
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Jaijeet Roychowdhury, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 245,000.00

The term oscillator is broadly used for any physical system that can generate
and sustain repetitive motions through its own fundamental mechanisms. For
example, clocks, hearts, combustion engines, and lasers are all oscillators.
Oscillators are fundamental building blocks in electronics, producing the clock
signals and repetitive waveforms essential for the operation of virtually all
computer, radio and communication circuits. In spite of the ubiquity of and
longstanding scientific interest in oscillators, certain aspects of their
operation, such as their response to small external influences or noise, have
remained&lt;br/&gt;poorly understood to date. Noise makes an oscillator's
repetition period drift in a random fashion this is often referred to as phase
noise or jitter. The accuracy of clocks, or the purity of radio signals carrying
voice or high-speed data, is fundamentally limited by oscillator noise. Being
able to predict oscillator noise correctly is, therefore, not only of
considerable scientific value, but also of great practical interest, for it can
be used to build oscillators that are less sensitive to
noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a rigorous
mathematical understanding of oscillator noise mechanisms, and apply this
understanding to develop computational tools for quantitative noise/jitter
prediction. In addition to solving an important scientific problem that has long
been open, this research will be directly useful as a module for computer-aided
circuit design tools, such as the well-known program SPICE. Although the
principal immediate benefit of this research will be in the design of electronic
circuits, the techniques developed will be applicable to any kind of oscillator,
including mechanical, biological, chemical and optical ones. Hence we expect
this research to have broad long-term impact in a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;scientific disciplines. A strong educational component is an
integral part of this work, with an explicit goal being to disseminate results
in as readable and easily understandable a form as possible. To further increase
impact, the computational methods developed in this research project will be
prototyped and made publicly available as open source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;