* 0312081
* NSF-Europe:  Evaluation of the Optical and Electrical Properties of Oxychalcogenide Glass Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Steve Martin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2006
* USD 720,000.00

Inorganic chalcogenide glasses (ChG's) are promising candidates for both optical
and electrical applications as they possess excellent transparency in key
spectral regimes, widely varying (tunable) electrical properties and are
amenable to on-chip manufacturing processes. However, their long-term stability
is often unacceptable. Recent efforts by our research team have suggested that
such limitations can be overcome by the partial replacement of the primary
chalcogen (S or Se), with oxygen. Preliminary data suggest that key optical
properties of such oxy-chalcogenide (OChG) glasses can be superior to terminal
ChG or oxide glass compositions. In the proposed NSF-EU program, three U.S.
research teams in partnership with two French research sites will collaborate to
synthesize and evaluate the optical and electrical properties of these new OChG
materials. The program aims to (i) maintain the attractive features of ChG's but
blend the beneficial attributes found in oxides; (ii) create glasses with
improved mechanical, thermal and transport properties and long-term stability;
(iii) utilized key learnings in optical and electrical modifications associated
with oxygen substitution to produce materials amenable to photo-induced
modification resulting in novel device structures. Glass compositions to be
evaluated include modified GeO2-GeS2 compositions and Ag doped:OChG; these
materials will be compared to their parent oxide and ChG materials, for optical
applications; thio-nitride and thio-oxynitrides will be evaluated for Li:battery
applications. Resulting OChG will be assessed for their photosensitivity and the
potential for further enhancement of properties using light-induced structural
changes. Successful candidate bulk materials will then be transferred to use in
film and fiber form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assemblage of glass science,
chemistry and optical science expertise among the researchers, brings a proven
track record of educational outreach and mentoring, and it is expected that the
international team of students and faculty will extend key scientific and
technological know-how to both sides of the partnership, while furthering the
success of our established international collaboration. The Division of
Materials Research (Ceramics) and the International Office (Western Europe) will
support this program involving researchers from the University of Central
Florida School of Optics, Iowa State University and Lehigh University working
with researchers at the Univeristies of Bordeaux and Rennes in France.
&lt;br/&gt;