* 0312356
* ITR:    Text Metadata Mining:    Extending the Frontiers of Text Based Applications in Biomedicine
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Padmini Srinivasan, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2007
* USD 318,292.00

The goal in text mining is automatic knowledge discovery from large text
collections. The importance of text mining technology comes from its potential
to enable the process of hypothesis generation and thereby influence the
progress of science. This complex process, a crucial initial step for making
scientific discoveries, relies on several factors including intangible ones such
as prior experience and intuition. Oftentimes chance connections made
serendipitously, later turn out to be fruitful. Text mining tools automatically
scour large text collections to identify a small set of hypotheses that are both
novel and interesting enough to warrant further research by the user. This
research is a study of text mining algorithms, especially those that exploit the
metadata associated with text. The specific aims are (1) to implement algorithms
designed around three basic text mining functions in a prototype hypothesis
generation and knowledge discovery tool and (2) to evaluate this prototype
through a set of mining experiments designed to explore knowledge discovery
within the biomedical domain. Although biomedicine forms the topical context of
this study, the mining functions explored are general and may be applied to any
subject area that has a large text database with associated metadata.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;