* 0312879
* ITR:     Noiseless Data Compression Based on Error Correcting Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Sergio Verdu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2008
* USD 508,000.00

Noiseless Data Compression is a key information technology used in
innumerable&lt;br/&gt;data storage and transmission applications ranging from
computer operating systems&lt;br/&gt;to modems to lossy compression standards.
Although the state-of-the-art has&lt;br/&gt;reached a certain level of maturity,
with data compression algorithms that reach&lt;br/&gt;the fundamental
information theoretic limits with linear computational
complexity,&lt;br/&gt;they suffer from several shortcomings when used in
packetized noisy channels.&lt;br/&gt;For this reason, no payload data
compression is currently implemented in third-generation&lt;br/&gt;standards for
high-speed wireless data transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we
explore an alternative avenue to the conventional approach&lt;br/&gt;which seeks
to design and analyze noiseless data compressors that are suitable for
use&lt;br/&gt;in packetized data transmission through noisy channels while
retaining the favorable&lt;br/&gt;properties of existing algorithms in terms of
complexity and elimination of redundancy.&lt;br/&gt;The new approach is based on
the use of modern capacity-approaching&lt;br/&gt;error-correcting encoding and
decoding algorithms&lt;br/&gt;(such as low density parity check codes and belief
propagation, respectively)&lt;br/&gt;in a novel way that capitalizes on the
recent discovery of a reversible&lt;br/&gt;transformation (block-sorting
transform), which&lt;br/&gt;previous research by the PI and his collaborators
has shown to transfer&lt;br/&gt;essentially all the memory redundancy present in
ergodic&lt;br/&gt;discrete information sources to redundancy in the individual
symbol outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;One of the most exciting applications of the new
class of algorithms&lt;br/&gt;is the problem of joint data
compression/transmission. While Shannon's&lt;br/&gt;separation principle
establishes no loss in asymptotic performance&lt;br/&gt;when compression and
transmission are performed separately, it has long been&lt;br/&gt;expected that,
in the nonasymptotic regime, gains may accrue by joint
design.&lt;br/&gt;However, this promise has not yet been realized as existing
schemes that take into&lt;br/&gt;account the source statistics at the decoder
can only cope with very simplistic models.&lt;br/&gt;