* 0312105
* ITR/AP: Simulation Tools for Open Quantum Systems with Application to Molecular Electronics Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Christopher Roland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational and theoretical research
and education to calculate current-voltage characteristics of molecular and
nanoscale structures with an aim to understand and predict transport and other
properties of these systems. The PIs will use a recently developed approach,
based on the Keldysh nonequilibrium Green's function formalism combined with
density-functional-theory-based simulations. Calculations will be performed
using a newly developed real-space ab initio code. The main features of the code
include: (i) fully atomistic treatment of the device electrodes which properly
match the molecular device region; (ii) the correct self-consistent charge
distribution generated under the effects of external bias and gate voltages,
which includes the contributions from both the scattering and the bound states
of the system; (iii) the implementation in an efficient numerical scheme for
large-scale calculations on state-of-the art supercomputers. The PIs will extend
this code in significant ways enabling calculations for multiprobe systems,
current-induced forces, spin-dependent effects, and the dynamical response of
molecular systems. The PIs aim to distribute codes developed in the course of
the work to the broader materials research community.&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports education spanning the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral level.
Students and a postdoctoral research associate will be engaged in all aspects of
the research projects. In addition, the PI aims to integrate part of the
research into a series of simulation "short courses."
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a 'small' category proposal
submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports
computational and theoretical research and education to calculate electron
transport through molecular and nanoscale structures in response to an applied
electric field with an aim to understand and predict the properties of these
systems. The PIs will use a recently developed approach that combines a quantum
many-body theory technique with electronic structure methods to create a tool
that may be significant step towards realistically modeling electron transport
through molecules and nanoscale structures. The PIs will develop new algorithms
to extend the capabilities of existing code. The PIs aim to distribute codes
developed in the course of the work to the broader materials research community.
This research may have impact on the emerging fields of nanoelectronics and
molecular electronics.&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education spanning the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral level. Students and a postdoctoral
research associate will be engaged in all aspects of the research projects. In
addition, the PI aims to integrate part of the research into a series of
simulation "short courses." &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;