* 0312717
* Process Connectors: Enabling Rapid and Flexible Interconnection of Distributed Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Joachim Hammer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/2005
* USD 449,485.00

Abstract - Title: Process Connectors: Enabling Rapid and Flexible
Interconnection of Distributed Processes Poor coordination of interacting
processes in the construction industry is largely responsible for a low workflow
reliability of 30-60% that results in costly delays and repeated process
coordination needs in this $700+ billion dollar US industry ($3.4 trillion
globally). However, since the coordination needs are information intensive, new
computer science practices supported by detailed understanding of the
application domain holds the promise to improve practice. This project
objectives are to generate new theory and understandings to enable rapid
configuration of computerized links - process connectors - between firms to
manage distributed process coordination tasks. A key limitation of existing
models and methods for integrating distributed services (e.g., Web Services) is
that they do not provide the necessary tools to rapidly configure specific
implementations (particularly for complex services). This limits their usability
in projects where firms assemble and disassemble in an ad hoc manner. To support
the research objectives, two specific outcomes are anticipated: (1) Development
of an ontology that can accommodate interactions between processes, in
particular interactions where there are different levels of detail and
constraints that must be propagated across processes. (2) Development of a
specification language to flexibly model heterogeneous processes and process
connectors in an executable format. To guide the development and testing the
research team will collaborate with industry throughout the project. Specific
focus will be placed on residential construction, a large $300+ billion subset
of the US construction industry. Collaboration with industry provides directed
opportunities to foster the educational objectives of the grant to involve
students in the research and to develop examples and systems for classroom
pedagogy.

While focusing on residential construction, the theory and methods developed
under this proposal are applicable to a wide range of project industries such as
commercial and industrial construction, shipbuilding, custom manufacturing, etc.
More broadly, the proposed research will provide the foundation to enable
dynamic process modeling by firms and individuals. It is expected that the
proposed research will enable a step change in firms' capabilities to share
process knowledge and coordinate their collective actions, allowing them to
generate, evaluate and refine process alternatives more rapidly and reliably
than is currently possible.