* 0312011
* Chemical Hydrology of Vascular Plant Growth: Role of Root-Fungus Associations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Ching-yan Li, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2007
* USD 249,722.00

The dissolved chemical load of runoff - i.e. discharge of dissolved mass from
terrestrial environments to streams, groundwater and the oceans - is important
for its relationship to nutrient retention and loss in ecosystems, quality of
aquatic and marine coastal habitats, and long-term climate control exerted by
the ocean-atmosphere system. Vascular plants promote dissolution of primary
minerals, or chemical weathering, to meet their nutritional requirements for
growth; this plant-driven weathering has long been understood to affect the
chemistry of soil water and the chemical loading of runoff. This research will
experimentally investigate the mechanisms by which rooted plant growth affects
soil water chemistry and the hydrologic loss, in runoff, of mineral-derived
elements from watersheds. Previous work by us on experimental ecosystems at
Hubbard Brook indicates that pine tree growth reduces both soil-water
concentrations of base cations in the rooting zone, and the discharge of these
cations in drainage water, relative to controls. This research is designed to
investigate how, and under what conditions, mineral-to-root chemical transport
is isolated from soil water and "protected" from hydrologic loss. It is
hypothesized that this phenomenon is a feature of root-to-mineral attachment
which occurs during plant growth. It is specifically hypothesized that
ectomycorrhizal fungi and their hyphal networks function as root-to-mineral
conduits which facilitate the hydrochemical control observed by us at Hubbard
Brook. The hypothesis will be tested by replicated growth experiments in the
laboratory and in greenhouses. The experiments will isolate fungal and fungi-
root-plant effects on solution chemistry and loss in drainage from
hydrologically, chemically and ecologically simple systems. Additionally, base
cations will be tracked from their sources at mineral surfaces into fungal and
plant tissue and into drainage. Broader impacts of this research include
participation of high school and undergraduate students, particularly women, in
data collection and interpretation via coursework and part-time jobs;
dissemination of findings via interdisciplinary forums and the world wide web;
and improvement of our understanding of long-term ecosystem sustainability and
controls on the partitioning of sequestered atmospheric CO2 into short-term and
long-term storage.