* 0312046
* Well-Defined Macromolecule-Magnetic Nanoparticle Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 611,000.00

Intellectual Merit of the Research Program. This research focuses on the
molecular design of block copolymers with anchor segments expected to bind to
magnetic metal or metal oxide particles and tail blocks to provide steric
dispersibility in aqueous and organic carrier media. Emphasis is devoted to two
inter-related thrusts. One includes syntheses of copolymer dispersants with
hydrophobic, glassy anchor blocks and controlled molecular weight tails, a study
of their function as micellar templates for generating controlled-size cobalt
nanoparticles, dispersive properties as related to particle size and copolymer
structure/morphology, and anaylses of their effectiveness in improving
durability of magnetic metal nanoparticles. The second thrust encompasses the
design of enzymatically degradable dispersants for magnetite, and a study of
dispersibility as related to magnetic size as it is increased from 10-100 nm in
diameter. These dispersants have silane or siloxane anchors with carboxylate
binding groups and selected peptide tail blocks. The polypeptide blocks include
models with essentially uni-modal molecular weight distributions as compared to
those prepared in facile polymerizations via carbodiimide-activated aminoacid
coupling or by ring-opening of N-carboxyanhydrides. Anticipated outcomes of teh
research are methodologies for preparing controlled size cobalt and magnetic
nanoparticles, well-coated with macromolecular dispersants. The knowledge gained
relating copolymer structure and composition, particle size, and dispersibility
will enable complexes to be prepared with the highest possible volume fractions
of the magnetic components. This will provide dispersible magnetic complexes
with the highetst magnetic response. It will also provide a firm basis for
predicting properties of other particle-macromolecular compositions as future
inorganic magnetic components are developed. Anticipated Broader Aspects of the
Program: Complexes of tailored macromolecules with magnetic metal and metal
oxide nanoparticles could "open the door" to microelectronics and critical
biomedical technologies. Biological applicatons include possibilities for intra-
arterial, magnetic field-directed localization of drugs, cell targeting with
magnetic separations for bone marrow treatments, localized in-vivo hyperthermia
treatments for treating difficult-to-reach malignancies with heat generated via
alternating magnetic fields, improved diagnostic imaging tools, and treatments
for retinal detachments. The development and understanding of tailored
macromolecular dispersants hold the key to obtaining materials with the maximum
volume fraction of the magnetic component in the complexes that remain
dispersible in the necessary carrier media. It is also probable (1) that the
solution structures of the reaction media for synthesizing these nanoparticles
can be used to control the in-situ generated particle size, (2) that improved
polymer coatings can impart biocompatibility, and (3) that these coatings can
improve particle durability against oxidation. The program will concentrate on
educating graduate students. In this vein, it is recognized that today's
fundamental research methods are multi-disciplinary and global. The students
will enhance needed team-building and communication skills by collaborating
throughout the program on inter-related research thrusts, by completing a 1-cr.
course each in technical writing and in technical oral communication, and by
annual participation in scientific meetings to present research findings. They
will participate in an international multi-disciplinary working group by
electronically sharing ideas, and by preparing model materials for study for
physicists and pharmacologists in the group. In this way, they will derive
multi-disciplinary research findings related to their materials and will also
contribute to a research infrastructure whereby the physicists and
pharmacologists will be able to conduct careful studies on well-defined
macromolecules and macromolecular-magnetic particle complexes.