* 0312953
* ITR:      Optimal Support Set Selection in Data Analysis with Applications to Bioinformatics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* David Axelrod, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This research will develop systematic procedures which take advantage of
computer-related developments and advanced combinatorial optimization
techniques, to build on previously successful ad-hoc methods for optimizing
feature selection in data analysis, with special attention to bioinformatics.
Knowledge extraction from data represents a fundamental challenge in information
technology research. A very frequent type of knowledge extraction problem is
that of analyzing archives of records or observations in order to discover
hidden structural relationships. Problems of this type appear in numerous areas
of science, technology, medicine, management, and in countless other areas of
activity. The advent of the computer and of the Internet have radically
increased the role of data analysis, by allowing not only the creation of large,
meaningful datasets, but also by making them accessible to researchers all over
the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most prominent areas of applications
of data analysis is in systems biology and bioinformatics. In contrast to
molecular biology investigations, which typically focus on single molecules,
systems biology pays attention to tens or even hundreds of thousands of
biological attributes at the same time. Moreover, the number of attributes
included in a dataset is predicted to increase dramatically in the very near
future. The new global approach to systems biology has been enabled by new
technologies that have allowed the simultaneous measurement of large numbers of
attributes and the generation of large multiparameter datasets. These biological
datasets represent the domain of bioinformatics. Beside the classic methods of
statistics, new approaches to the analysis of data are required. Among others,
these methodologies prompt the development of entirely new research areas,
including e.g., machine learning, data mining, neural networks, support vector
machines. In all these areas of data analysis, the knowledge of a known (finite)
subset of observations is used to derive conclusions about the entire set of
possible observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While powerful analytic tools have
been developed within the framework of statistics and of newer research areas
based heavily on combinatorics, logic and optimization, the size of the problems
in the area of bioinformatics (as well as in some other areas), leads to major
computational difficulties, and raises the challenge of developing new
approaches in which systematic heuristic procedures are integrated into solution
algorithms, in order to intelligently reduce the size of the problems to be
solved. By using ad-hoc combinations of heuristics and of combinatorics, logic,
and optimization based algorithms, this project aims to achieve spectacular
reductions of problem size without significant loss in the accuracy of the
resulting models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce new concepts
for evaluating the role and the impact of features in data analysis problems.
These concepts combine elements of statistics, combinatorics, information
theory, the theory of Boolean functions, the theories of games and of voting. On
the algorithmic side, they open possibilities for systematic heuristic
approaches to the elimination of redundant features. The project will also
introduce new concepts for the comparative evaluation of pairs of features,
including those of similarity and domination. These concepts combine elements
from statistics, the theory of partially ordered sets, and that of Boolean
algebra, and can add to the arsenal of tools available for the elimination of
unnecessary features. As opposed to previous studies which view the sets of
attributes just as collections of individual attributes, the project proposes a
study of the combined efforts of attributes. The research plan includes the
development of a local optimality criterion for a set of attributes which should
combine the two desired characteristics of a "support set": it should allow the
construction of accurate models, and it should, at the same time, be of a
computationally manageable size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the project
will introduce new, synthetic "logical" attributes which allow, on the one hand,
the compression of the dataset and, on the other hand, the possibility of
finding clearly understandable and practical usable "logical" discriminants,
which distinguish the positive observations from the negative ones. A very
significant application of these ideas is the proposed algorithmic framework for
optimizing feature selection. In the field of biological research and
bioinformatics, the project introduces: (i) the concept of "groups of
biomarkers" (obtainable through combinatorial optimization techniques), (ii) an
algorithmic hypothesis generator for biological research, and (iii) a new
approach for discovering new classes of observations with highly similar
characteristics. A publicly available software package will result from the work
and is expected to stimulate substantial research in the computational analysis
of data, and in bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining elements of
statistics, combinatorial optimization, information theory, the theories of
Boolean functions, games, voting, and partially ordered sets, the project is
expected to attract researchers from a variety of areas to collaborative
studies. The publicly available software for the analysis of bioinformatics
data, as well as the hypothesis generation system proposed, will provide major
tools for stimulating research in biology and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;