* 0312764
* ITR: Novel Finite Element Techniques for Modeling of Flows of Microstructured Liquids in Complex Geometries with Free Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Matteo Pasquali, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 06/30/2006
* USD 419,346.00

Abstract Information Technology Research (ITR) Small Proposals

Proposal Number: CTS-0312764 Principal Investigator: M. Pasquali and M. Behr
University/Institution: William Marsh Rice University

The intellectual merit of the research lies in the development of new
computational methods and software for modeling complex fluid flows at
macroscopic as well as microscopic length scales in processes where free
surfaces, elastic boundaries, and moving boundaries are present. The software
will include theory modules for describing the flow of many micro- and nano-
structured liquids and soft solids such as blood, blood cells, polymeric
liquids, and dispersions of nanotubes. The computational method and software
will be capable of modeling three-dimensional as well as two-dimensional flows
with effects of surface elasticity, capillarity, and fluid viscoelasticity. It
will be used for modeling important engineering applications, such as blood flow
and blood damage in blood pumps, coating and polymer processing flows, ink-jet
printing, flow in microfluidic devices, and for studying the effects of stress
on white blood cells and on the operation of the immune system.

The broader impact of this research is exemplified by significantly improved
fidelity of modeling in important areas of bioengineering and medicine. In
particular, the research will directly benefit the design of centrifugal left-
ventricular assist devices, which offer hope for thousands of heart disease
victims waiting for donor hearts. If enough progress is made, these devices will
offer increased biocompatibility in their current bridge-to-transplant role, and
may even be accepted as a permanent clinical solution.

This research will incorporate graduate student training and undergraduate
internships, both as a means of accomplishing its objectives, and as a way to
prepare the next generation of computational fluid dynamicists, who are well
versed in the modeling of microstructured liquids and in high-performance
computing. Simulation results obtained, and programming techniques developed in
the course of this research will be included in computational engineering
courses. The project will also strengthen the ties between computational
scientists and medical researchers, which will aid the development of new life-
saving devices and clinical methods.