* 0312115
* ITR: Development of a SimulationTool to Model the Complex Dynamics in Reacting Monomer/Polymer Mixtures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research and education
in the area of polymer physics. The aim of the research is to develop a
theoretical model that captures the structural evolution of a complex ternary
A/B/C fluid mixture, where incompatible components A and B undergo a reversible
chemical reaction to form a growing polymer chain, C, which in turn phase
segregates from the parent species. The model will be based on a modified Flory-
Huggins free energy for the ternary mixture. A kinetic rate equation will be
included in the model for the degree of polymerization. Flows will be imposed
and the effect of processing conditions on the reaction will be determined. This
computational model is relevant to actual experimental systems. So it is also
technologically relevant to optimizing the design and implementation of an
important class of polymerization processes, namely, interfacial polymerization,
where polymers are formed at the interfaces between A and B.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and education and has the
potential to enhance the efficiency of polymer production. Simulation tool codes
will be made available to the broader materials research community. Using these
simulations, researchers may be able to control or tailor the properties of the
system. These simulation tools may reduce the lag time between concept and
implementation and facilitate the design of efficient manufacturing processes
for a broad class of polymeric materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The simulations
can also be implemented as an integral part of both undergraduate and graduate
level classes. At the undergraduate level, these computer experiments would be
supplemented by physical experiments that students perform as part of a
laboratory course in polymer science. This approach can help train a generation
of scientists to view simulation and experiment as complementary tools that can
be used hand-in-hand to solve challenging problems. At the graduate level, the
simulation tools provide an exciting and innovative means of introducing
theoretical models of phase separation, hydrodynamic interactions, and
polymerization kinetics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a
'small' category proposal submitted in response to the ITR solicitation,
NSF-02-168. It supports computational research to develop a simulation tool that
enables scientists, engineers and students to: &lt;br/&gt;o Model reacting
monomer mixtures where hydrodynamic interactions, polymerization processes,
phase separation and imposed flows are simultaneously affecting the complex
structure and kinetic behavior of the system &lt;br/&gt;o Design more efficient
manufacturing processes for fabricating technologically important materials
&lt;br/&gt;o Understand how computer modeling can be integrated with physical
experiments to solve scientific problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates research and education and has the potential to enhance the
efficiency of polymer production. Simulation tool codes will be made available
to the broader materials research community. Using these simulations,
researchers may be able to control or tailor the properties of the system. These
simulation tools may reduce the lag time between concept and implementation and
facilitate the design of efficient manufacturing processes for a broad class of
polymeric materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The simulations can also be
implemented as an integral part of both undergraduate and graduate level
classes. At the undergraduate level, these computer experiments would be
supplemented by physical experiments that students perform as part of a
laboratory course in polymer science. This approach can help train a generation
of scientists to view simulation and experiment as complementary tools that can
be used hand-in-hand to solve challenging problems. At the graduate level, the
simulation tools provide an exciting and innovative means of introducing
theoretical models of phase separation, hydrodynamic interactions, and
polymerization kinetics. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;