* 0312921
* ITR: Decision Making, Optimization, Learning, and Adaptation in Uncertain and Dynamic Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* John Tsitsiklis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 207,083.00

PROJECT SUMMARY This project deals with decision
making,optimization,learning,and adaptation in uncertain and dynamic
environments.The main objectives are: (a)To develop e .cient learning methods
(either simulation-based or on-line)for construct- ing near-optimal policies for
dynamic decision making in uncertain environments. (b)To develop new methods and
to enhance the understanding of certain existing methods for addressing large
scale dynamic decision-making problems. (c)To develop computational methods and
learning algorithms that pertain to risk-sensitive performance criteria,as well
as fundamental limitations in the form of computational complexity results.
(d)To establish the fundamental limitations of learning in multi-armed bandit
problems and Markov decision processes (MDPs),in the form of lower bounds on the
amount of learning that is required,and simultaneously derive optimal algorithms
whose require- ments match the lower bounds. (e)To develop new
formulations,models,and algorithms for multi-agent learning and adaptation in
dynamic environments. The proposed research involves problems that are both
practically relevant and intellec- tually deep. On the application side,the
range of relevant contexts is vast.It includes logistics (e.g.,supply chain
management,inventory control,.eet assignment),manufacturing systems
(e.g.,sequencing and scheduling),communications (e.g.,frequency allocation and
hando . management in wireless systems,routing and congestion
control),.nance,robotics,and economic systems (e.g.,auctions and real-time
markets). The intellectual merit arises because some of the problems present
signi .cant mathe- matical challenges,that require new approaches as well as new
problem formulations.This project will lead to advances in the scienti .c
knowledge-base and the state of the art in the .eld of decision making.In
addition,this research combines methods from operations research and control
theory (dynamic programming),applied probability (stochastic approx- imation and
large deviations),arti .cial intelligence (learning),and economics (game
theory). As such,a broader impact of this work will be the advancement of the
cross-fertilization of these disciplines.In more concrete terms,this cross-
fertilization will occur not only through publications,but also through
presentations at audiences from disparate communities (e.g., at machine learning
as well as control theory conferences),and also through the development of new
courses.Finally,at the human resource and training level,the most direct impact
will occur through the mentoring of doctoral students,who will be expected to
populate leading academic institutions. 1