* 0312857
* Arabidopsis 2010 Project: Collaborative Research on the Functions of the SABATH Family Methyltransferases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Vladimir Shulaev, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2008
* USD 440,000.00

The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains 24 related genes that encode
methyltransferase enzymes distinct from any other known methyltransferases. One
methyltransferase from this group has been shown to convert jasmonic acid, an
important plant hormone, into the jasmonate methyl ester, thereby changing the
activity of the hormone in significant ways. Preliminary experiments suggest
that the other 23 methyltransferases of this group convert several important
hormones and other plant constituents into the methyl esters, thereby exerting
important effects on the biological activity of these molecules and consequently
on myriad important physiological processes. The aim of this project is to
identify the function of all the methyltransferases of this group (i.e., which
compound each of them methylates) by a combination of methods that involve
molecular genetics, enzymology, protein structure analysis, and metabolite
profiling. The consequences of the methylation of such hormonal molecules on the
physiology of the plant will be examined in selected cases, which may include
processes involving plant response to pathogens, drought conditions, and
herbivory. The results are expected to provide a better understanding of plant
responses to environmental conditions, thus helping improve crop yield and
nutritional value. In addition, by developing methodologies for determining
which Arabidopsis genes are involved in the synthesis of the plant's diverse
repertoire of small molecules, the project will contribute to the elucidation of
the function of other Arabidopsis genes involved in hitherto unknown biochemical
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will provide
interdisciplinary opportunities for training undergraduates, graduates, and
post-docs, including women and minorities. All three institutions involved in
this project have formal programs to attract minority undergraduate and high
school students to faculty labs, and such students will be actively recruited.
In addition, methods and materials developed in this investigation will be used
directly to train undergraduate students in formal lab courses taught by the
lead investigators. The resources generated in the project will be made
available through the Arabidopsis Biological Resources Center. The data obtained
will be disseminated by publications in scientific journals, by deposition in
the public databases including the Arabidopsis Information Resource, NCBI, and
the Protein Data Bank, and by monthly updating of the project's website,
http://biology.lsa.umich.edu/research/labs/pichersky/NSF2010.&lt;br/&gt;