* 0312136
* Solid State Oxyfluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Kenneth Poeppelmeier, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 420,000.00

The focus of this project is on the rational design of crystal structures based
on the chemical nature of molecular components in noncentrosymmetric structures
based on acentric transition metal oxyfluorides. Robust synthetic methods used
to prepare metal oxyfluorides from metal oxides allow many reactions to be
carried out simultaneously, which greatly enhances reaction yields, controlled
purity, and single crystal growth. Acentric molecules and solids are those that
lack inversion symmetry. A major goal is to understand how to optimize
geometries and the electrostatic potential of the individual oxyfluoride anions
to create order and avoid disorder in the metal-oxygen and metal-fluoride bonds.
Crystal symmetries of the oxyfluorides are determined by the network of contacts
the surrounding lattice provides which are controlled to create chiral, polar or
chiral-polar three-dimensional solids. Structures lacking inversion symmetry are
a requirement for important current and future technologies that are being
created by numerous inventions based on piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity,
ferroelectricity and second harmonic generation (SHG). The goal is to provide is
to provide a new class of solids for studies in basic science associated with
the noncentrosymmetric space groups. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing the
infrastructure of research and education is a key objective. Strong ties are
maintained with the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
and the Center for Catalysis and Surface Science (CCSS) at Northwestern
University. These centers encourage, support and operate multi-user facilities
and provide training for the students which facilitate a high level of
scientific achievement and professional development. Undergraduate, graduate and
post-graduate students benefit from the significant advances that can be made in
the discovery of new materials and from the cross-disciplinary experiences
gained from the characterization of these new structures and their properties.
Students are given every opportunity to give presentations at scientific
meetings where they can interact with industrial and academic colleagues. The
determination of structure/property relationships is ongoing with basic
structural studies (X-ray, neutron and electron diffraction and microscopy),
thermo-dynamic properties (thermogravimetric analysis and differential scanning
calorimetry), and optical and magnetic properties (IR, Raman and SQUID). Strong
ties are also maintained with National Laboratories especially Argonne National
Laboratory, and in particular with scientists at the Intense Pulsed Neutron
Source (IPNS) and the new Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) under development at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory. New materials classes exhibiting
piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, ferroelectricity and second harmonic
generation (SHG) are of significant interest as applied materials and students
trained in these and related areas are very competitive in the job
market.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;