* 0312448
* ITR:  A Thermodynamic Density-Functional Theory of Static and Dynamic Correlations in Complex Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Duane Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 270,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research into
multicomponent materials exhibiting various levels of disorder with chemical,
charge and magnetic correlations. Examples include metals (steels, magnets, and
refractories), battery materials, and ferroelectric and superconducting oxides.
The PI aims to develop a density-functional-theory-based thermodynamic theory of
static and dynamic correlations to predict and understand the atomic, magnetic,
and charge correlations in multi-component systems with multi-sublattice
disorder. System-specific electronic and electronic-structure effects are
incorporated on an equal basis within a variational density-functional-theory
(DFT) linear-response framework using the coherent-potential-approximation, and
its extensions, for configurational averaging. Computationally efficient linear-
response algorithms will be developed to integrate the theory into a practical
computational framework. Specific goals include: (I) developing a DFT-based
thermodynamic theory of static and dynamic correlations in general lattice
N-component alloys, (II) validating predictions via direct calculations for
partially ordered alloys, (III) relating static and dynamic correlations to
their electronic origin for materials-specific understanding and phase stability
information for control of ordering, (IV) applying to important oxides, Fe-based
magnets, Ni-based superalloys, and refractories, (V) connecting to on-going
experiments. Computational tools resulting from this work such as KKR-CPA codes
will be made available to the broader materials theory community. This award
supports education in advanced materials physics, computational techniques, and
algorithm development. %%% This award was made on a 'small' category proposal
submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports
computational research into multi-component materials that exhibit various
levels of disorder with chemical, charge and magnetic correlations. Some
important examples include metals, (steels, magnets, and refractories), battery
materials, and ferroelectric and superconducting oxides. The PI aims to develop
a density-functional-theory-based thermodynamic theory of static and dynamic
correlations to predict and understand the atomic, magnetic, and charge
correlations in multi-component systems with disorder. Calculations will be
performed to connect to recent and on-going experiments. Computational tools
resulting from this work will be made available to the broader materials theory
community. This award supports education in advanced materials physics,
computational techniques, and algorithm development. ***