* 0313444
* Collaborative Research: On the Effects of Economic Development on Population Growth
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Mark Rosenzweig, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2003
* USD 47,038.00

In this proposed multi-level and longitudinal household data from a large
national probability sample of over 4500 rural households in India covering the
period 1968-1982 and new data covering the period through 1999, merged with
supplementary area-specific data from governmental sources and from satellites,
will be used to reexamine comprehensively the effects of economic growth on the
distribution of incomes across households and individuals, on economic mobility
and on the formation and dissolution of households. A unique and critical
feature of the merged data is that they document a period of time in India which
conforms closely to a natural experiment in which the source of economic
development - the "green revolution" - was exogenous to the population, was
measurable, and, due to natural conditions, was geographically selective. It is
thus possible to document how economic development, propelled by agricultural
productivity growth, differentially affected human capital returns and
investments and other household behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
theme of this work is that the evaluation of economic change on individual
welfare must importantly account for how individuals are grouped into households
and how household interact through transfers, markets, and local political
institutions. The particular aims of the project include (a) the achievement of
a better understanding of household behavior and intra-household distribution,
(b) an assessment of the contributions of interhousehold transfers to income
security and investment in a dynamic context, (c) estimation of the determinants
of household break-up and formation, with particular focus on the impact of
technical change, (d) an evaluation of the role of dowry in affecting
investments in gender-specific human capital and the distribution of resources
across households, and (e) the evaluation of the role of local governments in
allocating land resources and other public goods with attention to both
distributive and efficiency criteria and with particular attention to forest
resources situated on common lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new inquiries
will be based on the availability of a new survey round of the panel data used
in the prior project work. The new data not only expand the time frame for
analysis another 17 years, for a total span of temporal coverage of more than 30
years, but provide new information particularly suited to analyses of households
in a dynamic context. In particular, the new data provide information more
consistent with new frameworks describing family and household relations and
will include split-off households in the panel for the first time as well as
retrospective information on the marriages of all family members and household
division histories. These novel and unique household data will in particular
permit a detailed exploration of family and household relations and how these
and the outcomes of family decisions are affected over the long as well as the
short-run by economic change. The new data will also provide retrospective data
on the governance structures of the villages, enabling the construction of a
village-level data set of approximately 250 villages over 30 years with which to
explore whether and how village governance affects the distribution of resources
across households, common land use and the exploitation of forest resources. The
availability of these unique data spanning a long time-period yet providing
detail at the individual, household level and family level will thus provide an
improved empirical basis for assessing theories of the distributional effects of
growth and development as well as of household behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;