* 0313095
* ITR:      Community Wireless Networks for Last-Mile Broadband Interconnectivity:      An Experimental Research Program
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Shivkumar Kalyanaraman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

The ``last-mile'' broadband problem is arguably the most important long-standing
techno-economic challenge faced by the telecommunications industry. Grassroots
community wireless networks are emerging in various parts of the world as an
interesting paradigm to connect a community of users to the nearest broadband
wire. Community wireless networks (CWNs) have a number of characteristics
distinctly different from both mobile ad-hoc wireless networks (MANETs) and
traditional IP-based internetworks (eg: OSPF/IS-IS/BGP routed networks). They
can also leverage a variety of low-cost capabilities available in residential
areas to dramatically simplify configuration and boost effective network
capacity. Our project focuses primarily on leveraging the design freedom made
possible due to these differences.

Technical Merit: The PIs propose an broad experimental research program into the
community wireless network (CWN) concept. The research will be conducted in the
context of an operational medium-scale community network to be built in Troy, NY
(upto 100 nodes in a 1 mile radius around RPI campus) and in collaboration with
a commercial 802.11 access network provider in Harrisburg, PA (see attached
letter of support). PIs divide our proposed investigation into the following
parts:

First, at the physical/link layer we focus on the problem of auto-configuration
and network capacity maximization. PIs propose to use a mix of cheap 802.11b,
802.11a and 802.11g links, leverage the directionality of streets, the GPS
(latitude/longitude) location of homes, and the availability of backup channels
(eg: telephone line or 915 Mhz ISM band radios for remote auto-configuration) to
simplify the setup of nodes. The proposed hardware/software design combined with
real-world deployment is a unique feature of our proposal.

Second, at the routing layer, The PIs will develop a broad framework and
mechanisms for efficient explicit/multi-path routing using existing routing
protocols (eg: OSPF, BGP-4, MANET protocols like DSR etc). Within this
framework, PIs will investigate a number of hybrid geographic and topologically-
informed routing to seamlessly interconnect organically evolving community
wireless networks.

Third, PIs propose to model the growth and evolution of the network; develop
strategies to characterize and improve the robustness against node failures.
Finally, PIs will measure and characterize the real traffic and usage patterns
of the operational community wireless network in the Troy, NY area from its
earliest stages of deployment.

Broader Impact: The proposed research will provide real-world experimental
validation of the nascent community wireless network (CWN) concept, and make
significant contributions to the architecture of last-mile wireless networks,
routing, traffic engineering and growth modeling of wireless networks. The
project will involve the RPI ACM undergraduate chapter (see attached letter) and
a large number of undergraduate students in the research. It will also be used
as a context for term-projects in the RPI networking curriculum. We already see
tremendous excitement in campus during our pilot activities this semester.

