* 0313743
* Collaborative Research of Proton Transfers in Enzymes: A Synergetic Theory-Experiment Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Hua Guo, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 171,550.00

This collaborative project involves a combined theoretical-experimental approach
that aims at a better understanding of proton transfer processes in enzymes. A
specific focus will be placed on the carbonic anhydrase family, in which
intramolecular proton transfer is the rate-limiting step. To guide the
experimental design of new and more efficient proton transfer pathways in
carbonic anhydrase, a series of calculations will be carried out using QM/MM
methods based on a recently proposed approximate density functional theory (SCC-
DFTB) and the CHARMM force field. These calculations will provide microscopic
information about the free energy barrier, rate constant, solvent effect,
kinetic isotope effect, and more importantly the contribution of individual
residues to the proton transfer process. On the experimental side, site-directed
mutagenesis of selected active site residues of the enzyme will be carried out
to introduce chemically modified amino acids containing artificial proton
shuttles; the location and nature of these groups will be guided by
computational studies. Structural measurements of modified enzymes using x-ray
crystallography will yield valuable information about the spatial organizations
of the active site, such as the orientation of the new shuttle group and its
distance to the Zn ion as well as the configuration of water bridges between the
proton donor and acceptor groups. Kinetic studies, utilizing isotopic
substitutions and pH changes, will reveal the catalytic effectiveness of the
mutation(s). The strength of the present project lies in a coherent interplay
between state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical investigations.
Experimental results help to define the key questions for theoretical
simulations, while in turn theoretical studies provide both interpretation of
experimental findings and guidance to further experimental exploration.

Broader Impact: In addition to providing mechanistic insights into the function
of carbonic anhydrase, the present project has broader impacts on the
understanding of proton transfers in other enzyme systems and on uncovering
general principles for de novo protein engineering. The research will also
provide ample opportunities for participating students to acquire important
skills in computational chemistry, organic and biological chemistry, molecular
biology, and structural biology. Finally, the integrated theoretical-
experimental research will be invaluable for motivating undergraduate students
and attracting them to scientific research and discovery.