* 0313847
* SGER: Sampling and Isotopic Analysis of Yucatan Groundwater: Impact of Hurricane Isadore
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Eugene Perry, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 11/30/2004
* USD 25,795.00

0313847&lt;br/&gt;Perry&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to evaluate the use of
tropical storm precipitation,&lt;br/&gt;especially that from hurricanes, as a
natural tracer of groundwater&lt;br/&gt;movement. Precipitation from tropical
storms is known to have a special&lt;br/&gt;oxygen and deuterium isotope
composition that distinguishes it from&lt;br/&gt;normal precipitation. Because
tropical storms also produce many times as&lt;br/&gt;much rain as normal storms,
they are capable of adding a large batch or&lt;br/&gt;slug of water to an
aquifer during a single event. The objective of this&lt;br/&gt;study is to
determine whether that slug of isotopically labeled water&lt;br/&gt;can be
traced by stable isotope measurements as it moves through an&lt;br/&gt;aquifer.
This research could establish a powerful new technique to
study&lt;br/&gt;groundwater in tropical areas where hurricanes are frequent.
&lt;br/&gt; It is difficult to plan and set up an experiment suitable
for&lt;br/&gt;monitoring a hurricane, and it would be expensive to establish a
large&lt;br/&gt;network of monitoring stations purely on the chance that a
tropical&lt;br/&gt;storm might occur somewhere within that network. That is what
adds an&lt;br/&gt;element of urgency to this proposal. Hurricane Isadore
recently passed&lt;br/&gt;over the northern Yucatan Peninsula, an area where the
PI has previously&lt;br/&gt;obtained background data on the isotopic composition
of the local&lt;br/&gt;groundwater. Northern Yucatan is especially well suited
for a trial of&lt;br/&gt;this monitoring technique: its karst aquifer is
extremely permeable,&lt;br/&gt;insuring rapid groundwater movement; it has
almost no soil that might&lt;br/&gt;impede rapid movement of the hurricane
precipitation into the aquifer;&lt;br/&gt;and the aquifer is relatively
uncomplicated. Thus, it will be relatively&lt;br/&gt;easy to monitor changes in
the composition of water in this aquifer as&lt;br/&gt;the hurricane
precipitation moves through. &lt;br/&gt; Samples of groundwater will be
collected in three sampling trips&lt;br/&gt;over a period of one year. These
will be obtained from municipal wells,&lt;br/&gt;covered karst sinkholes, and
piezometers (where available). Students&lt;br/&gt;will be involved in collecting
the samples and analyzing the data.&lt;br/&gt;Isotopic analyses will be
performed in the stable isotope laboratory of&lt;br/&gt;the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico. &lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merit of this project will be a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the behavior of groundwater, a precious
resource, and&lt;br/&gt;the development of a new, non-polluting technique for
charting its&lt;br/&gt;movement.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this activity
will include: 1)&lt;br/&gt;development of information on groundwater movement
that can lead to&lt;br/&gt;better management and protection of groundwater in
the very sensitive&lt;br/&gt;Yucatan aquifer (essential for human health,
agricultural productivity,&lt;br/&gt;industrial development, and tourism), 2)
establishment of closer&lt;br/&gt;collaboration between Mexican scientists and
scientists in the United&lt;br/&gt;States, accomplished by close collaboration
in this research, and 3)&lt;br/&gt;education of students in the procedures used
to collect meaningful&lt;br/&gt;samples of groundwater and to evaluate the
analytical results of this&lt;br/&gt;study.&lt;br/&gt;