* 0313628
* The Role of Ice Nuclei in the Evolution of Supercooled and Mixed-Phase Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Paul DeMott, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 04/30/2006
* USD 235,164.00



Abstract ATM-0313628 DeMott, Paul J. Colorado State University Title: The Role
of Ice Nuclei in the Evolution of Supercooled and Mixed-Phase Clouds

This grant supports the participation of Dr. DeMott in the AIRS II project
(Alliance Icing Research Study), a collaboration of American, Canadian, and
European agencies and institutions motivated by the important practical problem
of aircraft icing. The AIRS field program is scheduled for the winter of 2003-04
and centered at Mirabel Airport, north of Montreal, Canada, where a surface
observing network and ground-based remote-sensing equipment will be located. Dr.
DeMott and his colleagues will be responsible for cloud microphysical
observations aboard the NSF C-130 aircraft operating out of Cleveland, Ohio. The
main scientific objective is to explain the circumstances by which regions of
supercooled cloud can form and continue to exist though ice crystals may also be
present. The C-130 will be equipped with instruments for measuring the water
content and ice content of clouds; the concentration, size, habit, and density
of ice crystals; the concentration of ice-forming nuclei; the activity spectrum
of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN); and the concentration and characteristics of
aerosol particles both within the project area and in the air upstream that
flows into the clouds of interest. Dr. DeMott will use a continuous-flow
diffusion chamber to measure the concentration of ice nuclei, as a function of
temperature and saturation ratio, that feed the clouds containing supercooled
water. Additional analysis will determine the chemical composition of the ice
nuclei for clues to their sources and scavenging properties. Because little is
known of the structure and evolution of supercooled clouds, the approach is
largely exploratory. Experiments will be designed to answer the following
questions: Are ice nuclei scarce in the supercooled regions? Are the CCN in the
inflowing air consistent with cloud particle sizes and concentrations? Can the
aerosol measurements be synthesized for use in numerical cloud models that may
give further insight on the persistence of supercooled clouds? What are the
meteorological conditions under which supercooled clouds persist? How might such
events be predicted? Answers to these questions contribute not only to the
understanding of the microphysics of supercooled clouds but also to the
advancement of aviation safety.







