* 0313466
* Arabidopsis 2010 Collaborative Research: The Synthesis and Function of Arabidopsis Thaliana Sphingolipids
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Teresa Dunn, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 08/31/2009
* USD 888,946.00

Sphingolipids have been demonstrated to play important roles as both membrane
components and as signaling molecules involved in regulating cellular processes
in animals and fungi. While sphingolipids are quantitatively important
components of specific plant membranes and recent evidence indicates that
sphingolipids serve as signaling molecules in plants, surprisingly little is
known about plant sphingolipid function. This 2010 project focuses on the
network of genes predicted to be involved in sphingolipid metabolism. Further
information about the project including a list of the specific genes to be
investigated is available at http://bio.usuhs.mil/2010.html. These genes will be
identified and the functions of the encoded proteins (e.g., the specific
reaction catalyzed by the gene product, its substrate specificity, subcellular
location, expression and activity in tissues) will be determined. The specific
roles of different sphingolipids in plants will be determined by characterizing
the properties and behavior of mutant plants defective in specific sphingolipid
metabolic genes and so incapable of synthesizing a given sphingolipid. This
research will lead to an understanding of the role of sphingolipids in plant
growth and development as well as the response of plants to biotic and abiotic
stresses. This project will not only result in a profound increase in our
understanding of the metabolism and function of plant sphingolipids per se, but
it is anticipated that these efforts will also intersect with other 2010
projects focusing on signaling, disease resistance and glycosyltransferases.
While the major results of the work will be published in scientific journals and
presented at meetings, regular updates of progress and abstracts of published
work and meetings presentations will be posted at the web address given above to
facilitate information sharing. This collaborative effort involves five
investigators at distinctly different institutions with the complementary
expertise to successfully accomplish this work. All facets of this effort will
involve post-doctoral associates, graduate students, undergraduates and high
school students and it is expected that these individuals will develop an
appreciation for the benefits of collaborative research.