* 0313498
* Conference:     2003 Electronic Spectroscopy and Dynamics Gordon Conference;  Bates College, Lewiston, Maine
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Elliot Bernstein, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/2004
* USD 2,500.00

0313498&lt;br/&gt;Bernstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conferences
(GRC) bring together active researchers, both experts and beginners, in a
broadly defined scientific field. The purpose is to identify and analyze key
issues, recent advances, and opportunities for new research through invited
lectures, contributed posters, and extensive informal discussions. One specific
objective of this proposal is to secure partial funding for the 2003 GRC on
Electronic Spectroscopy and Dynamics (ES&amp;D), to be held on July 6 - 11, at
Bates College, in Lewiston, Maine. ES&amp;D is an exceptionally broad and timely
topic, ranging from the study of how one atom in a diatomic molecule probes the
electronic wavefunction of the other atom, to the study of how the electronic
structure of biological light harvesting antenna systems controls the energy
transport mechanism. Until recently, molecular electronic wavefunctions were
only indirectly probed by experiment; now not only do direct visualization
methods exist for electron distribution in molecules, but schemes also exist for
creating, exploiting, and controlling the dynamics of specific, localized,
electronic, and nuclear wavepacket excitations. New microscopic systems (Bose
Einstein Condensates, molecules doped into superfluid 4 He droplets, single
nanoparticles) have emerged that exhibit novel electronic/nuclear/radiation
coupling mechanisms. Molecules in new environments (supercritical fluids,
superfluid 4 He, crystalline H2 matrices) or subject to novel radiation fields
(half-cycle and chirped pulse sequences, subfemtosecond pulses) raise questions
and possibilities that were unimagined at the time of the previous
MES&amp;D-GRCs. ES&amp;D is an area of enormous&lt;br/&gt;fundamental and
technological importance. Nine scientific sessions, featuring 31 invited
speakers, are planned. Each session will have an expert chair (often the person
who instituted the field) who can guide and energize the discussion and give
some perspective to the topic considered. Topics to be discussed include:
imaging electronic distributions and dynamics of reactions; low temperature ( 3
He/ 4 He) isolation spectroscopy; small clusters of molecules, organic and
inorganic; biomolecules in the gas phase and condensed phase; strong field,
superfast, coherent, and nonlinear interactions of radiation and matter;
condensed phase dynamics; nanoparticles and materials; and interfaces. Two
poster sessions (each lasting for two days and nights) are planned to encourage
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, young investigators, and all attendees
to present their research. This ES&amp;D-GRC traditionally attracts a diverse
group of scientists, from academe, national laboratories, and industry. This
diverse group includes basic researchers studying fundamental aspects of
electronic spectroscopy to more applied scientists pursuing more practical
problems. A special effort has been made to include younger scientists (nearly
half of the invited speakers) and women (4 of 31) among the invited speakers.
The limited attendance (~100), focused yet interdisciplinary scientific sessions
(35 minutes for each invited talk followed by 10 minutes of discussion), lively
poster sessions, informal gatherings and events, and an international spectrum
of invited speakers will provide an exciting and effective forum for the
formulation and exchange of new ideas. The intent of this broad program and
participation base, and focus on younger investigators from around the world, is
designed to emphasize the central importance of spectroscopy and
radiation/matter interactions to the advancement of physical science. The
requested funding will be used to encourage junior investigators, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows to attend the meeting and present their
research through support for their conference fees and travel
expenses.&lt;br/&gt;