* 0313774
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hunting in the Rural Livelihood Systems of Peasant Households in Seringal Sao Salvador, Acre, Brazil
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Marianne Schmink, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,736.00

Hunting is important to peasant populations throughout the tropical forests in
the Amazon region, yet why peasant households hunt is not well understood. Past
research has focused on the effects of hunting on wildlife populations, or
hunting behavior and strategy by indigenous groups, but little is known about
why peasant groups in the region hunt. This dissertation research links theories
of the peasant economy within the household and across peasant households in the
community with the literature on hunting strategy and behavior by indigenous
groups in Amazonia. The social and symbolic functions of hunting will be
studied, for example by analyzing how local men use hunting to socialize their
sons and nephews into manhood. The project will investigate the influence of
household organization and decision-making on peasant hunting strategy and
behavior, and analyze the effects of inter-household relationships on hunting
practices. The project will investigate how hunting affects other forest based
activities and the sustainability of the forest resource base.

Broader Impacts: This study builds upon the work of a Brazilian NGO, PESACRE,
which has worked with the communities in the research site since 1998. In the
state of Acre, an area known for its "forest government", this study aims to
link the importance of hunting in the rural livelihoods of peasant households
and communities to wider issues of forest management. An understanding of the
social dynamics of hunting and the use of wild game in the livelihood systems of
peasant communities in Amazonia will help conservation and development
organizations and the state of Acre and throughout Amazonia in their attempts to
provide projects that account for both the cultural and biological diversity of
the region. Further, this project contributes to the education of a young social
scientist.