* 0313963
* New Intercalation Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* M. Stanley Whittingham, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 454,373.00

This project targets the discovery and characterization of new transition metal
oxides that are capable of acting as the host for guest-host reactions --
intercalation compounds. Little is still understood about the relationship
between the crystalline structure of materials and their chemical and physical
properties. We have begun to get a better understanding of what controls the
reactions of inorganic materials, and ways to predict what compounds will be
formed. However, the inorganic/materials chemist is still far behind the
synthetic organic chemist who can map out a synthetic sequence. One goal is to
further the understanding of synthetic approaches, and the strategy is to use
'soft' chemistry conditions where it is possible to control the building blocks
that eventually are used for building the solid structure. A main goal is to
discover new transition metal oxides with open structures, with an emphasis on
vanadium oxides, some mixed manganese oxides and iron oxides/phosphates. These
oxides form intriguing structures that are able to intercalate a range of ions,
including lithium and are therefore of interest for use in advance lithium
batteries, and as sensors. Our work has shown that they can form in a range of
morphologies from large single crystals to nanotubes and fibers. Our work also
shows that their chemical reactivity and physical properties depend on the scale
(nano to macro) and on the atomic level bonding. Such oxide materials are also
readily tailored in principle to give the desired behavior, either by
substitution in the host lattice or by varying the guest intercalating specie.
It is these exciting possibilities that encourage the student to participate in
the discovery process, and motivate this project to discover and characterize
new solid materials.

%%%

The broader impacts of the proposed activity include advancing discovery and
understanding while at the same time promoting the scientific education of the
next generation of citizens. This project will impact undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdocs as well as colleagues in the US and
internationally. Research and education will continue to be heavily integrated,
significantly impacting students from their beginning years to graduation. A new
materials-oriented general chemistry course adapted for Engineering, Physics and
Geology students, as well as for chemistry majors is being developed. Two
senior/graduate level courses on the Chemistry of Solids and Techniques for
Studying Solids are taught every year to more than 30 students each. Innovations
in the research laboratory are being incorporated into an undergraduate
Inorganic/Materials Laboratory so that undergraduates are using the latest
techniques and materials. This year a new graduate degree program in Material
Science was started and students from a wide range of disciplines and
diversities will be impacted by the opportunity of working together on teams to
solve interdisciplinary challenges.