* 0313226
* Collaborative Research in Immersive Design Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Lee Anderson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 379,196.00

In this project two PIs, one from Computer Science and the other from
Architecture, will collaborate to investigate ways of effectively harnessing the
full potential of immersive virtual environments technology to empower the
creative processes involved in the earliest stages of architectural design.
Through these efforts they expect to gain insight into how to enhance spatial
awareness, facilitate spatial understanding, and enable the intuitive creation,
manipulation, and comprehension of inexactly or incompletely specified geometric
and environmental models, as well as abstract information, within immersive
virtual environments that support the integrative nature of design. This project
will lead to new and deeper understanding of issues relating to design research
and education, and especially into how visual presentation, information
representation, and user interaction affect spatial awareness and understanding,
with architectural design as the driving application. Another project outcome
will be new tools, in particular a virtual environment system suitable for the
support of the activity of design, including new methods for content creation,
new methods of information integration, and new algorithms for rendering a range
of different kinds of models in a variety of realistic and non-photorealistic
styles, with the objective of efficiently and effectively portraying large,
complicated architectural datasets, including both building details and the
accompanying environmental surround, in a perceptually effective manner that can
capture multiple levels of ambiguity in the architectural specification. In
addition, a diverse series of formal studies will be conducted to gather
information about specific characteristics of the design process, including the
efficiency and effectiveness of the interpretation of 3D information under
various conditions, and the effect of representational style on the specificity
with which a model is interpreted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will provide a basis for encouraging and deepening the
interdisciplinary collaboration between faculty in computer science
(specializing in computer graphics and visualization) and faculty in
architecture, two fields with vastly different cultures but with many common
interests and objectives. The project will attract and support students from
non-traditional backgrounds to work and study in this interdisciplinary area.
The modeling and rendering software developed as part of this project will
enrich undergraduate and graduate courses in architectural design, and will
serve as a resource for multiple potential uses by members of the greater design
community. Further, the PIs and their research assistants will contribute to the
creation of a virtual environment infrastructure that, through their involvement
with the St. Paul Consortium, will be made accessible to city planners and
community advocates for use in making informed decisions about the impact of
proposed major development projects on the urban landscape.