* 0313089
* ITR:    Ubiquitous Mobile Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Kai Li, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

One consequence of the phenomenal storage density improvement is
the&lt;br/&gt;emergence of highly compact disk storage that can be integrated
into&lt;br/&gt;various computing and networking devices of various shapes and
forms.&lt;br/&gt;Our conjecture is that mobile storage will become a dominant
form of&lt;br/&gt;storage in the near future, especially for personal user
data,&lt;br/&gt;subsuming conventional disks enshrined in server rooms. This
proposal&lt;br/&gt;describes a project that studies how to build, manage, and
use&lt;br/&gt;discrete storage devices to form ad hoc, distributed storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we propose to build system
software to intelligently&lt;br/&gt;coordinate the discrete storage elements.
The system has four core&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms: (1) a multicast-like data
location mechanism, (2) an&lt;br/&gt;invalidation mechanism for purging obsolete
data from the system, (3)&lt;br/&gt;a snapshot mechanism for supporting sharing
and backup, and (4) a&lt;br/&gt;storage level solution that can support existing
file systems. In&lt;br/&gt;this proposal, we describe how combinations of these
four core&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms allow us to achieve our consistency,
transparency,&lt;br/&gt;reliability, security, and performance
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the data management needs addressed by
this project are&lt;br/&gt;by no means limited to traditional desktop
applications. As the data&lt;br/&gt;management functionalities are separated
from cumbersome generic&lt;br/&gt;computing devices, and as these
functionalities are cleanly&lt;br/&gt;encapsulated in modular small form factor
devices that can readily&lt;br/&gt;interact with other consumer electronic
devices (such as cameras, MP3&lt;br/&gt;players, phones, and email devices),
these application-specific&lt;br/&gt;devices would be freed from the burden of
having to solve and re-solve&lt;br/&gt;a difficult mobile storage problem, and
we may multiply the utility of&lt;br/&gt;these devices and potentially foster
new applications.&lt;br/&gt;