* 0313747
* Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2015
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 36,024,767.00

&lt;br/&gt;Our ability to monitor, anticipate, and respond to changing
circumstances and events is increasingly&lt;br/&gt;important, particularly with
regard to our physical surroundings. Nowhere is this capability more vital
to&lt;br/&gt;society, or the challenges associated with its practical
implementation greater, than in the context of the&lt;br/&gt;atmosphere, where
hazardous local weather, such as thunderstorms, tornadoes, microbursts, snow
storms,&lt;br/&gt;and floods as well as lofted radiological, chemical and
biological agents can, in a matter of minutes or&lt;br/&gt;hours, destroy or
contaminate life and property over vast areas. Yet, the portion of the
atmosphere that&lt;br/&gt;contains the bulk of both natural and man-made hazards
the lower troposphere and particularly the&lt;br/&gt;atmospheric boundary layer
is grossly undersampled by today's sensing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Our ERC
proposes a revolutionary new paradigm in which transforming systems of
distributed,&lt;br/&gt;collaborative, and adaptive sensing (DCAS) networks are
deployed to overcome fundamental&lt;br/&gt;limitations of current approaches.
Here, distributed refers to the use of large numbers of&lt;br/&gt;appropriately
spaced sensors capable of high spatial and temporal resolution throughout the
entire troposphere.&lt;br/&gt;These systems will operate collaboratively within
a dynamic information technology infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;adapting to changing
conditions in a manner that meets competing end user needs. These systems
will&lt;br/&gt;achieve breakthrough improvements in sensitivity and resolution
leading to significant reductions in tornado&lt;br/&gt;false alarms, vastly
improved precipitation estimates for flood prediction, fine scale wind field
imaging&lt;br/&gt;and thermodynamic state estimation for use in airborne hazard
dispersion prediction and other applications.&lt;br/&gt;Successful
implementation of DCAS systems will require fundamental breakthroughs consistent
with the&lt;br/&gt;NSF Technical Merit Review Criteria. Among these
breakthroughs will be integration and sharing of knowledge&lt;br/&gt;across
disciplines; design and fabrication of low cost, multi beam, solid state radars;
creation of a systems&lt;br/&gt;based architecture to organize sensing,
computing, and communications resources; development of&lt;br/&gt;twoway end
user interfaces that dynamically target system resources; deployment of
integrative test beds to&lt;br/&gt;validate assumptions and understand emergent
system behavior; implementation of cross linked hierarchical&lt;br/&gt;data
storage and processing; and improved understanding of small scale atmospheric
processes.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these breakthroughs, we have assembled leading
engineering and computer science&lt;br/&gt;experts from the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst. They will work in partnership with scientists
and&lt;br/&gt;engineers from the University of Oklahoma, Colorado State
University and the University of Puerto Rico,&lt;br/&gt;Mayaguez, and corporate
partners including Raytheon, IBM, Vaisala, and federal and state
government&lt;br/&gt;agencies to create the Center for Collaborative Adaptive
Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA). We will create&lt;br/&gt;scalable prototype
test beds to demonstrate the potential for DCAS to revolutionize our
understanding,&lt;br/&gt;detection, and prediction of hazardous atmospheric
phenomena with end users involved from the outset.&lt;br/&gt;CASA meets the NSF
Broader Impacts Review Criteria through: comprehensive education and
outreach&lt;br/&gt;programs that introduce systems based engineering to K-12
students via the mandated engineering/technology curriculum in Massachusetts,
and serves as the mechanism for expanding participation by under represented
groups in engineering and scientific endeavors at all levels. Further, it will
engage first responders and other end users through the provision of both
technology and training. CASA will address the observation, prediction and
response of weather, an issue that affects between 10 percent and 30 percent of
the U.S. gross national product.&lt;br/&gt;Our management structure has the
flexibility to take advantage of our broad partnership. For
example,&lt;br/&gt;CASA will collaborate with industry partners, who, in turn,
will create new product lines and services&lt;br/&gt;based on our new paradigm
for sensing, analyzing, predicting and responding to atmospheric hazards
in&lt;br/&gt;the troposphere.