* 0313954
* Oceanographic Technical Services 2003-2005, R/Vs Revelle, Melville, New Horizon and Sproul
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Robert Knox, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2007
* USD 9,465,675.00

0313954&lt;br/&gt;Knox&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year award to University of California
San Diego's Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) provides support for
technical services during NSF-funded programs on research vessels Revelle,
Melville, New Horizon and Sproul. All four vessels are operated by SIO as part
of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research
fleet. SIO will provide two shipboard technicians on each cruise of Revelle and
Melville, and one technician on New Horizon and Sproul, to support seagoing
research projects and to maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified users
items from their pool of shared-use research instrumentation. In addition, the
award supports some specialized services support on both SIO vessels and other
UNOLS vessels on which SIO technical staff will provide support. Such services
includes multibeam sonar operations, seismic reflection profiling, mitigation of
acoustic impacts on marine mammals by seismic sources, biological and undulating
oceanographic vehicle support, support for 'reference quality' CTD operations,
hydrographic Doppler sonar support, and technician training. The services
supported here are expected to significantly enhance the operation of the
research vessels via cost-effective and expert support of shared-use
oceanographic instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;