* 0313237
* ITR: 3-D Visualizations for Medical Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Mary Hegarty, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 383,181.00

There is much excitement about the educational potential of interactive computer
visualizations. Despite such optimism, however, we know relatively little about
how learners interact with 3-D computer visualizations. Initial studies in
medical education suggest that rather than augmenting cognition for all
learners, 3-D interactive models may actually be disadvantageous to individuals
with low spatial abilities.

This project will examine the effects of individual spatial abilities and
visualization design factors on students' spatial comprehension, and use those
results to improve the effectiveness of 3-D visualizations in medical education.
The first objective of the project relates to the spatial abilities that have
been shown to be important for developing 3-D mental models of human anatomy. We
will explore the correlation between spatial ability and anatomy learning, and
examine how this correlation is modulated by use of interactive computer
visualizations and by domain knowledge. The second objective is to test the
effectiveness of different aspects of computer visualizations (stereoscopic vs.
monoscopic displays, active vs. passive control and haptic vs traditional
interfaces) for learning anatomy. The third objective is to apply the resulting
findings to medical education by developing and testing training programs that
use the types of simulations that are shown to be most effective. The studies
will use a combination of correlational and experimental methods to explore the
relationships between individual differences and anatomy learning, and the
effectiveness of different aspects of computer visualizations. Basic studies
will initially be conducted with naive undergraduate students and later
generalized to medical students.