* 0313813
* Early Humans in the Eastern Great Basin: The View from Bonneville Estates Rockshelter, Nevada
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Bryan Hockett, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2004
* USD 54,311.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ted Goebel and his colleagues will
continue archaeological excavations of Bonneville Estates Rockshelter, located
in Elko County, northeastern Nevada. Their work in 2003 will focus on the
rockshelter's earliest cultural occupations that span from before 10,000 to
nearly 7,000 years ago. Earlier work has revealed an incredibly rich record of
diagnostic spear points and other stone artifacts, perishable artifacts
including fragments of baskets, cordage, and wood and bone tools, as well as
well-preserved remains of plants and animals. The richness of the cave's
deposits, coupled with the fact that they are well-stratified and can be
securely dated, make Bonneville Estates arguably the most important
archaeological site known in the eastern Great Basin for answering questions
about the peopling of the intermountain west of North America and the evolution
of human adaptations from the late Pleistocene into the Holocene. Work in
2003-2004 will focus on (1) firmly establishing the age and geologic context of
the rockshelter's earliest cultural occupations, (2) characterizing artifact
assemblages to explain human technological activities, (3) characterizing faunal
and floral assemblages to explain human subsistence activities, and (4) placing
the rockshelter's record into the greater context of the study of the Great
Basin's first human inhabitants. The project will provide invaluable learning
experiences for both graduate and undergraduate students, including those
enrolled in the University of Nevada archaeological field school, and will lead
to greater appreciation of the human experience in harsh arid environments. By
considering the archaeological record of the eastern Great Basin within a
paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental context, the proposed study will also
enhance our understanding of the impacts of global change on small-scale human
societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;