* 0313242
* ITR:  Computation and Communication in Sensor Webs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* David Andrews, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

Traditional design approaches that treat the processor node, network,
and&lt;br/&gt;sensor/actuator subsystems as distinctly independent components do
not&lt;br/&gt;apply well to the domain of sensor webs. This is a result of
sensor web&lt;br/&gt;systems being comprised of hundreds of thousands of small,
autonomous&lt;br/&gt;devices that dynamically engage or disengage in the
generation of data. &lt;br/&gt;Nodes within these systems are deployed in an ad-
hoc fashion, with no&lt;br/&gt;a-priori knowledge of network and sensor/actuator
connectivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new requirements call for a new
machine model that more closely&lt;br/&gt;supports the sensor webs unique
operational and behavioral requirements. &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on a
holistic system-centric approach that&lt;br/&gt;defines such a new integrated
communications/computation machine model for&lt;br/&gt;sensor web nodes. The new
machine model is expressed in terms of a Meta&lt;br/&gt;instruction set
architecture (ISA). This Meta ISA defines primitive&lt;br/&gt;system operations,
such as domain selections, data reduction, and&lt;br/&gt;broadcast across ad hoc
networks of nodes, much like the ISA of a CPU&lt;br/&gt;defining the CPU's
primitive operations. The Meta ISA enables consistent&lt;br/&gt;and reliable
system level operation for dynamically changing numbers and&lt;br/&gt;locations
of sensors, and supports multimode data fusion. The Meta
ISA&lt;br/&gt;explicitly supports attribute based naming, which enables the
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;creation of unique knowledge domains across unknown numbers
of&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous sensor types. A new routing protocol has is studied
as an integral part of the integrated computation/communication model. The
protocol is active in&lt;br/&gt;issuing and decoding Meta instructions
throughout the sensor&lt;br/&gt;web and has been designed specifically to
support attribute-based naming&lt;br/&gt;and formation of knowledge domains
across large ad hoc webs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
project includes the development of an educational focus area in the engineering
of computer-based systems. Courses include embedded and real-time systems,
sensor webs, run time software for embedded systems, and distributed systems.
The project is achieving impact for both graduate and undergraduate students by
integrating the research agenda and results into the classroom, and focusing
collaborative activities. Software tools and hardware platforms developed in
this project will enhance student laboratories for experimentation and
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;