* 0313369
* Arabidopsis 2010: ATP: A Reverse Genetics Service for the Arabidopsis Community
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Luca Comai, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 810,000.00

Multiple tools will be required to understand the function of the 26,000 genes
of the model plant Arabidopsis. Discovering induced or natural variation in DNA
sequences of interest greatly facilitates the analysis of each gene. The
Arabidopsis TILLING Project (ATP) discovers, sequences and delivers mutations
and polymorphisms (natural variations) in target genes ordered by Arabidopsis
researchers. For each target locus ATP provides mutations using TILLING
(Targeting Induced Local Lesions In Genomes), a reverse genetics method that
discovers induced point mutations in populations of chemically mutagenized
individuals. The broad range of mutations possible by chemical mutagenesis can
impair a gene with different severity, thus providing an allelic series useful
in understanding function. In addition, for each target locus ATP queries 50
standard accessions for natural polymorphisms (Ecotilling). Natural variants
will thus be available for phenotypic characterization. The first objective is
to TILL and ecotill 180 genes per year. Orders can be entered by the public at
the ATP site (http://tilling.fhcrc.org:9366/). The second objective is to
provide to undergraduate students an Arabidopsis-based educational tool on
genomic research. An education link will be posted at the ATP site and will
provide guided opportunities to explore gene function. Deliverables include
TILLING lines, mutations and polymorphisms, all available for search and
ordering at the TAIR Arabidpsis database site (www.arabidopsis.org, see
"stocks", "sequence viewer" and "allele/polymorphisms"). The service provided by
ATP will supplement the existing reverse genetics tools by providing an
important additional technology, thus facilitating the Arabidopsis 2010
objective to understand the function of each gene. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enriching the teaching of the PIs and providing
training opportunity for undergraduates at the University of Washington, this
project has a specific plan to involve undergradues in 4-year institutions. In
collaboration with instructors from four-year universities we are developing
exercises for undergraduate teaching in which the relationship of candidate
genes to selected phenotypes will be assessed by students using the genotyping
and targeted mutations resources of ATP. The genomic resources developed over
the past decade in Arabidopsis will be integrated into these exercises.
Therefore, ATP will provide a conduit through which undergraduate students in
small four-year institutions can participate in postgenomic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;