* 0313593
* ADVANCE Leadership Award:  Initiative for Minority Female Environmental Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Dorceta Taylor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laura Kramer
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal seeks to develop an ADVANCE Leadership Initiative for Minority
Female Environmental Faculty (LIMFEF) that is aimed at enhancing the presence
and stature of minority female faculty in American academic institutions. The
initiative will focus on Black, Hispanic and Native American faculty in
environmental departments and schools, and will pursue the following goals in
addressing barriers faced by minority women in developing professional careers
in academia. &lt;br/&gt;o Conduct a national study to determine the status of
female minority environmental faculty, &lt;br/&gt;o Develop a national database
with contact information of minority female environmental faculty, &lt;br/&gt;o
Develop a clickable e-book of minority female environmental faculty featuring
profiles of "pioneers" in the field and "rising stars,"&lt;br/&gt;o Convene a
national conference of minority female environmental faculty to discuss the
results of the study, network, develop mentoring relationships, and craft
leadership strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the ADVANCE program is
to increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering
workforce through the increased representation and advancement of women in
academic science and engineering careers. Through this program, NSF seeks to
support new approaches to improving the climate for women in U.S. academic
institutions and to facilitate women's advancement to the highest ranks of
academic leadership, thereby broadening participation in the Nation's science
and engineering enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;