* 0314760
* Some Modern Aspects of Elastomer Science and Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 768,000.00

One practical goal of the research proposed is to obtain structure-property
relationships that can be used to optimize the properties of elastomeric
materials. For example, stress-strain results on a variety of elastomeric
materials in elongation, biaxial extension, shear, and torsion will be
interpreted using both analytical theories based on entanglement-constrained
network junctions, and computer simulations. Elastomers will include both
commercially important polymers cross linked by some of the relatively
uncontrolled techniques used in the industry, but also some elastomers prepared
to have unusual bimodal chain-length distributions that improve ultimate
properties by end linking functionally-terminated polymer chains. Additional
elastomers will be produced under conditions giving structures that have some
unusual advantages, for example by cross linking in solution or in a state of
strain. Experiments on these materials that are of particular interest will be
stress-strain measurements for identifying maximum extensibilities and
toughness. Elastomeric gels will be used to produce biodegradable films of
enhanced orientation and improved mechanical properties. The second major topic
involves strain-induced crystallization in elastomers, in elongation, but also
in several important deformations in which results are almost entirely lacking.
Some analytical theory and computer simulations will be carried out in parallel
investigations. Novel reinforcing fillers such as silica will be generated in-
situ by hydrolyses of precursors such as organosilicates, and simple metal salts
such as ferric chloride. Of particular importance will be identifying the
particle size that maximizes reinforcement, and characterizing the effects of
particle shape and the orientations of non-spherical particles. Novel materials
will be prepared by coating particles of one type with a ceramic of another
type. It will also be possible to thread elastomeric chains through reinforcing
zeolites. The resulting filler-reinforced elastomers will be characterized
primarily by mechanical property measurements, electron microscopy, X-ray and
neutron scattering, and pulse-propagation measurements. Simulations will also be
carried out to elucidate reinforcing mechanisms in filled elastomers in general.
As a final topic, experiments will be carried out to exploit the ability of
elastomeric domains to improve the impact resistances of polymer-ceramic hybrid
composites in which the ceramic is the continuous phase. Of particular interest
here is control of the level of dispersion by using the connectivity of networks
structures in one of the phases to "frustrate" the usual types of phase
separation in disparate two-component systems.

Broader impacts, described within the proposal, include developing a module on
elastomers and rubberlike elasticity for deployment in a "Mobile Laboratory" to
bring science and engineering demonstrations and experiments to K-12 students in
Cincinnati. Three large "Winnebago" sized mobile classrooms are being outfitted,
and each will be stocked with the equipment necessary to allow students the
opportunity to carry out more advanced experiments than usually possible in
typical K-12 venues.