* 0314259
* International Conference:  Monocots III/Grasses IV, March 31 - April 4, 2003, Ontario, CA
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Elizabeth Friar, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/29/2004
* USD 28,000.00

0314259 Columbus, Friar, Porter, and Prince Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
(RSABG) in California will host the Third International Conference on the
Comparative Biology of the Monocotyledons (Monocots III) jointly with the Fourth
International Symposium on Grass Systematics and Evolution (Grasses IV) on 31
March to 4 April, 2003. Past conferences have been successul gatherings that
have resulted in widely referenced conference proceedings on the comparative
biology and evolution of monocots, and stimulated the formation of new research
initiatives and international collaborations. Monocots III/Grasses IV will offer
a core program in systematics while integrating new and highly relevant advances
in the disciplines of developmental biology and genomics, with an emphasis on
data integration across molecular and morphological domains. Monocot researchers
from around the world will assemble to share knowledge and results on the
taxonomy, phylogeny, and classification of all groups of monocots, including the
large families of grasses, sedges, and orchids, and to discuss recent advances
in genome evolution of cereals and other monocots and floral development and
evolution in these plants. Funds from the award will provide travel monies for
young investigators (new faculty, graduate students and recent graduates mostly)
and for scientists from developing countries. This and waiver of conference
registration fees for these groups will help attract a large group of
participants, to what traditionally has been a well-attended meeting drawing
several hundred scientists.

