* 0314643
* Acquisition of a Nano-Tribometer and Imaging Tool for Research and Education in Nanostructured Thin Films and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Krishan Chawla, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 111,362.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a Nano-Tribometer and Imaging Tool (NTI-
Tool) needed for current and future research and education activities in the
physics of nanostructured materials at the University of Alabama at Birmingham
(UAB). This tool comprises two major parts, a combination of a pin-on-disk and
linear reciprocating CSM Nano-Tribometer to study friction and wear of materials
in a wide range of loads and environments including liquids, and a Fogale
interferometric microscope Microsurf- 3D for high resolution three-dimensional
images of surfaces with a complex morphology before and after tests. The Nano-
Tribometer and Imaging Tool will establish a new research capability at UAB
Department of Physics and will complement the Department's materials fabrication
(CVD, PLD, sputtering, and sol-gel) and mechanical properties characterization
(Nano-Indentor / AFM facility) infrastructure. There are four research groups in
UAB (Physics, Biomedical Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering
Departments) that will benefit from using the proposed tool in research projects
focused on nanostructured metal oxides, nanocrystalline diamond and nitride
ceramic coatings for biomedical and micro-mechanical (MEMS) applications, and on
characterization of surface friction and micro-wear in metallic composite
materials for load-bearing biomedical hip implants and friction pair components
of machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will have application in
three UAB educational programs: the Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in
Materials Science, the UAB NSF/DMR-supported REU-Site (Regional Initiative to
Promote Undergraduate Participation in Experimental and Computational Materials
Research involving UAB, Birmingham Southern College, and Samford University with
the focus groups of women and minorities), and pending NSF IGERT full proposal
on Multidisciplinary collaboration in materials and biotechnology..
Undergraduate and graduate students in these programs will benefit from using
this state-of-art instrumentation to become acquainted with the methods of
materials characterization, and to obtain hands-on laboratory experience. It is
expected that this equipment will have a significant impact on physics and
technology of nanostructured and composite materials for biomedical implants and
components of MEMS. The enhanced understanding of friction and wear of these
materials generated by research involving the instrumentation will aid in the
production of new, useful assemblies of functional thin film and composite
materials systems and new load-bearing components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;