* 0314373
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Food practices and social stratification at the Shang period Bronze Age site of Anyang
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Ian Hodder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,940.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ian Hodder, Katrinka Reinhart will analyze data from
the early Bronze Age archaeological site of Anyang in Henan province, China.
Anyang flourished as a capital city during the Shang dynasty, the first
historical dynasty in China, from roughly 1200 - 1050 BCE. The site is well
known for its great artistic and technological achievements: its grand burials,
large elevated buildings, sophisticated bronze ritual vessels, and 'oracle bone'
texts. These elaborate features contrast markedly with material culture,
dwellings, and burials at the site that are smaller, plainer and generally more
functional. Such stark contrast in cultural remains reveals a deepening division
between social classes at Anyang and depicts a ruling class whose lifestyle and
position in society differed greatly from those of lower social
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research project questions how this
intensification of social inequality at Anyang was established and maintained.
Investigation is aimed at a scale more personal than institutional, looking at
differences in everyday practices between people from different classes. How did
individuals at Anyang experience such deep inequality in their day-to-day lives?
Research will specifically focus on differences in practices surrounding food
between people of different social status. The aim is to see how politics play
out in the domain of food - how what people ate, how they prepared food, how the
types of utensils they used, and how the symbolic and ideological associations
with food served to identify, distinguish, and separate social groups thereby
strengthening the domination of the elite class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Food
habits of Anyang residents from different social classes will be analyzed
through several methods: residue analysis, paleodiet analysis, and typological
analysis of pottery. Data for each procedure will be collected from different
social classes. First, food residues retained in the pores of pottery vessels
will be analyzed through the technique of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC/MS) to determine what types of foodstuffs were cooked. Second, human bone
will be analyzed through the stable isotope technique in order to determine
diet. Third, the style and function of utensils used in food preparation and
consumption will be examined. These analytical procedures will be complemented
with a study of texts recovered from Anyang.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be of interest to both scholarly and general audiences. The topics and
analytical methods combine theories and methods from both the social sciences
and the hard sciences and will thus be relevant to an interdisciplinary academic
audience. Public outreach will be also an important aspect of the project.
Knowledge distribution will include the construction of a museum exhibit small
enough to travel between the US and China in addition to a website describing
the project, currently under construction at: http://www.chinesearchaeology.org.
It will be fascinating to see what foods were eaten by various people at the
beginning of Chinese civilization, but moreover, since food is something we all
relate to, this study has the ability to convey to the lay-person ideas about
how politics play out in daily life. Finally, the project will be undertaken in
collaboration with scholars from China and will thus further scholarly exchange
of ideas and ties between the two nations.&lt;br/&gt;