* 0314710
* Understanding the Role of Rain-On-Snow Events in High Latitude Climates: Soil Temperature and Ecosystem Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jaakko Putkonen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2006
* USD 249,521.00

This project will explore the influences of wintertime rainfall-over-snow events
on the snow cover itself and on soil properties that affect climate. Such rain-
on-snow events create ice layers in the snow which impact land surface
conditions and land surface-atmosphere interactions in the Arctic region. The
research will be conducted using data from an array of meteorological stations
combined with atmospheric model reanalysis, and is expected to advance our
understanding of the climate systems in regions representing the typical
hydrology and ecology of high northern latitudes. The model used for this
project is a coupled atmosphere-land surface, single-column model derived from
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate System
Model (CCSM) and modified to capture the relevant physics. The output from
global climate model scenarios are to be used to determine changes in the
frequency of rain-on-snow events and other relevant meteorological conditions
that impact the future of land-surface systems on climate and on ungulate
(hoofed animal) populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work are
expected to improve modeling capabilities in Arctic land surface processes. The
P.I.s will produce a report which they will distributed to the climate modeling
community and specifically share with the land-surface working group of the NCAR
CCSM. The work is also expected to benefit the Arctic native people since it
includes the impact of rain-on-snow events on arctic ungulate herds.