* 0314023
* GOALI:     Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Membrane Assisted Phase Equilibrium in Dilute Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2011
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2011
* USD 369,058.00

Murad, Sohail - U of Illinois - Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Miller, Jeffrey - BP Research
Center, Naperville, IL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Molecular Dynamics
Simulations of Membrane Assisted Phase Equilibrium in Dilute
Solutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to develop a direct simulation
method to investigate the phase equilibrium of dilute solutions. The method is
based on using a membrane to assist in attaining equilibrium between two or more
phases. Direct simulation methods, although conceptually the simplest methods
for studying phase equilibrium are usually difficult to implement because they
require: (i) long simulation times to account for slow diffusion through the
interface; (ii) large systems to account for the thickness of the interface and
to have sufficiently large regions to represent the bulk phases; and (iii) are
not suitable when the densities of the two phases are close to each other, since
it becomes difficult to maintain two separate phases. Preliminary work using the
membrane-assisted method to study the solubility of gases in liquids, has shown
that many of the problems with other direct simulation methods are significantly
less problematic with such direct simulation methods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the proposed research is to further develop this method to study
a wider range of phase equilibrium problems, especially those of direct
industrial interest. They will include solubility of a wide range of gases in
solvents. Selective solubility of gases in solvents has been suggested as an
efficient technique for separating gases, which are otherwise difficult to
separate (e.g. ethylene/ethane). In addition, the solubility of gases such as
O2, N2, C2H4, C2H6, etc., in solvents such as alcohols, ethers, and hydrocarbons
are of considerable interest by themselves in the chemical and petroleum
industries. Apart from being of direct industrial interest, these properties are
very sensitive to cross interactions between different species (e.g.
polar/nonpolar) which are not well understood at both the molecular and
macroscopic level. The PI's will also investigate other related problems such as
the partitioning of solutes in competing solvents, which are important in
pollution prevention and abatement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is a
collaborative project with BP America, Dow Chemical Company, and Huntsman
Corporation, who have expressed a willingness to commit considerable industrial
resources as an expression of their interest in the success of this project. It
is the PI's intention to demonstrate the robustness of these methods for
important industrial projects under this GOALI proposal, and subsequently work
closely with these companies to enable them to use it for additional problems
and systems of more immediate and direct industrial interest. The PI's will also
develop user-friendly computer codes that will be made available to the
industrial partners for developmental purposes. Finally, the industrial
collaboration will allow graduate students to interact with industrial
scientists, and add an important dimension to their graduate education
experience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;