* 0314250
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration and Ecological Change:  The impact of rapid social change on natural resource management in rural sending communities, Puebla, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Thomas Patterson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,118.00

Migration from rural communities in Mexico to labor markets in the United States
is an important activity for several million Mexicans who support their
households and communities in both countries. Researchers have focused on how
this mass movement of people creates important economic, cultural and political
changes in and linkages between migrants' home and host societies. The effect
migration has on the exploitation of natural resources in sending regions has
not been studied. This dissertation project, conducted by a student of cultural
anthropology from the University of California, Riverside, will focus on the
members of a rural community in Puebla, Mexico and the town's migrants in New
York City in order to understand the changes due to migration in the social
relations and local institutions which mediate control and access to land,
livestock, water, and mineral resources, how these changes have shaped patterns
of resource use and management, and the meanings that community members assign
to these new developments in their lives. The impact of social change on
resource exploitation is important in the context of state-sponsored
conservation and development programs which, when coupled with changes in
agrarian reform laws, have the potential to curtail control over resources
claimed and managed by transnational communities. The town and its surrounding
communal lands are located within a nationally recognized protected area
established in the 1990s to conserve the region's rare and fragile desert
landscape. The results of the doctoral dissertation will increase our knowledge
of how transnational communities manage natural environments and what the
implications of this process are for the outcome of state-sponsored conservation
and development programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Aside from
contributing to the education of a young social scientist, the research findings
will inform policy planning that promotes ecologically and socially viable
conservation and development programs in rural areas with high rates of
international migration throughout Mexico and other Latin American countries.
&lt;br/&gt;