* 0314719
* Vanadium Complex Interaction with Lipids and Transport across Lipid Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Nancy Levinger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2007
* USD 444,000.00

Debbie C. Crans and Nancy E. Levinger, Department of Chemistry, Colorado State
University, are supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program for fundamental studies exploring how metal complexes interact
with lipids. They will synthesize vanadium(IV) and vanadium(V) complexes with
ligands such as picolinate, dipicolinate, and acetylacetonate. They will study
their properties in aqueous solution, in the presence of dispersed lipids,
reverse micelles, vesicles and liposomes. The tools for characterization of the
systems include multinuclear NMR, EPR, UV/visible, IR and Raman spectroscopy.
Pulsed field gradient NMR and time-resolved anisotropy will also measure
interactions of the metal complexes with the lipid assemblies. The potential
transport of the metal complexes across lipid bilayers will be measured using
surface second harmonic generation.

Metal ions are involved in many metabolic processes. Vanadium complexes have
been shown to normalize elevated glucose levels in diabetic humans. This project
will provide insight into the fundamental aspects of metal complex interactions
and transport across bilayers that are critical for the design of new
therapeutics for diabetes and other metabolic disorders. The project will engage
students, both undergraduate and graduate, and enhance the visibility of women
in bioinorganic and biophysical research using a variety of state-of-the-art
spectroscopic tools.