* 0314012
* Conference Support for GECCO
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2003
* James Foster, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

EIA-0314012&lt;br/&gt;James Foster&lt;br/&gt;University of
Idaho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Conference Support for
GECCO&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests funds to support and encourage student participation in the Genetic
and&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO), to be held 12-16 July
2003 in Chicago,&lt;br/&gt;Illinois. Our overall objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Encourage and support student participation at GECCO 2003,
targeting&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups and including both undergraduates
and graduates&lt;br/&gt;2. Encourage undergraduates to pursue graduate research
in genetic and evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;computation&lt;br/&gt;3. Encourage
students to pursue academic or industrial careers that research or use
genetic&lt;br/&gt;and evolutionary computation&lt;br/&gt;This funding
opportunity will be advertised with all conference advertising. This will
include&lt;br/&gt;physical mailings, email broadcasts,
listsere&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: this proposal will enhance development
and dissemination of research in&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary computation by helping
students attend a major international meeting to present&lt;br/&gt;their work,
attend tutorials and other events, and establish collaborations. Our primary
target for&lt;br/&gt;student support is students from underrepresented groups
that are presenting peer reviewed&lt;br/&gt;work-specifically, those who are
already making a scientific contribution. Evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;computation is
still considered an experimental and innovative approach, so this is responsive
to&lt;br/&gt;the mission of NSF/EIA. It is also biologically inspired, and
events at GECCO 2003, particularly&lt;br/&gt;workshop, tutorials, and one of the
technical tracks, will specifically emphasize applications
to&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics problems, so this is responsive to the mission of
NSF/DBI as well.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: this proposal funds student
participation at a major international meeting, with&lt;br/&gt;an emphasis on
underrepresented groups and undergraduates. We will disburse the funds
from&lt;br/&gt;this grant to students in the form of registration fees, travel,
and housing awards. All funds from&lt;br/&gt;this grant will go to students.
Students will be selected for awards by the general chair, the PI
of&lt;br/&gt;this proposal. I will give precedence to students who: are
presenting a paper that will be&lt;br/&gt;published in the conference
proceedings; are self-identified as being from
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;groups; are participating in workshops; are
undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;