* 0314499
* SGER:  Geotechnical Reconnaissance of the 3 November 2002, Mw 7.9, Denali- Earthquake, Alaska
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/29/2004
* USD 75,037.00

A magnitude 7.9 earthquake struck central Alaska on 3 November 2002. The
earthquake resulted from slip on the Denali fault that is comparable in size to
California's San Andreas Fault. The magnitude of the earthquake, and the type
and magnitude of the fault rupture are within the range of a maximum credible
earthquake that would be expected on the San Andreas Fault. Thus, this
earthquake provides a unique opportunity to study the geotechnical effects of a
major strike slip fault rupture with characteristics very similar to those
assumed for the San Andreas Fault.

The objective is to support a rapid-response reconnaissance of the earthquake
damage in order to document the geotechnical and engineering geologic features
of this major earthquake. Experience with major earthquakes shows that much of
the surface phenomena associated with faulting, landslides, and ground failure
such as liquefaction is highly perishable. In this case, the onset of winter
will rapidly obscure many of the surficial features, and spring snowmelt will
further obscure most of the surface exposures. Therefore, it is essential that
collection of information commence as soon as can be arranged; to be followed by
additional detailed work once the weather permits in the spring.

The results of the survey are being made available on the web page of the
Earthquake Engineering Research Center at the University of California,
Berkeley, http://eerc.berkeley.edu/research/

