* 0314774
* Consortium for Achievement in Mathematics and Science
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Carlo Parravano, Merck Institute for Science Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,025,426.00

The Merck Institute for Science Education (MISE) and additional Core Partners
including the Educational Testing Service (ETS), Kean University and four urban
school districts in New Jersey (Elizabeth Board of Education, Hillside Public
Schools, Linden Public Schools and Rahway Public Schools) provide intensive,
sustainable, systemic reform with the vision that all middle school students
understand and are able to apply key concepts in mathematics and science. Goals
for the project are: Implementing challenging instructional programs Building
professional capacity in schools, the University, ETS, and MISE Developing
leadership among teachers, administrators, and University faculty Developing a
student-centered learning climate in every classroom, and Building parent and
community support.

The project is focusing on the urgent need for well-prepared and supported
middle school mathematics and science teachers via an array of coordinated
efforts that address candidate recruitment, teacher preparation, and support of
teachers in schools. A common set of standards based instructional materials in
mathematics and science is selected and implemented at Grades 6-8 in all
districts ensuring content rich and challenging courses for all students. A
curriculum audit for assessing level of implementation is developed. A
collaborative assessment Plan that includes a standards based state-wide
assessment is administered to all students at Grade 8, nationally-normed,
objectively scored, standards-aligned, assessment are administered to all
students grades 6 and 7. Collaborative wide end-of-unit assessments including
objectively scored and free response items including performance tasks are
administered to all students. ETS assists in developing performance assessments.
Professional development schools are established in partner districts. Districts
identify and address professional development needs of all teachers and
administrators to support effective implementation of instructional materials.
Professional development is continuous and ongoing with participation by
university faculty and content experts from within P [MS] 2. Attention is paid
to teacher induction through mentoring and coaching. A middle school Mathematics
and Science Endorsement is developed and implemented by Kean science,
mathematics and education faculty, preparing candidates with the content
background and knowledge of middle school instruction needed to be effective
educators in middle school science and mathematics. Project goals are realized
through all project activities, in that a strong emphasis is placed on
developing capacity and creating a continuous learning culture within each
partner organization and promotes teacher retention. Collaborative activities
have an extensive research component, and results are widely disseminated.
Project activities address the needs of underrepresented students and provide
strategies and models for increasing achievement and participation of all
students in mathematics and science.