* 0314970
* Forebrain Processing of Biologically Relevant Odor Information
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* John Caprio, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 08/31/2008
* USD 478,540.00

Olfactory information comes into the brain from the level of the olfactory
receptor neurons to the first processing center of the forebrain, the olfactory
bulb. However, functional information as to how odors are processed at more
central neural levels is fragmentary at best. A key question is how information
about biologically relevant odors is handled by the cerebral lobes, after
arriving via the olfactory tracts from the olfactory bulbs. The channel catfish,
Ictalurus punctatus, a teleost fish, is the only vertebrate species for which
there is a clear correlation across the morphological type of olfactory receptor
neuron, the specific molecular transduction system, the type of biologically
relevant odor detected, and the local portion of the olfactory bulb used to
process this information. This project uses electrophysiological recording by
multi-electrode methods as well as single electrodes, to determine whether
biologically relevant odors of amino acids, bile salts, and nucleotides are
represented in by local activity showing an 'odotopic' map in the cerebral lobes
as they are in the olfactory bulb; to determine the response properties of odor-
responsive neurons within the cerebral lobes; and to determine whether the odor-
induced synchrony of activity seen in olfactory receptor neurons modulates odor
responses within the cerebral lobes.&lt;br/&gt; Results will provide a new level
of understanding higher-level processing of olfactory information in
vertebrates, and will provide an evolutionary and comparative perspective on how
odors are processed in cortical neurons. The issue of synchronous oscillating
activity is relevant to computational and theoretical models of brain function.
Because teleost fish comprise the largest number of vertebrate species, and are
economically important worldwide, this work has importance beyond neuroscience
to comparative physiology and ecology, and to aquaculture. Finally, this project
promotes the teaching and training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from under-served groups, in an EPSCoR-designated
state.&lt;br/&gt;