* 0314001
* Computational Methods in Modular Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Klaus Lux, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 183,000.00

Lux&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies computational representations of
a&lt;br/&gt;finite group over finite fields. Groups can be thought of as
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical abstraction of the common notion of symmetries.
As&lt;br/&gt;such they arise in mathematics and natural sciences such as
for&lt;br/&gt;example physics, chemistry, and biology. The symmetry group of
an&lt;br/&gt;object usually also acts on function spaces that are related
to&lt;br/&gt;the given object. This is a so-called linear action and in
the&lt;br/&gt;case where the function space is finite dimensional the
group&lt;br/&gt;acts as invertible matrices on the space. Such a realization
is&lt;br/&gt;called a (matrix-) representation of the group. In this
context&lt;br/&gt;one distinguishes two cases, the one where the matrices
are&lt;br/&gt;written over a field of characteristic 0 such as the
complex&lt;br/&gt;numbers, or the case where the entries are in a finite
field.&lt;br/&gt;This case is particularly interesting since here
the&lt;br/&gt;representation theory is tightly connected to the structure
of&lt;br/&gt;the group. The investigator develops a share package of
programs&lt;br/&gt;in the computer algebra system GAP. This system is free
of&lt;br/&gt;charge, well documented, and widely used. The theory
of&lt;br/&gt;representations in the finite characteristic case is far
from&lt;br/&gt;being fully understood. For example, up to now not even all
the&lt;br/&gt;irreducible representations for all finite simple groups
are&lt;br/&gt;known. The share package implements algorithms to help
solve&lt;br/&gt;several questions concerning the representations of a
finite&lt;br/&gt;group. First of all it enables the user to compute the
projective&lt;br/&gt;indecomposable representations of a given group or
alternatively&lt;br/&gt;access them via a data base that is provided by the
package.&lt;br/&gt;These representations are of fundamental importance when one
is&lt;br/&gt;interested in getting an overview of all representations of
the&lt;br/&gt;group. From the projective indecomposable representations one
can&lt;br/&gt;derive an algebra called the basic algebra that has the
same&lt;br/&gt;representation theory as the group. This algebra is much
smaller&lt;br/&gt;than the group algebra itself and hence also has
important&lt;br/&gt;applications in computing with representations. The share
package&lt;br/&gt;therefore also contains functions to compute the basic
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;Even though the basic algebra is a very important
invariant,&lt;br/&gt;barely anything is known about it even for specific groups.
The&lt;br/&gt;share package increases the knowledge about specific
groups&lt;br/&gt;tremendously. Moreover, there is an explicit
algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;connection between representations of a group and that of
its&lt;br/&gt;basic algebra. The share package incorporates functions
that&lt;br/&gt;allow the user to analyze and construct representations
using&lt;br/&gt;this connection. This is of particular importance in
computations&lt;br/&gt;of the cohomology ring or the Ext-algebra of a
group.&lt;br/&gt; A group is a mathematical object that captures notions
of&lt;br/&gt;arrangement and symmetry -- for example, the
different&lt;br/&gt;orientations of a square when turned ninety degrees at a
time&lt;br/&gt;comprise a group. Groups arise in mathematics and
natural&lt;br/&gt;sciences such as physics, chemistry, and biology. Exploiting
the&lt;br/&gt;group structure often leads to deep insights into problems
in&lt;br/&gt;these areas. The investigator develops ways to represent
and&lt;br/&gt;computationally study finite groups. He implements these
methods&lt;br/&gt;in computer software, building on the freely available
software&lt;br/&gt;system GAP. The package he develops contains data bases
of&lt;br/&gt;computed results. These are accessible to the public via the
GAP&lt;br/&gt;system and alternatively on the world wide web. GAP itself
is&lt;br/&gt;used in the educational environment and as part of GAP
one&lt;br/&gt;possible application of the software package is in the
class&lt;br/&gt;room. It gives students hands-on experience with
representation&lt;br/&gt;theory free of charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;