* 0314069
* Collective and Nonlinear Physics of Mesoscopic Oscillators
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2007
* Michael Cross, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Mechanical oscillations at the sub-micron scale - either fabricated
lithographically or built up from the atomic scale as in carbon nanotubes -
combine the physics of nonlinearity, noise and dispersion, collective behavior,
and ultimately quantum effects, in systems that are both readily investigated
experimentally and likely to be important in technology. This project is to
study theoretically the nonlinear, nonequilibrium, stochastic, and pattern
forming aspects of such oscillators, with strong motivation from the concurrent
experimental program at Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern lithographic
techniques allow the construction of free-standing mechanical oscillators, made
from silicon, silicon nitride, gold and other materials, at ever decreasing
sizes, and with a wide variety of geometries, from simple beams and cantilevers,
to complex multi-oscillator structures that provide isolation from supports. In
addition, the fabrication of mechanical oscillators made from single- and multi-
walled carbon nanotubes is rapidly developing. These experimental advances open
up interesting new avenues of basic physics, which have direct application to
possible technological applications of such devices in detectors, communication
and other areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the one hand the fabrication
technologies open up new experimental possibilities, for example the ease of
constructing large arrays of oscillators, and the approach to size scales where
quantum effects become important. On the other hand, there are new challenges
that arise, such as the inevitable dispersion of the oscillator frequencies due
to imperfections of the fabrication, the growing importance of stochastic
effects from the thermal noise as sizes decrease, and the nonlinearity of the
oscillators that will develop at the larger amplitudes of motion that will
enhance the signal to noise ratio of detection schemes. These must be understood
for the successful development of applications. Thus there is a strong need for
a theoretical investigation of such small scale oscillators, combining the
issues of nonlinearity, noise and dispersion, collective behavior (pattern
formation), and quantum effects. Each of these areas has a large body of
theoretical work, of greater or lesser applicability to experiment. The progress
in the range of devices that can be fabricated provides strong experimental
stimulus for testing, refining and combining these theoretical ideas in a new
physical domain. The possibilities of precise measurements of the behavior of
large numbers of dynamical components, through on-chip diagnostics and
processing, makes mesoscopic oscillators an exciting testbed for these
theoretical ideas. In turn the theory may suggest completely new protocols for
technological applications, as well as provide new insights on the design of
more conventional protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides being carried out in
close coordination with an experimental program at Caltech, the research will
involve both graduate students and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical oscillations at the sub-micron scale - either fabricated
lithographically or built up from the atomic scale as in carbon nanotubes -
combine the physics of nonlinearity, noise and dispersion, collective behavior,
and ultimately quantum effects, in systems that are both readily investigated
experimentally and likely to be important in technology. This project is to
study theoretically the nonlinear, nonequilibrium, stochastic, and pattern
forming aspects of such oscillators, with strong motivation from the concurrent
experimental program at Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides being carried out
in close coordination with an experimental program at Caltech, the research will
involve both graduate students and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;