* 0314139
* Dissertation Research:  Gender, Autonomy and Indigenous Rights in Chiapas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Charles Hale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Over the past few decades in Latin America, rural politics has shifted from
national popular and class-based agendas to a politics of indigenous identity,
often transcending regional and national boundaries. This shift has produced
tensions as multicultural nation-states consolidate neoliberal forms of
governance and simultaneously face increasing demands for collective rights and
autonomy from ethnic groups. This dissertation research by a cultural
anthropologist from the University of Texas at Austin will examine the Zapatista
Army of National Liberation's movement for autonomy and indigenous rights in
Chiapas, Mexico by comparing two communities in Zapatista-run autonomous
townships in the Canadas region, which have strong variations in levels of
gender equity and women's participation. Through the ethnographic methods of
household surveys, oral histories, semi-structured interviews, participant
observation and archival research, this project will investigate the historical
construction of these differences and will analyze the relationship between
gender and autonomy. The study will focus on the ways in which gender equity has
positively and negatively affected the practice and consolidation of autonomy
and will contribute to the theorization of indigenous women's organizing. The
study will also assess the impact of gendered state responses on this process.
&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: By advancing understanding of the relationship
between demands for individual rights, such as women's rights, and for
collective rights within indigenous movements, the research findings will be of
use to academics, policy-makers, and indigenous organizations as they search for
peaceful ways to resolve conflicts. The project will also contribute to the
education of a young social scientist.&lt;br/&gt;