* 0314212
* Mechanically Alloyed Iron-Based Bulk Metallic Glasses and their Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Challapalli Suryanarayana, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 293,110.00

The grant explores synthesis and detailed structural mechanical characterization
of iron-based bulk metallic glasses. A major objective is to synthesize bulk
metallic glasses using powder metallurgy technique of mechanical alloying
followed by consolidation using pressing at elevated temperatures. The aim is to
produce composites with fine dispersion of nanometer-sized particles of
intermetallics in the amorphous matrix by judicious selection of processing
parameters. The structural characterization involves x-ray diffraction,
transmission electron microscopy and differential scanning calorimetry. The
mechanical properties will be investigated using instrumented indentation to
establish the correlation between structure and properties of the new types of
alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis of bulk metallic glasses and their
nanocrystalline composites by mechanical alloying will enable production of
glassy materials in the systems that could not be produced or produced
insufficient section thickness by other and more traditional techniques starting
from the liquid state. Instrumented indentation over nano- and microscales
offers itself as an effective and versatile tool for qualitative and
quantitative mechanical characterization. The mechanical characterization from
the continuously decreasing size of engineering structures will have application
in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The broader educational impacts include
integration of research into teaching through the development and introduction
of new courses such as 'Experimental Techniques in Mechanics and Materials,' and
'Non-equilibrium Processing of Materials.' The outreach is planned to high
schools and diverse communities through the Florida Engineering Education
Delivery System (FEEDS).