* 0314959
* The East Alabama Partnership for the Improvement of Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2013
* Phillip Zenor, Auburn University
* Cooperative Agreement
* teri murphy
* 12/31/2013
* USD 10,202,887.00

The East Alabama Partnership for the Improvement of Mathematics Education has
been formed to improve mathematics education in 12 school districts in East
Alabama with the support of Auburn University, Tuskegee University and other
partners. This partnership is guided by the belief that the low mathematics
achievement in its region can be solved through a multidimensional, coordinated
effort focusing not only on the schools, but also on the universities' teacher
preparation programs as well as community and parental factors. The partners
emphasize that they can accomplish more in collaboration than can any one member
individually. Indeed, the project has developed an innovative approach in which
the districts pool their limited resources and are thus able to operate, in some
respects, as one large district. Together, the districts in this partnership
serve roughly 56,000 students who are growing up in an environment that is
rural, very poor and heavily African American (48% of the student population).
Over five years, the project expects to impact over 1700 K-12 teachers of
mathematics in the partner schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The East Alabama
partnership is committed to ensuring that all students in the region receive an
equitable mathematics education by participating in a rigorous curriculum that
is taught by highly qualified teachers who use a variety of instructional
practices designed to promote student learning and understanding. The project
seeks to achieve its aims by using methods shown to improve mathematics
education elsewhere and adapting them to the circumstances of East Alabama. The
project will sustain its efforts by building the long-term capacity of the
system to provide quality education in mathematics. At the school district
level, new curriculum guides will be developed and textbooks selected, forming a
foundation for achievement. The project will provide administrator training and
support to help administrators develop a more supportive attitude toward
mathematics. An emphasis on building internal capacity through teacher leaders
will create a generation of leaders in mathematics education. Finally, the
partnership of mathematicians and mathematics educators from Auburn University
and Tuskegee University is expected to significantly alter their teacher
education programs in order to produce the qualified and diverse teacher
workforce for the future.. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;