* 0314233
* CAREER: Fundamental Aspects of Electrocrystallization Phenomena: An Experimental and Modeling Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Giovanni Zangari, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2006
* USD 386,138.00

0093154&lt;br/&gt;Zangari&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Process control in
electrochemical deposition (ECD) is a challenging task. A fundamental
understanding of the processes involved in film formation is needed to develop a
predictive, quantitative model for the effects of deposition variables on film
microstructure. In this CAREER grant a comprehensive investigation of nucleation
and growth processes of a representative set of electrodeposition systems is
undertaken with the objective to develop such a model and thus provide better
tools for ECD fabrication of metallic films. Electrochemical techniques, which
yield spatially averaged information on the growth process, and
microscopy/structural methods, that provide morphological data at the
microscopic scale, are coupled to yield a comprehensive description of the
electrocrystallization behavior of the model systems. These two techniques are
uniquely combined by monitoring in-situ and in real time the electrical response
and nucleation and growth processes of metals into micro- and nano-electrodes
fabricated by lithographic methods. The experimental effort is integrated with a
kinetic Monte Carlo simulation of the nucleation and growth process to quantify
the effects of metal type, electrolyte chemistry, and deposition variables on
the microstructure of the resulting films. The experimental results are used to
validate and improve the numerical simulations, and the resulting models are
utilized to develop a quantitative description of electrocrystallization
phenomena in electrolytic solutions. The theory, research and practice of ECD
will be integrated into the undergraduate and graduate materials engineering
curricula at the University of Alabama with the objective of enhancing skills
and creative thinking of students in the area of ECD technology and
applications. Students at the undergraduate level will be exposed to laboratory
projects in this field. Attention will be devoted to recruitment and retention
of minorities as well as economically and socially at risk students. Graduate
students will have the opportunity to attend a highly interdisciplinary course
on the theory and practice of ECD, wherein the lectures will be complemented by
laboratory sessions and simulation tools. Multimedia modules developed using
these tools will be employed in lectures and made available to the general
public through web publishing. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;ECD techniques are
widely employed for fabrication of thick coatings and for deposition through
lithographic patterns. ECD processes have unique capabilities to monitor and
control the nucleation and growth of coatings. This makes ECD ideal for the
synthesis of high performance metallic coatings for microelectronics, magnetic
recording, and MEMS applications, where control of microstructure and texture
over a wide range of length scales is essential.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;