* 0314209
* SGER:  A Study of a Ordered Body Centered Cubic Structure Superalloy Formed by Spinodal Decomposition
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2005
* USD 76,425.00

In this SGER proposal, scientifically interesting features of a new quaternary
alloy (Fe30Ni20Mn25Al25) will be examined to determine whether this particular
alloy system would be useful as a structural material. This new alloy is a bcc
equivalent of a nickel-based superalloy that has been used for high temperature
structures. A major objective is to investigate in detail the kinetics of both
the spinodal decomposition and the phase stability in bulk. In-situ high
temperature transmission electron microscopy will be used to characterize phase
coarsening and stability. Deformation behaviors will be characterized using both
bulk and in-situ straining experiments in transmission electron microscope. The
alloy will be considered in both as-cast and following different heat treatments
to determine the optimum process conditions for sufficient ductility without
sacrificing high-temperature strength. If successful, results from this work
will have applicability to other alloy system since the spinodal decomposition,
followed by ordering represents a new way of manipulating microstructures.

The educational impacts include training a M.S. student and two undergraduates
who will work on the project. They will acquire varying degrees of skill in
materials characterization techniques and mechanical testing. In addition, a
close collaboration with ORNL is planned wherein the materials will be processed
at the national laboratory.