* 0314453
* Analyses of Kwajalein Experiment (KWAJEX) and Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI-2000) Data
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Qiang Fu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 09/30/2008
* USD 465,444.00

This award supports analysis of data collected by the Cloud and Aerosol Research
Group (CARG) of the University of Washington, using its Convair-580 research
aircraft, in two field projects: the Kwajalein Experiment (KWAJEX) in the
Marshall Islands in 1999, and the Southern African Regional Science Initiative
(SAFARI 2000) in Southern Africa in the late summer of 2000. In these
experiments, the airplane was equipped for measuring cloud microphysical
characteristics, the concentrations of trace gases, and the sizes, shapes,
composition, and optical properties of aerosol particles. KWAJEX was focused
primarily on investigating cloud and precipitation processes in tropical
convective clouds. Studies under way include (1) investigating the unexpected
observation that drops appear to shatter at relatively warm temperatures (warmer
than -10C) and produce large numbers of ice splinters as a source of secondary
ice nuclei; (2) analyzing the evidence for very rapid rain production by the
collision and coalescence of liquid cloud droplets; (3) investigating the origin
and properties of the extremely narrow cloud filaments (tens of meters across)
in which the rain initially forms. The SAFARI observations were designed to
document the chemical and physical properties of the pall of polluted air over
the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Southern Africa. The data are well suited
for evaluating the effects of the smoke from biomass burning on atmospheric
chemistry and on the transfer of solar and terrestrial radiation. A goal is to
determine the climatic impact of the smoke through both its direct effect on the
atmospheric radiative balance and its indirect effect, caused by changes in the
microstructure and hence the optical characteristics of clouds that ingest the
smoke. Special attention is being given to the unique data from SAFARI on
atmospheric trace gases. The rates of emission for many species were measured,
and will be used as inputs for chemical transport models for comparison with the
downwind aircraft measurements. A goal is to understand the evolution of
anthropogenic emissions (aerosols and gases), including their interaction with
clouds, well enough to predict their effect on the radiative balance.