* 0314645
* Role of EAG K+ Channels in Cortical Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Bernardo Rudy, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2007
* USD 559,984.00

The action potential is the universal signal in the nervous system throughout
the animal kingdom. Action potentials are very similar in different parts of the
nervous system and between different animals. Information is instead encoded in
the frequency and temporal pattern of series of action potentials. Several
factors contribute to generating these patterns. Among these, the diversity of
ion channels carrying, potassium (K+) ions, known as K+ channels, is one of the
main factors contributing to the shaping of neural signals. A large number of
new K+ channels have been discovered recently through genetic molecular
analysis. Additional discoveries can be expected as the full sequence of the
genomes of several animals becomes known. A major task of future research is to
understand the physiological roles of these channels. This project will study a
new K+ channel gene family, known as EAG, recently identified and cloned from
flies and mammals. The products of EAG genes have been introduced into model
cells, where they result in the formation of K+ channels with unique and
intriguing functional properties. The task is to determine if they have the same
properties in their native environment in the brain and to unravel their roles
in neural signaling. To discover the functional roles of EAG channels,
experiments are designed to explore which brain cells normally contain the
products of the genes encoding these channels. Electrophysiological techniques
are then used to study their properties in native cells, and their role in
shaping neuronal signals. Previous investigations in the applicant's laboratory
have shown that several EAG gene products are particularly prominent in neurons
in the cerebral cortex, and their unique distributions suggest that EAG channels
play specific roles in particular cortical circuits. This project will test the
hypothesis that EAG channels have crucial functions in regulating the state of
excitability of specific cortical neurons, including determining whether or not
sensory information enters the cerebral cortex and hence in modulating states of
consciousness. This study will contribute to the unraveling of the function of
novel K+ channel genes and advance our understanding of the mechanisms by which
the brain processes information. This study will contribute to the development
of methods to discover the roles of newly found genes, and multidisciplinary
training to a graduate student.

