* 0314588
* Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Dewey Holten, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

The ultimate goal of this research is to achieve a unified molecular level
understanding of the photochemical processes in the bacterial photosynthetic
reaction center, which is a pigment-protein complex found in photosynthetic
bacteria. Plants have similar photosynthetic machinery. All these reaction
centers have in common two quasi-symmetric branches of potential electron
carriers. In the bacterial reaction center, only one of them, the so-called
A-branch, is utilized for storing the energy of (sun)light -accomplished by
trans-membrane photo-induced electron transport on the A branch. In the native
reaction center, the B-branch is inactive. The previous work in this project has
shown that under certain unique conditions, the B-branch cofactors can be
induced to support full trans-membrane electron transfer. The yield is high
enough that detailed explorations of electron transfer along the entire normally
inactive B-branch of reaction center cofactors are now possible. Such studies
are the basis of this project. This research will test current models and
exploit insights gained from previous studies of the active-branch (A-branch)
processes and in doing so elucidate mechanistic underpinnings of electron
transfer in the RC as a unified whole. From a more global perspective, this
project is aimed at making the normally inactive B-branch cofactor chain fully
accessible in a robust manner for a variety of next-generation studies. This
work will open up new avenues for exploring electronic and/or conformational
changes, proton movement and other similar processes that are thought to be
functionally significant in association with the QA/QB two-electron gate
function of the two quinones (Qs) in the reaction center. These goals will be
pursued via static and time-resolved (femtoseconds to seconds) spectroscopic
studies of RC mutants with multiple amino acid changes that rationally
manipulate the properties of the cofactors and the rates and yields of the
charge separation and recombination processes. This research is not only central
to understanding the primary photochemical events in the bacterial RC, but also
will provide guideposts for research being conducted on plant photosystems I and
II.

Broader Impact: Understanding the molecular-level mechanisms of the processes in
the photosynthetic RC lays a foundation for synthetic systems for solar-energy
harvesting/conversion, thereby addressing a national need for next generation
renewable energy sources. Undergraduate and graduate students will participate
in this research. The integration of research ideas into teaching and
educational development will focus on two projects. (1) A web-based tutorial
will be developed. It will be tailored for undergraduate or high school
students, on the general topic "Why is grass green and blood red?" (2) Two
undergraduate physical-chemistry laboratory experiments at Washington University
will be extensively upgraded to exploit the spectroscopy of chlorophyll and
related chromophores, and the energy/electron transfer processes critical to
photosynthesis, to teach molecular electronic spectroscopy and kinetics from
new, application-oriented perspectives. Finally, a broad, science-based lecture
on general and fundamental aspects of photosynthesis with links to interests in
gardening will be developed as a proposed part of an adult education outreach
program at the Missouri Botanical Garden. Despite the undeniable relevance of
photosynthesis, the program does not have such a lecture/education component at
present. In these ways we will endeavor to disseminate an understanding of
photosynthesis, its relation to the earth's habitat, and to solar energy
research to a broad spectrum of individuals.