* 0314002
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regional Variation in Late Upper Paleolithic Human Postcrania
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Erik Trinkaus, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,790.00

Upper Paleolithic early modern humans from Europe exhibit chronological trends
in postcranial biomechanical features. These trends include a modest increase in
upper limb robusticity and a decrease in antero-posterior lower limb strength,
despite stasis in femoral overall strength. This variation is seemingly related
to behavioral changes that indicate resource intensification and decreased
mobility. It is unknown whether these are regional or global trends due to a
shortage of fossil material and the low level of paleobiological analysis of
modern human remains from geographical areas outside of Europe. As such, the
goal of this research is the analysis of postcranial robusticity, combining
existing European data with that available for or to be generated from non-
European Late Upper Paleolithic fossil material. The non-European samples at the
focus of this analysis include Tam Hang, a previously unstudied population from
southeast Asia; Wadi Halfa, Jebel Sahaba, Taforalt, Afalou, Tushka and Esna from
north Africa; and Nahal Ein Gev, Neve David and Ohalo 2 from Israel. Robusticity
will be analyzed for the upper and lower limbs of these samples using diaphyseal
cross-sectional biomechanical properties. Additional information about the size
and strength of the appendicular skeleton will supplement this robusticity data.
Supplemental methods will include analysis of muscularity (muscular hypertrophy
and levels of mechanical efficiency in bone-muscle lever systems) and articular
robusticity (joint size and shape). These traits will be used to perform a
functional and biomechanical analysis of the postcranial material from these
non-European samples, in the context of other better known regional samples, in
order to provide relative measures of robusticity and inferences regarding
biobehavioral variation in the Late Upper Paleolithic. The intellectual
significance of this research includes 1) biomechanical description and analysis
of previously unstudied populations of the Late Upper Paleolithic and 2) the
contribution of additional evidence of biobehavioral variation in late
Pleistocene humans. Given that the terminal Pleistocene is a period of dramatic
environmental changes associated with the Last Glacial Maximum (18 ky BP),
current evidence suggests shifts in subsistence-related behavior as well. This
research will expand the current perspective on modern humans of the Late Upper
Paleolithic and further address Late Pleistocene hunter-gatherer evolution and
expand the background to the emergence of food producing societies and the
profound cultural and biological changes associated with such changes in
subsistence. The broader impacts of this study include international
collaboration with researchers from Europe (London, UK, Paris, France, Rome,
Italy), Africa (Cape Town, South Africa) and Asia (Tel Aviv, Israel, Kyoto,
Japan). Additionally, it will address a region of the world that is
underrepresented and poorly understood in the late Pleistocene and offer further
information about human evolution in southeast Asia.