* 0314026
* Arabidopsis 2010 Project:  Collaborative Research:  A Functional Genomics Approach to N-Terminal Modifying Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Ben Dunn, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2007
* USD 443,373.00

This 2010 project will determine the specificity and mechanisms of N-terminal
modifications of the Arabidopsis proteome. The N-terminal modification enzymes
(NTMEs), which include 28 peptidases and 11 transferases, will be studied. NTMEs
control important fundamental aspects of protein maturation, activation or
regulation, degradation, and potentially of plant gene regulation. State-of-the-
art methods from plant genetics, cell biology and both basic and high throughput
biochemistry are integrated in this program to transition the NTME field from
"activity by homology" to one grounded in solid biochemistry. The project will
address the following questions: (1) Do Arabidopsis NTME proteins have enzymatic
activities? (2) What are the specificities of NTME enzymes as determined by
combinatorial peptide libraries? (3) When and where do NTME RNAs and proteins
accumulate? (4) Do NTME proteins act co- or post-translationally? (5) What are
the impacts of NTME T-DNA knock-out mutants? Collectively, these data will
establish the specificity and location of each NTME and thereby establish a set
of rules for the proteome, which will predict the fate of a protein by its
subcellular localization and the primary sequence of its N-terminus.

Broader Impacts: This project will: (1) produce and distribute antisera to 39
NTME proteins, (2) develop methods to express and assay plant NTMEs, (3)
synthesize novel combinatorial peptide libraries for determining the extended
specificities of NTMEs, and (4) produce a collection of homozygous single and
double mutants for NTMEs. The interactive NTME web site
(http://www.cepceb.ucr.edu/members/walling/2010_NTMEs) will provide a list of
the Arabidopsis NTME genes, NTME assays, links to the peptidase and transferase
research communities, and mechanisms to access the resources developed by this
project. The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) will distribute
mutants generated in this project. In addition to establishing the first
biochemical rules to predict the fate of a protein in a subcellular compartment,
this program provides a unique opportunity to train undergraduates, graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in a newly emerging field of N-terminal
modifying enzymes in plants.