* 0314157
* SGER:  Feasibility of High Gradient Magnetic Implants for Targeted Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Armin Ebner, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 72,499.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: SGER: Feasibility of
High Gradient Magnetic Implants for Targeted Drug Delivery&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: CTS-0314157&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: James
Ritter&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research
is to incorporate magnetic particles into drug carriers and direct the drug to a
specific site using a magnetic field. This project will build on the PI's
expertise in high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) concepts to determine the
feasibility of a using magnetically enhanced targeted drug delivery as a viable
therapeutic tool. Although a general phenomenological theory to describe the
retention of a ferrofluid drop in a flowing stream has been developed, no
theoretical work has been doen to explore the limitations of the use of magnetic
fields for targeted drug delivery. The first objective is to determine
theoretically the feasibility and limitations of using ferromagnetic wires to
locally enhance the force on a drug-containing nanoparticle as it travels
through the artery. Simulations over a wide range of conditions will be
explored. Parameters of interest include wire magnetic properties, wire
diameter, fluid velocity, and blood viscosity. In terms of the broader impacts,
this concept has the potential to target drugs to specific locations, thus
reducing overall dosage and reducing potential side effects. The traditional
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students will also be carried out. The
novelty of this project is to determine the feasibility of using electrically-
generated magnetic fields for directing drug delivery. If successful, the
project may lead to a new technique for effectively delivering increased
con.centrations of drugs for use in the treatment of cancer, blood clots, and
other medical conditions&lt;br/&gt;