* 0315645
* Collaborative Research: The Consequences of Phage-Bacteria Coevolution in Aquatic Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Jennifer Martiny, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 249,290.00

Marine viruses are extremely abundant and diverse. Studies suggest these viruses
are important in regulating microbial abundance and diversity and thus may
influence nutrient cycling in marine ecosystems. Despite their ecological
importance, little is known about the population biology of marine viruses or
how these viruses interact with their hosts. This project is examining the
coevolution of bacteria and their viruses (phage) in diverse communities and the
effect phage/bacteria interactions have on overall bacterial mortality rates.
The research is employing a two-pronged approach that will bridge laboratory
microcosms with natural communities of marine cyanobacteria and cyanophage.
First, natural isolates of cyanobacteria (Synechococcus spp.) and cyanophages
are being used to examine whether Synechococcus and cyanophage undergo
coevolution, whether phosphate availability changes the outcome of these
interactions, and the consequences of these interactions on host mortality.
Second, the hypotheses generated in laboratory experiments are being tested in
natural marine communities. Synechococcus and cyanophage strains are being
isolated from Rhode Island coastal waters over the course of two years. This
time series are being used to detect if coevolution is occurring and how it
affects the genotypic and phenotypic diversity of cyanobacteria and cyanophages
in the natural environment. This project is the first to test whether
cyanobacteria and cyanophage undergo coevolution and whether coevolution is
likely to occur on a time scale important to their population dynamics.
Furthermore, the experiments are examining the consequences of viruses on marine
host populations from a population biology perspective, whereas previous studies
have examined only aggregate measures of phage-caused mortality.