* 0315123
* Regulation of Zebrafish Germ Layer Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* David Kimelman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 09/30/2008
* USD 360,000.00

0315123&lt;br/&gt;Kimelman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical step in the early
development of the vertebrate embryo is the establishment of the three principle
germ layers. While work from many laboratories has demonstrated that Nodal
intercellular signals are essential for specifying where in the embryo the
mesoderm and endoderm will form, a critical question remains: what determines
where Nodal signaling occurs? This laboratory has shown that in zebrafish, the
Yolk Syncytial Layer (YSL) is a source of an unknown signal that activates the
expression of the two gastrula-stage nodals, squint (sqt) and cyclops, in the
so-called marginal region of the embryo where the mesoderm and endoderm forms.
The aim of this proposal is to understand how the YSL induces the marginal
expression of sqt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two general directions will be pursued.
A fragment of genomic DNA that directs the marginal expression of sqt has been
isolated, and deletion analysis has defined a 300 bp region that is necessary
for this expression. In the first two aims, the essential transcription factor
that regulates this element will be determined. The third aim will initially
determine which intercellular signaling pathway regulates sqt expression, and
then will define the specific factor secreted by the
YSL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies proposed here will provide a basic
mechanistic understanding of the process that regulates germ layer formation in
the vertebrate embryo. While several studies have elucidated how nodal
expression is regulated by a localized transcription factor in the frog Xenopus
laevis, other vertebrates such as zebrafish instead use intercellular signaling
to regulate the nodals. Thus these studies will provide novel insight into the
mechanism of germ layer patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate students
will be trained during the course of this project, as will several
undergraduates. Particular emphasis will be placed on training underrepresented
minority undergraduates who are recruited to the lab through Dr. Kimelman's
participation in the STAR and BRIDGES4 programs at the U.W. Dr. Kimelman will
provide services to the larger scientific community through serving on the
editorial boards of Cell, Developmental Cell, Developmental Biology, as a
reviewer for many journals, as a frequent review of NSF proposals, as a member
of the Faculty of 1000, and through the writing of reviewer articles. Dr.
Kimelman also serves as the director of a large training grant at the U.W.,
which provides additional training (through monthly meetings and an annual
retreat) for 33 graduate students each year.&lt;br/&gt;