* 0315215
* Vibrationally Driven and Controlled Bimolecular Reactions in Gases and Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* F. Fleming Crim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 642,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Crim will continue and extend his research on
the role played by vibrational excitation on chemical reactions in both gases
and liquids. The goal is to study the same reactions of vibrationally excited
molecules in gases, where they react in single, isolated encounters, and in
liquids, where molecules interact almost continuously. Previous work on mode-
and bond-selected reactions in the gas phase will be expanded to include new
vibrationally excited molecules and to new reaction partners. The experiments in
liquids start with a thermal reaction to which is added a vibrational excitation
to accelerate the reaction and alter its course. For gases the select
vibrational excitation will be accomplished by laser pulses of nanosecond
duration, while femtosecond pulse excitation will be employed for the liquid
studies. This research will contribute to a unified fundamental understanding of
chemical reaction processes in gases and liquids. Graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as post-doctoral research associates will participate in these
studies. They will acquire skills and experience that will prepare them for
advanced studies or entry into the scientific/technological workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;