* 0315883
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Muscle fiber size as a determinant of metabolic design
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Bruce Locke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 295,800.00

&lt;br/&gt; Most cells are small, with dimensions &lt;100mm along the shortest
axis. Small size promotes a high surface area to volume ratio and short
intracellular diffusion distances, both of which are thought to be necessary
design features of cells. However, cells of some organisms are nearly 10-fold
larger than the norm. In some crustaceans, muscle fibers from juvenile animals
have "normal" dimensions (&lt;100mm), but as the animals grow, some of these
fibers may exceed 600mm. Attaining such a large size while maintaining function
should be difficult or impossible, which raises the question: What are the rules
and tradeoffs that govern cell size? &lt;br/&gt;The effects of developmental
increases in cell size will be examined in isolated fast-twitch muscle fibers of
the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus. Size-associated changes in muscle structure,
metabolism, and contraction will be examined using methods that include electron
microscopy, chemical assays, nuclear magnetic resonance and polarographic
measurements of oxygen consumption. In addition, a reaction-diffusion
mathematical model will be generated to aid interpretation of experimental data.
This study constitutes a novel view of cellular energetics that is broadly
applicable. Once the rules are established for an extreme model system, the
approach can be applied to traditional models. This will be particularly useful
for studying the impact of energetic challenges like hypoxia, exercise regimes
and developmental processes, all of which are inherently linked to cell size.
&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaboration of biologists and chemical engineers. The
lead institution (UNCW) emphasizes undergraduate education, and undergraduate
students will work alongside graduate students and the PIs. The research
environment at the lead institution will be enhanced by the project's multi-
disciplinary approach, and students will benefit from facilities and expertise
at the collaborating institution. At the collaborating institution (FSU), the
work will also involve training of undergraduate and graduate students.
Mathematical modeling will form the basis for the dissertation of at least one
graduate student, and undergraduate participation will be sought for all phases
of the project. &lt;br/&gt;