* 0315812
* Collaborative Research: Maricopa Engineering Transition Scholars (METS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Bassam Matar, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2007
* USD 239,619.00

The METS project-Maricopa Engineering Transition Scholars-is a two-year pilot
collaboration between Arizona State University (ASU) and Maricopa County
Community College District (MCCD) to forge an integrated learning system that
enrolls, retains, and graduates women and underrepresented minorities in
engineering degree programs. The project is designed to 1) create an interest in
engineering among students at the community colleges; 2) help students to
transfer smoothly from a community college &lt;br/&gt;in MCCD to a four-year
engineering degree program at ASU; and 3) assist the students in persisting to
earn an undergraduate degree in engineering. The lead institution is the College
of Engineering and Applied Sciences at ASU. Four of MCCD's 10 institutions are
participating: Chandler-Gilbert, Estrella Mountain, Glendale, and Mesa.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The target population is approximately 10,000 students
enrolled in MCCD courses in calculus/pre-calculus, biology, chemistry, physics,
and geology. The project aims to increase by 30% the number of women and
underrepresented minorities who transfer into CEAS engineering programs and to
retain 75% of those students in the first year and to graduation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research-grounded project activities were designed based on
analysis of best practices piloted over many years at both MCCD and ASU. Three
especially innovative features of METS are 1) research to determine which
interventions and support programs are the most effective for students
transitioning from a community college to a university engineering program 2)
tactics to strengthen and institutionalize new collaborations between MCCD and
ASU and 3) modules of Web-accessible problem-centered learning
&lt;br/&gt;activities designed to interest community college students in
engineering (especially women and underrepresented minority students) and fill
the curricular gap that exists in hands-on engineering courses at the two-year
level. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of METS is that it will
yield data to enlarge the research understanding of 1) which interventions are
most effective in recruiting and retaining women and minority students in
engineering programs and 2) the extent to which college/university
collaborations impact those efforts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of METS will occur in 1) developing a model of collaboration for STEM
recruitment/retention between community colleges and universities, a model that
can be replicated and adapted nationwide by educational institutions; and 2)
disseminating Web-accessible, problem-centered engineering modules tailored to
the cultural needs and learning styles of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;