* 0315487
* Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Andrew Metters, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This action supports the purchase of a BioScope Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)
from Veeco Instruments. With a specially designed stage that allows for AFM
imaging alone, optical characterization alone, or combined AFM and optical
characterization, this instrument will be used to study the nanoscale structural
properties of ultrathin interfacial layers of soft materials in air and liquid
media and determine how they respond to environmental stimuli. This instrument
will also be used in combination with optical spectroscopy techniques to study
dynamic adsorption events at materials surfaces. A set of projects that will
benefit from the capabilities of this instrument include efforts on bioactive
nanoparticle-surface interactions; environmentally responsive, surface confined
polymer layers; hybrid polymer layers; biomimetic polymer matrices for guided
tissue regeneration; and bacterial cell adhesion to antimicrobial polymer films
and luminescent, antibody-linked nanoparticles. These projects impact important
scientific areas such as the development of new biomaterials; nano-devices such
as molecular valves and switches; effective therapies for treating chronic, non-
healing wounds and impaired wound healing; antimicrobial food packaging; and
sensors for bacterial pathogens.

The AFM instrument will be housed in the Surface Characterization Laboratory,
located in the Department of Chemical Engineering. This facility is used by
post-doctoral researchers and graduate and undergraduate students from Chemical
Engineering, Bioengineering, Chemistry, Environmental Engineering and Materials
Science & Engineering. A new group from Food Science will add to the list of
researchers who benefit from the interdisciplinary training environment that
this facility provides. The AFM instrument and facility will be available to
faculty and students from nearby non-PhD granting colleges that have an
association with Clemson's Department of Chemical Engineering through Research
Exploration programs. The AFM will also help to grow the Surface
Characterization Laboratory into a state-of-the-art facility in the area of
advanced materials research, which is a core research theme of Clemson
University.

