* 0315476
* Acquisition of a Scanning Hall Probe Microscope for Nanomagnetics Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Joseph Ross, Jr., Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 170,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a Scanning Hall Probe Microscope (SHPM)
system, for the quantitative, noninvasive measurement of surface magnetic fields
at the nanometer length scale. This recently developed robust instrument is a
low temperature/room temperature SHPM that can be operated simultaneously in
either the SHPM and STM modes or the SHPM and AFM modes to provide complementary
information. This instrument is ideally suited for the study of magnetic
nano/micro structures: 1) it can operate in high magnetic fields (easily to
above 7 Tesla); 2) it has high field and spatial resolution (about 50
nanometers); 3) it does not require automatically smooth, oxide free surfaces.
It will consist of a room temperature head for use with larger samples, a low
temperature head with superconducting solenoid for operation in the temperature
range 1.5-300 K at fields up to 8 Tesla, and one controller to operate the two
heads. The room temperature head will handle much larger samples and can be
operated in air or a controlled atmosphere. This configuration is well suited
for training personnel in the SHPM techniques. This project will support
research on nanomagnets and magnetic nano/microstructures at Texas A&amp;M
University including the study of nanomagnets, single magnetic molecules, hybrid
magnetic devices and magnetic traps to manipulate biological specimens.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is an active interdisciplinary materials research
program at Texas A&amp;M University. Approximately 40 students (undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral) with the principle users will benefit in their
research in the design of new Single Molecule Magnets (SMMs), thin films and
composite materials of SMM's. In addition to providing new research capability,
this instrument serves to train postdoctoral students, graduate students,
undergraduate students and high school teachers and their students in the
fundamental principles of nanomagnets and scanning probe microscopies.
Approximately 20% of the instrument operating time will be dedicated to
education and training. Students having access to this instrument will learn
about magnetic fields and magnetic nanostructures. The instrument will be
integrated into the interdisciplinary materials science graduate laboratory
course, and special research projects for undergraduates and gifted high school
students. In particular, a large number of University Honors Fellows (advanced
undergraduates undertaking an Honors research thesis) and NASA Sharp
participants (gifted minority high school students) will benefit from having
access to this opportunity over the lifetime of the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;