* 0315925
* DNA-Templated Assembly of Multichromophore Aggregates and Nanoparticle Wires
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Bruce Armitage, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research involves the use of the minor groove of
DNA as a template for the synthesis of helical assemblies. Helical aggregates of
cyanines will be assembled, leading to right-handed helical morphology and
materials with interesting optical properties. Neutral substituents on the dye
will afford blue-shifted absorption spectra and quenched fluorescence within the
aggregate while cationic substitution will yield aggregates with red-shifted
absorption spectra and intense fluorescence. The aggregate structures will be
characterized by optical and high-resolution NMR spectroscopies. Minor groove
binding ligands will also be used to noncovalently link gold nanoparticles to
DNA. By using repetitive DNA sequences, multiple nanoparticles will be assembled
in a linear fashion along the DNA, effectively creating a 1-D array, or wire.
Silver deposition can be used to form a continuous wire of silver metal along
the DNA-gold template.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Bruce A.
Armitage of the Department of Chemistry at Carnegie Mellon University. Dr.
Armitage will focus his work on using DNA as a scaffold for the synthesis of
helical assemblies of organic dyes and inorganic nanoparticles. The resultant
materials could have nonlinear optical properties or afford conductive wires,
respectively. The project also provides an excellent venue for the
interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students and the
project has been very successful at including underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;