* 0315760
* Acquisition of an Infrared Ellipsometer for Materials Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Fernando Ponce, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 01/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of an infrared spectroscopic
ellipsometer for materials research and student training at Arizona State
University. The instrument will be equipped with a cryostat attachment allowing
variable temperature operation. Such capability is extremely rare: the new
instrument will be the first of its kind manufactured in the United States. A
spectroscopic ellipsometer measures the real and imaginary parts of a material's
index of refraction as a function of wavelength. In the infrared range of the
spectrum, the dominant optical excitations are phonons (vibrations), plasmons
(collective electronic oscillations) in doped materials, and band-to-band
electronic excitations in narrow gap semiconductors. Accordingly, the new
ellipsometer will play a key role in the characterization of oxides,
ferroelectric materials, and semiconductors, areas of active research at Arizona
State University and of great interest to industrial partners. Spectroscopic
ellipsometry has significant advantages over light transmission or reflection
experiments. The latter measure a single quantity at each wavelength (the
intensity of the transmitted or reflected light), whereas ellipsometry measures
the change in polarization of the light reflected at a surface. Because this
change is characterized by an amplitude ratio and a phase shift (related to the
reflection coefficients for light polarized in the plane and perpendicular to
the plane of incidence),&lt;br/&gt;ellipsometry is highly accurate and
reproducible, even for low light levels. In addition, it requires no reference
sample, is less affected by sample scattering of light, and can be used to
determine absolute values for the optical constants without independent
thickness measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to have a
broad societal impact. One of its unique aspects will be the synergistic
collaboration between ASU and industrial collaborators, who play a key role in
the training of ASU personnel. Special emphasis will be placed on fostering
scientific education. Funds are requested to support the operation of the
instrument during the first year, and these funds will be expended primarily for
the training of students. Industrial collaborators will play a key role in these
activities, supervising students, providing samples, and teaching short courses
on ellipsometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;