* 0315968
* Molecular and Functional Characterization of an Ancient Histocompatibility System
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Luis Cadavid, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 508,809.00

Sessile, colonial invertebrates often encounter members of their own species as
they grow on hard surfaces. The nature and outcomes of such encounters are
mediated by highly discriminatory recognition systems. In general, close
relatives fuse whereas unrelated colonies reject. These histocompatibility
phenomena have been unambiguously observed in all major colonial invertebrate
groups, and have attracted the attention of various biological disciplines. In
particular, they are often claimed to reflect the evolutionary origins of the
vertebrate immune system, and have played a prominent role in evolutionary
theory and ecology as a paradigm of competitive interactions within species.
Despite the prevalence of histocompatibility and their putative biological
importance, the responsible genes and molecules have not been identified in any
colonial invertebrate. Histocompatibility in the colonial hydroid Hydractinia
symbiolongicarpus (Cnidaria; Hydrozoa) is better understood than in perhaps any
other colonial invertebrate. The response results from a dose-dependent
interaction of at least two gene loci encoded in a single chromosomal interval.
This project aims to identify and functionally characterize the
histocompatibility genes in Hydractinia. Specifically, genetic markers located
at close proximity to the target genes will be used to identify the relevant
genomic segment from a Hydractinia DNA library. Plausible candidate
histocompatibility genes will be identified by sequencing the entire segment.
Candidate genes will be subsequently knocked-out in vivo to test their role in
histocompatibility responses. Characterization of the invertebrate
histocompatibility molecules will prove instrumental for understanding, at its
most basic level, the nature of competitive interactions amongst conspecifics.
Furthermore, it will settle the long-standing debate on the evolutionary
relationship between vertebrate immunity and invertebrate histocompatibility.
The project will integrate research and education by developing new curricula,
providing research opportunities for undergraduates, and recruiting and training
underrepresented groups in science.