* 0315898
* Collaborative Biodiversity Study of Chironomidae at a LTER Site
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Leonard Ferrington Jr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 01/31/2007
* USD 149,838.00

The National Science Foundation administers a program for Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) to address ecological research over broad time scales
(http://www.lternet.edu/). Although highly successful, research in some areas is
hindered by the sheer number of undescribed species and poorly known species in
certain ecological settings. In aquatic ecosystems this is particularly the case
with species of two-winged flies (Diptera) of the family Chironomidae that
predominate in most habitats. Although represented in North America by
approximately 1,300 described species, it has been estimated that 50% or less of
the North American fauna has been discovered and formally described. LTER sites
are selected based upon their representativeness of particular ecological
settings and usually are among the most pristine areas available for research.
Consequently, LTER sites can have a high incidence of undescribed species. This
project is a collaboration among Leonard Ferrington (University of Minnesota),
Martin Berg (Loyola University) and Barb Hayford (Wayne State College) that
focuses on the of biodiversity of Chironomidae at the North Temperate Lakes Long
Term Ecological Research site (NTL LTER) in Wisconsin. Our preliminary research
at the NTL LTER has already revealed 110 species of Chironomidae, including a
significant number of undescribed species. Our goal is to collect and describe
species from a wide array of aquatic habitats contained within the LTER
(http://www.lternet.edu/sites/ntl/) and to document the basic conditions in
which the species occur. The scope of the project includes two field seasons and
one winter. It is expected that at least 35-50 new species or life-stage
associations will be discovered and described. In addition, specimens will be
provided to colleagues presently describing species as part of other research
projects and as many as 20-25 additional species will be described. Descriptions
of these species will provide the taxonomic foundation for more detailed
ecological research at the LTER.&lt;br/&gt;Research products of this project are
(1) species descriptions, (2) keys and illustrated guides for identification of
adults, pupae, and larvae, (3) collation of environmental data recorded with
field collections, (4) electronically accessible data files searchable by
species and habitat, and (5) home pages linked to the home pages of the NTL
LTER. The keys will stimulate broader investigations of Chironomidae in aquatic
ecology/pollution studies and facilitate better evaluations of Chironomidae in
aquatic research at the LTER. To be of use to non-research-based regulatory
agencies the results of this research must be widely disseminated. Consequently,
other project products include development of electronic information products,
including non-technical home pages, web-based keys and interactive data sets.
Interactive keys will reside on the Internet, and standard keys for publication
in journal format for adults and pupae will be completed. This research will
provide benefits to local, state and federal agencies responsible for water
quality management and/or environmental conservation by making data available
through interactive, searchable databases in formats useful for water quality
managers and policy-makers at state and federal levels.&lt;br/&gt;