* 0315393
* Functional Genomic Approach to Signal Transduction and Innate Immunity in Shrimp
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Gregory Warr, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 405,000.00

This research is focused on understanding the immune response of a crustacean,
the marine shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei to virus infections. Crustacea are
essential components of the marine environment and marine shrimp are of
commercial significance, especially since these animals are widely aquacultured.
These animals are highly susceptible to numerous viruses, including the Taura
Syndrome Virus and White Spot Syndrome Virus, and these have devastating impacts
on aquaculture and possible unknown consequences for the health of the marine
environment. This research addresses the hypothesis that 2 shrimp molecules
(STAT and IkK, which are families of immune function proteins) are components of
the molecular machinery by which shrimp recognize and respond to viral
infection. There are two Specific Aims. 1) To reduce, by RNA interference
methods, the expression of STAT and IkK, and establish the effect of this
reduced expression on shrimp resistance to viral infection. 2) To identify the
genes regulated by STAT and IkK that are important in viral immunity.
"Functional genomics" approaches will be employed, using DNA microarrays to
measure the levels of expression of approximately 3,000 shrimp genes
simultaneously. Bioinformatic analyses of the resulting data will identify genes
participating in the host response to viral infection, and the role of STAT and
IkK.

This research will increase our understanding of marine invertebrate immunity,
and assist in the management of marine ecosystems and aquaculture resources. The
broader impacts of this work include: 1) the dissemination of information on
marine organisms and the marine environment to professionals and the public,
through coordination with the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources and
2) the education and training of graduate students who will work on the project.
In addition, through participation in summer research exposure programs,
undergraduate students will have the opportunity to work on this project and to
gain experience in research.



