* 0315983
* Determinants of a Cytoplasmic Membrane Energy Transduction System
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Raymond Larsen, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The TonB and TolA systems of Gram-negative bacteria represent a unique set of
proteins that harvest the potential energy of the cytoplasmic membrane
electrochemical gradient, package it, and deliver it to a distant location.
These systems support the efficient harvesting of the essential nutrient iron
(via TonB) and maintain the integrity of the principle bacterial defensive
barrier - the outer membrane (via TolA). This project focuses on how energy is
harvested and packaged. In particular, the approach exploits the ability of
certain components from one system to function in the other system. Because this
molecular "cross-talk" is imperfect, it provides a means to identify the common
features that harvest energy and to distinguish unique features through which
energy is transmitted. By mixing and matching specific sections of these
proteins and evaluating the function and efficiency of such chimeras, this study
will identify the specific interactions that mediate energy acquisition and
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms for this type of energy
transduction are of fundamental importance in biological systems, and dissection
of the problem at the molecular level may establish far-reaching paradigms. The
current work emphasizes the harvest and packaging aspect of these systems, with
an added benefit of establishing a foundation for examining the delivery
function of the system. This is particularly important for the TolA system, the
study of which has suffered from the lack of adequate tools. From a practical
standpoint, the outer membrane is a crucial structure - forming the principle
interface between bacterium and environment. How this structure is energized is
relevant to disciplines ranging from environmental sciences to pathogenesis. As
systems that energize this defensive barrier, the TonB and TolA systems present
novel potential targets for therapeutic agents, and may prove of consequence in
biotechnology settings where transport across this barrier is an issue. The
project will involve training graduate and undergraduate students
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;