* 0315633
* Acquisition of a High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope for the University of Michigan Electron Microbeam Analysis Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* David Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 140,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a high resolution
Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) for the University of Michigan Electron
Microbeam Analysis Laboratory (EMAL). High-resolution electron microscopy (HREM)
has become a critical technique in the characterization of nanostructured
materials at the University of Michigan (U of M). EMAL equipment is available to
all research groups on campus, outside university researchers and to industry.
This instrument will become the primary HREM for materials research in EMAL. In
the past 15 years, over 50 research groups, from within the U of M, other
universities and industry, have used the existing, outdated electron microscope.
Through this usage, their research has resulted in more than 1150 publications
at the U of M, and more than 350 graduate students at the U of M have used the
old equipment for a major portion of their thesis research. The new instrument
will provide essential capabilities to the University's research programs,
attract new research programs, and allow more advanced training of graduate
students in HREM. The new HREM will be an essential part of numerous materials
research programs across campus, involving 14 faculty from several departments
including Materials Science and Engineering, Nuclear Engineering and
Radiological Sciences, Chemical Engineering, Physics and Geological Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new high resolution electron microscope (HREM) will
allow the research community to more effectively pursue their studies of
materials at the nanoscale, while also promoting the teaching, training and
learning of the graduate and undergraduate students. About 40 students and post-
docs actively use HREM in their research. Most faculty, who use the HREM have
undergraduate students in their research groups actively working on
characterization of materials. Summer high school interns are also able to
participate in research and laboratory management. The new instrument will be
used in summer research projects for minority high school students and young
women. The new instrument will be available to any researcher on campus who
needs these new capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;