* 0315461
* Application of Dynamic Spectroscopic Methods to the Rheo-Optical Characterization of Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Rabolt, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 460,000.00

The intellectual merit of this work is three-fold: 1) it will provide molecular
information on structural reorientation and reorganization in polymers on a time
scale not previously available from any other characterization technique; 2) it
will advance our understanding of the fundamental molecular mechanism of polymer
elastic and inelastic deformation and fracture; and, 3) it will provide a
correlation between polymer chemical architecture and deformation properties
that can be used as a template for engineering materials with enhanced
properties. In addition, the knowledge from this study will be transferable to
other "soft" materials areas including bio-inspired and bio-derived materials,
many of which are used in cell scaffold and tissue engineering applications.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research activities extends to the
students and postdoctoral fellows that will be trained to use state-of-the-art
spectroscopic instruments to obtain time-resolved information on film drawing
and fracture that will lead to an understanding of the physics associated with
polymer deformation. From a more practical perspective, the use of most films in
commercial processes from microelectronics to food packaging involves film
orientation to produce improved mechanical and electronic properties. An
understanding of the correlation between structure development, processing
history and properties would provide a template by which "value" can be added to
commodity materials through advanced processing techniques, an impact that would
be pervasive across many industrial sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;