* 0315361
* Peptide Secondary Structure: Folding, Mechanisms, Rates and Optimization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Niels Andersen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 390,000.00

Protein folding and design continue to be extremely active areas of research and
both rely to a significant extent on understanding the factors that control the
stability and folding rates of secondary structure elements (particularly alpha-
helices and beta-hairpins). The increasing evidence for secondary (and other
local) structure in the unfolded states of proteins and for the biological
significance of poorly folded proteins makes an understanding of secondary
structuring more important than it earlier appeared. Furthermore, determining
the time constants for the formation of different elements of local and
secondary structure will indicate whether these structuring transitions are pre-
equilibrium processes relative to collapse in Diffusion-Collision models of
protein folding. This proposal experimentally addresses the factors that control
the stability and folding rates of protein secondary structure elements
(particularly alpha-helices and beta-hairpins). The major goals of the proposed
research are: 1) to define the timescales of helix nucleation (and possibly
helix propagation), beta-turn/beta-hairpin formation, and loop searches that
produce local hydrophobic clusters, 2) to establish the individual contributions
of local sequence strings to secondary structure formation and folding
cooperativity, and 3) the quantitation of free energy contributions from
specific interactions that lead to stable isolated secondary structure elements.
Results from the last two research topics will be used to parameterize an
algorithm for predicting the structural features of unfolded protein states. New
systems and methods will be used to answer important questions in helix/coil
transition theory - 1) Is alanine uniquely favorable for helix stabilization;
and if so, why and in which contexts? 2) How is the heterogeneity of helical
ensembles effected by: a) hydrophobic, backbone-desolvating residues, and b)
end-capping interactions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Niels H. Andersen, of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Washington, is carrying out
fundamental studies designed to elucidate the details of protein folding. The
prediction of protein structure and function purely from the amino acid sequence
has gained a practical significance with the availability of protein sequences
from the numerous genome projects that have been completed. An atomic level
understanding of folding mechanisms will greatly facilitate both protein
structure prediction and design, essential for both the a priori design of
artificial systems with protein-like folding or functional properties and for
re-engineering natural systems. The insight gained from a better understanding
of protein structural stability could also prove useful in stabilizing the
native state or improving the folding efficiency of proteins which in their
excited or misfolded states are likely to be amyloidogenic.