* 0315831
* Spontaneous Activity in Embryonic Mouse Hindbrain Motor Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Martha Bosma, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 09/30/2006
* USD 370,712.00

&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms and roles of spontaneous electrical
activity in brain development is key to overall understanding of how connections
among individual nerve cells are created. These connections are required for the
correct functioning of the adult brain. The hindbrain contains several
populations of motor neurons that control muscles serving critical functions in
speech, respiration, and facial expression. Dr. Bosma's laboratory has developed
methods for identifying specific hindbrain motor neurons in the early mouse
embryo, and is the first to record spontaneous activity from these identified
soma during the developmental stages when spontaneous activity first appears.
The ability to characterize the onset, properties, and developmental functions
of these cells makes this an ideal preparation in which to understand the role
that spontaneous activity plays in establishing functional connections in the
central nervous system and in the peripheral musculature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the PI's laboratory has developed unique methods
to study spontaneous activity in this preparation, the PI has already
established collaborations with laboratories in the US and Europe that wish to
study these questions in chick and zebrafish hindbrain. Such collaborative
experiments will help advance the understanding of the evolution and genetics of
activity-dependent hindbrain development. Because the PI teaches undergraduate
courses in neurobiology and developmental neurobiology, the research efforts
will be easily integrated into undergraduate education. In addition to other
undergraduates in the lab, the PI has already sponsored three undergraduate
researchers to work on this project, including one currently in the lab who is
the first author on a published paper on this work. Two of these students won
the University of Washington's Franco Award for best undergraduate research
paper. The PI is also involved in educational outreach at the K-12 and community
college level. Basic ideas of brain function and development have been
incorporated into grades 1-4 hands-on classroom exercises, and the PI has
obtained funds to extend that outreach to disabled students in a local K-5
special education classroom. The PI sponsors a graduate student, whose salary is
included in this proposal, who is on leave from a local community college, where
she teaches biology. &lt;br/&gt;