* 0315927
* Biological Functions of the Src-Cas Protein Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Amy Bouton, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,999.00

Whether plants are resistant to pathogens depends on the genetic make-up of both
organisms. Pathogens produce effector proteins that manipulate the plant for the
pathogen's benefit. Plants produce resistance or R-proteins that recognize
effectors and induce defenses that restrict pathogen growth. Recent cloning of
genes encoding effectors and R-proteins enables mechanistic study of their
interactions by molecular and biochemical methods. This research focuses on
Arabidopsis thaliana plants and their bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae.
These model organisms offer a wealth of tools useful in answering fundamental
biological questions, such as: How do pathogens more successfully parasitize
plants by using effectors to manipulate them? How do R-proteins enable plants to
restrict pathogen growth by recognizing effectors and inducing defense
responses? Specifically, this research focuses on a protein of the plant (RIN4)
that is targeted by multiple bacterial effectors. One major focus is to
determine how targeting of RIN4 by bacterial effectors enhances the virulence
(or pathogenicity) of the bacteria. RIN4 also regulates the function of
R-proteins that respond to those effectors. A second major focus is to determine
how manipulation of RIN4, induced by effector proteins, elicits the activity of
R-proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important because little is
currently known about the interactions between pathogenic effectors and their
targets in plants. Fundamental understanding of these interactions will advance
understanding of how pathogens cause disease in plants and of how plants resist
pathogens. This information will ultimately contribute to the rational design of
superior crops by classical breeding efforts or by introduction of transgenes.
Understanding these processes at the molecular level will also enable rational
design of new chemicals to manage disease in crops. The significance of this
research extends beyond the interaction of pathogens with plants. Pathogen
encoded effectors similarly manipulate targets in animal hosts, and advances in
understanding of effector action in plants will lead to a better fundamental
understanding this process in all organisms. Students will be trained to conduct
research in this field.&lt;br/&gt;