* 0315373
* REVSYS: Revisionary Synthesis of the Holarctic Leafhopper Genus Erythroneura Fitch (Hemiptera, Cicadellidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Christopher Dietrich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

The leafhopper genus Erythroneura comprises 600 species worldwide, 487 of which
occur in North America. These insects are a major component of forest
biodiversity and are also important pests of horticultural crops, particularly
grapevine. The tremendous diversity of this genus has previously hindered
attempts to develop a comprehensive classification and identification guide for
Erythroneura species. The availability of several new labor-saving tools has now
rendered such a project feasible in terms of the time required and cost. The
specific goals of this 3-year project are: (1) compile a digital image archive
containing illustrations of all Erythroneura species and link it to an already
completed database of scientific names; (2) enter georeferenced collection
records for ca. 40,000 museum specimens of the genus, one record for each unique
collecting event/species combination, into the database; (3) compile a matrix of
anatomical features for Erythroneura species and analyze these data to estimate
the evolutionary relationships among species; (4) create interactive tools for
identifying species over the Web; (5) publish a color atlas and identification
guide for species. By incorporating various labor-saving tools, this project
will serve as a model for comprehensive and efficient classification of
hyperdiverse groups of organisms. The project will also facilitate study of the
evolution of host-plant associations in plant-feeding insects and the extent to
which specialization on particular plants has facilitated evolutionary
diversification in this group. Broader impacts of the project include: (1)
upgrading the infrastructure of the Illinois Natural History Survey to improve
the efficiency of revisionary studies and the accessibility of the products of
such studies to the scientific community and general public; (2) training of a
post-doctoral fellow from a developing country, studying a diverse but poorly
known insect group, in the use of advanced tools and methods in systematic
monography; (3) improvements in methods for identifying and tracking the spread
of agricultural pests and invasive species.