* 0315676
* Adaxial/Abaxial Pattern Formation in Maize
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Marja Timmermans, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 08/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

0315676 Timmermanns

Leaf shape varies dramatically among plant species, ranging from the needle
leaves of pine trees and the strap-like leaves of grasses to the broad lamina of
most eudicots. Also the arrangement and types of cells within the leaf can vary
between species, leading to adaptations to, for instance, protect against
predators or optimize the utilization of sunlight for photosynthesis. The
specification of adaxial/abaxial leaf polarity, i.e. the formation of distinct
upper and lower leaf surfaces, directs both the flattened outgrowth and the
patterning of leaves. Early surgical experiments suggested that a signal from
the undetermined growing tip of the plant, the shoot apical meristem, is
required to set up adaxial/abaxial polarity in the leaf. Recent genetic studies
have identified several genes required for the specification of adaxial or
abaxial cell identity in Arabidopsis leaves, and have led to the following
model. Adaxial and abaxial promoting factors are uniformly expressed throughout
newly initiated leaves. Polarity is established when transcripts of the HD-
ZIPIII family members are degraded on the abaxial side of the leaf via a
microRNA-directed cleavage reaction. In addition, these HD-ZIPIII proteins,
which contain a lipid-sterol-binding domain, become activated on the adaxial
side of the leaf in response to the meristem-born signal. This activation
results in the down-regulation of abaxial determinants such as the KANADI and
YABBY genes and in the specification of adaxial cell fate. In contrast, abaxial
cell identity results from the continued expression of the KANADI and YABBY
genes.

Members of the yabby and hd-zipIII gene families are also required for
adaxial/abaxial patterning in maize. However, the yabby genes are expressed on
the adaxial side of the maize leaf suggesting that these genes have distinct
functions in Arabidopsis and maize. Also, several recessive mutations that
abaxialize the leaf have been identified in maize, whereas the recessive
mutations in Arabidopsis adaxialize the leaf. This suggests either that
additional genes controlling adaxial/abaxial polarity remain to be described in
each species, or that aspects of adaxial/abaxial patterning are different in
monocots and dicots. Given the differences in monocot and dicot leaf initiation,
morphology and anatomy, it may be expected that the mechanisms underlying
adaxial/abaxial pattern formation have diverged between these two branches of
angiosperms. The goal of this proposal is to further investigate the mechanism
by which adaxial/abaxial polarity is established in the maize leaf. The specific
aims are: 1) To determine the genetic pathway(s) that underlies adaxial/abaxial
pattern formation in maize, 2) To characterize the rolled leaf1 (rld1) gene and
the microRNAs that may regulate rld1 expression(rld1 is a member of the hd-
zipIII gene family and like the Arabidopsis homologs, rld1 is required to
specify the adaxial domain of the maize leaf), and 3) To clone the
leafbladeless1 gene, which functions downstream of rld1 in the specification of
adaxial cell fate. This project will broaden our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the initiation and patterning of the maize leaf. The
comparative analysis of adaxial/abaxial axis specification in Arabidopsis and
maize may provide an understanding of how variations in the expression patterns
of just a few genes can contribute to the diversity of leaf shapes observed
among plant species. Such knowledge may ultimately facilitate the manipulation
of plant architecture, which has become increasingly more important for aspects
of crop yield such as shade tolerance in maize and insect resistance in cotton.
Moreover, this project will also make important educational contributions by
providing training for two graduate students, including one underrepresented
minority student. Also, during the course of this award, several high school and
undergraduate students will have to opportunity to participate in some of the
proposed experiments, exposing them to a variety of topics, including maize
genetics, plant genomics, and PCR genotyping of developmental mutants in plants.