* 0315192
* Collaborative Research:  Sophisticated Learning and Strategic Teaching in Repeated Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Teck Ho, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 128,516.00

Ho #0078853

Our research addresses how people and organizations learn from experience in
strategic situations like bargaining, coordinating joint actions (teamwork),
choosing prices and features for new products, bidding in auctions, etc. In
previous research we discovered a mathematical formula which explains how people
appear to learn from experience, but the numerical details of the formula (its
"parameters) seem to vary from situation to situation, as if people are learning
in different ways. We therefore propose to explore why these parameters seem to
vary. In addition, most mathematical theories of strategic learning assume that
people only look back at past experiences. We also propose to extend these
theories to allow for people who realize that other people are learning from
experience, and are able to therefore outguess what others will do based on what
happened in the past. If players are "sophisticated", in this sense, it pays for
them to take actions that are not perfect in the near-term, to "teach" other
players who are learning to take actions which will benefit the "teachers" in
the long-term. This teaching can be beneficial for the teacher but bad for
society (e.g., when firms scare away innovative competitors by threatening
illegal retaliation), or beneficial for everyone (e.g., when firms reassure
others that they can be trusted). Our research develops a precise mathematical
theory of how sophisticated players behave and when it pays for them to teach.
We use the theory to explain observations from experiments and predicts whether
teaching will occur in new situations.