* 0315551
* RUI: The Neurobiology and Behavior of Slime Trail Tracking in a Predatory  Snail
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Melissa Harrington, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2007
* USD 245,701.00

Melissa A. Harrington Proposal # 0315551 RUI: The Neurobiology and Behavior of
Slime Trail Tracking in a Predatory Snail

Euglandina rosea, a carnivorous snail native to the South East, eats slugs and
other snails. It finds its prey and potential mates by following slime trails
laid down as the animals move. Euglandina are capable of discriminating trails
of prey snails from trails left by other Euglandina, and can distinguish trails
of preferred from less preferred prey. Individual Euglandina do not follow their
own trails. In addition, the predators can be trained to follow artificial
trails of novel chemicals if they are associated with eating prey or with
exposure to a potential mate. Detection of slime trails by Euglandina results in
two behavioral outputs: a change in direction to follow the trail; and once the
animal leaving the trail is encountered, a choice between an aggressive versus
an agonistic interaction (predation versus mating). These reliable and easily
detected behavioral changes provide an excellent model system for studying the
mechanisms of sensory discrimination and control of behavior. Experiments are
proposed to identify and characterize the neural systems and signals that
represent slime trail stimuli, and determine a snail's response.
Electrophysiological and imaging techniques will be used to identify and record
from slime-responsive neurons in the ganglia of Euglandina. Studying the
physiological basis of slime trail tracking will lead to identification of the
neural circuits through which slime trail stimuli control the behavior of the
whole animal Funding of this proposal will further the development of a novel
and useful model system for studying the neurobiology of sensory processing and
learning. Moreover, since Delaware State University is an historically black,
undergraduate institution with a 78% African-American enrollment, this research
will increase opportunities for minority undergraduates to directly experience
the scientific process by taking part in basic research in a laboratory.

