* 0315765
* Molecular Characterization of Zebrafish Colgate, A Potent WNT Antagonist
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Paul Henion, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2008
* USD 361,545.00

0315765 Henion

The determination of the vertebrate body plan occurs during gastrulation as the
germ layers are induced and patterned along the dorsoventral (DV) and
anteroposterior (AP) axes. The process of dorsal specification is initiated soon
after fertilization and relies on the functioning of an inductive signaling
center called the gastrula organizer. The organizer forms as the result of
nuclear localization of b-catenin and the inductive signaling of downstream
genes. Once the organizer is formed, it can dorsalize lateral mesoderm and
induce and pattern neural fates in the ectoderm. These activities can, at least
in part, be attributed to its ability to inhibit the effects of the BMP, Nodal
and Wnt families of secreted factors. However, the molecular control of these
complex induction and patterning events is incompletely understood. The
zebrafish mutant colgate (col) is a recessive, embryonic lethal mutation with
visible defects in mesodermal and neural structures. Further analysis revealed a
reduction in dorsal mesodermal derivatives such as the heart and an expansion of
ventral mesodermal derivatives including blood. The central nervous system is
smaller overall, and is regionally posteriorized. Examination of col mutant
embryos during early gastrulation stages revealed an expansion of
wnt8-expressing lateral mesoderm and a reduction in the expression domains of
organizer-specific genes. In addition, wnt8b expression is expanded later in
gastrulation in col mutant embryos. Inhibition of Wnt8 signaling by antisense
morpholino-mediated gene knockdown in col mutant embryos rescues the organizer,
DV patterning and anterior neuroectoderm phenotypes, but does not rescue the
regionalized AP patterning defects in the brain. In contrast, Wnt8b morpholino
injection does not rescue the early defects in col mutant embryos, but does
rescue the regionalized AP brain patterning defects. Taken together, these
results suggest that the gene encoded by the col locus is normally required for
maintenance of the organizer and correct DV and AP patterning via antagonism of
Wnt8 and Wnt8b signaling. This proposal includes experiments designed to
determine the cell autonomy of the col mutation, identify the col gene by
positional cloning, determine the expression pattern of col during embryogenesis
and determine the effects of col misexpression on development. Taken together,
these results will identify the col gene and provide important insights into its
normal functions during development in the specification of the vertebrate body
plan and brain patterning. This knowledge in turn will form the basis for future
genetic and molecular characterization of the function of col in the regulation
of Wnt-signaling. Lastly, given the prominent role of members of the Wnt-
signaling pathway in tumorigenesis and tumor suppression and the emerging
capability of comparative genomics, these results are likely to provide insights
into clinically relevant conditions in humans. This proposal directly and
indirectly provides for substantial training and experience opportunities for
students at various stages of education, including graduate students,
undergraduates and local high school students. In addition to the obvious
importance of support for graduate students, support and opportunities for
undergraduates and high school students is particularly significant for
providing positive experiences in research science which they may either
subsequently decide to pursue or at least share with the broader lay community.