* 0316003
* Extended Structures Built on the Triphenoxymethane Platform: Modeling Metalloenzyme Active Sites
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Scott, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 393,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Michael Scott at the University of Florida to
develop nitrogen donor ligands with the ability to hold metal ions in proximity
to foster cooperativity during catalysis and to mimic metalloenzyme active
sites. Amino acid groups will be incorporated onto the triphenoxymethane
platform and these constructs will be used for both reactivity and binding
studies. In analogy to the trinuclear metal catalysts found in multi-copper
oxidases and metallophosphatases, several different examples of trinuclear
Zn(II), Cu(II), and Cu(I) compounds will be synthesized. Using the
triphenoxymethanes, an effort is also underway to build small ligands with three
peptide arms. When amino acid groups are attached to triphenoxymethanes, the
platform engenders a high degree of solubility and favorable intra-arm hydrogen-
bonding contacts and the pre-organization of the groups to facilitate the
binding of metals to the three arms and impart the important properties of
chiral amino acids onto the metal centers. These same ligands will also be used
to prepare trimetallic catalysts for the hydrolysis of phosphate esters such as
RNA, since sequence selective catalysts for RNA hydrolysis have many important
potential applications in in vitro and in vivo gene technology.

Functional models will be developed for multi-copper oxidases, which are an
extremely important family of oxygen-utilizing enzymes that are primarily found
in higher order eukaryotic cells, especially plants, fungi, and vertebrates, and
all are used for single electron oxidations of substrates. Students will develop
a strong background in both organic and inorganic synthesis and characterization
methods and will also become skilled at the collection and refinement of
crystallographic data. A collaboration to increase the participation of female
students and students from historically black colleges in the undergraduate and
graduate research programs at the University of Florida allows faculty and
students from Lincoln University to participate in this research during the
summer. The students in the normal REU programs administered by the PI, both
French and American, also will be involved in this research during their three-
month summer stay.