* 0316494
* Metal Ion-dependent Folding of the Spliceosomal U2-U6 snRNA Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Nancy Greenbaum, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/2008
* USD 509,808.00

The goal of this project is to understand how RNA and protein components of the
spliceosome, the cellular apparatus responsible for the removal of noncoding
regions from precursor messenger (pre-m)RNA molecules, assemble to perform
splicing chemistry. The folding of individual RNA components, and of structures
formed by RNA-RNA interactions, is an important feature of spliceosome assembly.
Specific binding of metal ions by the small nuclear (sn)RNA components of the
spliceosome is essential for assembly and catalytic activity, yet little is
known about individual binding sites or the role of metal ions folding.
Luminescence and solution NMR techniques will be used to investigate the metal
ion-dependent structural change in the complex formed by paired U2 and U6
snRNAs. U2 and U6 snRNA are the only two snRNAs required for both steps of
splicing, and their sequences are highly conserved phylogenetically.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work include education of graduate
and undergraduate students in a laboratory setting, which provides these
students with interdisciplinary training in molecular biology, biochemistry,
structural biology, and spectroscopic techniques; contributions to the PI's
strength as a classroom teacher, in particular development and teaching of a
research-based course in Nucleic Acid Structure &amp; Function; community
outreach programs, including judging in community science fairs; visits to small
undergraduate colleges, including women's and historically black schools, to
present research seminars and encourage students to consider graduate programs
in science; and encouragement of women and minority students to pursue careers
in science. This latter area takes the form of continuous mentoring of women
students through Florida State University's Women in Mathematics, Science, and
Engineering Program, recruiting minority undergraduates into the lab and
department for Summer Research Internships, sponsoring minority students and
postdoctoral fellows for fellowships to do research in the PI's
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;