* 0316522
* The Role of Antagonism, Commensalism, and Mutualism in Bark Beetle Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Kier Klepzig, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2006
* USD 336,483.00

The Role of Antagonism, Commensalism, and Mutualism in Bark Beetle Communities
Ayres, Matthew P. Dartmouth College

Positive associations between species (mutualisms and commensalisms), although
ubiquitous in nature, are not well integrated within the theoretical structure
of community ecology. This project will study interactions involving bark
beetles (Dendroctonus) to test the consequences of mutualisms for populations
and communities. The southern pine beetle has an obligate mutualism with two
species of fungi. The fungi are transported by adult beetles and inoculated
within the phloem of the pine trees during egg laying. The beetle larval feeds
upon the fungi within the phloem. A common cause of larval mortality is poor
growth of the fungi due to competition from the bluestain fungus. This fungus
also has a strong mutualism but with mites (Tarsonemus), which transport the
fungus ascospores between trees, and feed upon this fungus within the tree
phloem. The mites, in turn, are transported by the beetles. These system
properties are hypothesized to impact the entire community and influence the
outbreak population dynamics of beetles and death of pines, which is a dominant
source of disturbance in forests of the southeastern U.S. Studies of this
beetle-mite-fungus community have also revealed marked differences between mites
and beetles in their growth response to temperature change, which suggests that
seasonal and regional variation in climate should modulate the community. This
work will also test whether these differences among species lead to predictable
responses of the intact community. Results of this project will have scientific
value in clarifying the role of mutualisms in community ecology and population
dynamics and the dependence of these interactions on temperature. New
understanding of the processes that influence insect outbreaks will have
relevance to forest management, and aid in assessing risks to forests from
climate change and introductions of exotic species. Proposed activities will
also have broader beneficial impacts by contributing to the training of young
scientists.