* 0316375
* Phylogeny and Evolution of Caesalpinioid Legumes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Anne Bruneau, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

The Leguminosae (or Fabaceae - the legume or bean family) is the third largest
family of flowering plants, and the second most important family economically.
Legumes range from giant rain forest trees to tiny herbaceous annuals of desert
habitats. Of the three traditionally recognized subfamilies, Caesalpinioideae,
Mimosoideae, and Papilionoideae, the Caesalpinioideae is the most poorly known
because it is largely confined to tropical habitats. As a consequence,
evolutionary relationships among caesalpinioid legumes are poorly known and the
recognition of particular genera is often in dispute. Previous work by Dr.
Herendeen and his colleagues in Canada and England has developed a general
phylogenetic framework for Caesalpinioideae, which will be used to further
research on morphology, taxonomy, and phylogeny. Current morphological and
molecular data show that several caesalpinioid lineages have more basal
positions than either the Mimosoideae or Papilionoideae. Thus a classification
system for the family based on evolutionary relationships would not recognize
the caesalpinioids as a single natural unit but as several early-branching
lineages. How many distinct lineages of caesalpinioid legumes are there, at what
level should they be recognized relative to mimosoids and papilionoids, what are
the relationships among caesalpinioid genera, and what can we discern about
patterns of morphological evolution? These questions form the core of the study.
&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research is to produce a classification that
includes all ca. 160 genera of caesalpinioid legumes based on analyses of data
from morphology and DNA sequence data. To achieve this, field work will be
conducted in Madagascar, South America, and SE Asia to obtain material of as
many of the missing genera as possible. The investigators will also study
collections in herbaria and prepare anatomical samples to score morphological
characters for all species included in the molecular data set. They will use the
phylogenetic results to produce a revised classification and identification key
to subfamilies, tribes, and genera for all caesalpinioid legumes. With a robust
phylogeny and a specimen-based morphological data set, they will be able to
explore the implications of the phylogeny with respect to patterns of
morphological evolution. In addition, data on a diverse array of fossil legumes
will be integrated with the results. The fossils may be used in documenting
minimum ages of clades and as historical data points for biogeographic studies.
In addition, molecular clock techniques will be used to estimate ages of clades.
The data generated in this study will make the Leguminosae an ideal group in
which to experiment with new methods in estimating ages of clades and assessing
rates of taxonomic diversification and molecular evolution. &lt;br/&gt;