* 0316482
* Molecular Photonic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Gerald Meyer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 02/28/2007
* USD 373,073.00

Gerald Meyer of Johns Hopkins University is supported by the Division of
Chemistry for his research to design molecular materials that convert visible
light into potential energy and store that energy for a long period of time.
Prof. Meyer will utilize steady-state and time-resolved electrochemical and
spectroscopic techniques to characterize events occurring after metal-to-ligand
charge-transfer (MLCT) excitation of Fe(II) coordination compounds integrated
and spatially arranged within sol-gel processed thin film materials, comprised
of the wide band gap semiconductor TiO2 or the insulator ZrO2. Specifically he
aims to elucidate the role ligand field (d-d) excited states play in non-
radiative decay and photochemical ligand loss. Important fundamental mechanistic
questions relevant to the growing applications of Fe(II) compounds in biology,
chemistry, and materials science will be studied systematically.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying materials that efficiently convert light into
energy is a significant long-term research goal. This research will probe
molecular level processes that have historically limited the utility of iron
compounds for energy conversion applications. The research will contribute to
our fundamental understanding of molecular events occurring at semiconductor and
insulator interfaces in order that we might control them in a predictable
manner. Graduate students, undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates
will receive excellent training and research experiences in a forefront
inorganic materials chemistry program.