* 0316566
* EF 03:  Origin and Evolution of the Bracovirus-Braconid Wasp Symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* James Whitfield, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2008
* USD 162,940.00

Many parasitoid wasps in the family Braconidae lay their eggs inside the bodies
of caterpillars, which ultimately die after serving as food and home for the
developing wasp offspring. There is great complexity to the physiological and
endocrine interactions between the wasp and its caterpillar host. No aspect of
this is more remarkable than the evolutionary incorporation of viruses by the
wasps into their toolkits of host manipulation. The bracoviruses are fully
integrated into the wasp chromosomal DNA, yet functional genes are still
packaged as "proviruses" and "exported" into the caterpillars along with the
wasp eggs. These genes are involved in influencing the caterpillars' immune and
endocrine systems in ways that enhance survival of the wasp larvae inside. This
project explores the incredible evolution of this interaction between wasps and
viruses. It is one of the few cases known of a mutually beneficial relationship
between a virus and a eukaryotic organism, and in addition is remarkable in that
the genomes of wasp are so intertwined that the viruses are no longer an
independent entity, but instead act as an endosymbiont, more or less like
mitochondria and chloroplasts. &lt;br/&gt; The design of this project involves
comparing phylogenies ("evolutionary trees") of both wasps and viruses, inferred
from comparisons of DNA sequences, to explore how long the wasps and viruses
have been coevolving. So far the PI has demonstrated that the wasp and virus
phylogenies are essentially identical within a large genus of the wasps, and
have also shown that the wasps that carry the viruses form a single evolutionary
lineage. Remaining to be determined is whether the wasp and virus phylogenies
are identical through the whole wasp group that carries the viruses, and where
these viruses may have come from (i. e., which other groups of viruses may be
related). With the solution to these last two questions, a more complete picture
of how this remarkable association developed will be revealed. The results will
be of interest not only to evolutionary biologists, but may well have practical
implications in terms of designing sophisticated control strategies against
caterpillar pests. &lt;br/&gt;