* 0316247
* Characterizing the Contributions of Discrete Hippocampal Subfields to Contextual and Cued Fear Conditioning Using Multiple Measures
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Timothy Otto, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* john godwin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 438,453.00

Accumulating evidence suggests that a number of psychological and emotional
disorders, including phobias and post-traumatic stress syndrome, may in part
reflect conditioned (learned) emotional responses to environmental stimuli.
Among the many successful approaches used to explore the acquisition of
conditioned emotional responses has been an examination of the acquisition,
expression, and retention of Pavlovian fear conditioning in rats. In these
studies, an initially neutral stimulus (the conditioned stimulus [CS], for
example a tone, light, or odor) and an aversive unconditioned stimulus ([US],
are typically paired in a forward manner. Following several pairings, subsequent
re-exposure to the CS or to the context in which CS-US pairing took place
elicits in rats a variety of behavioral and physiological responses, including
increased heart rate and blood pressure, increased defecation and urination, and
freezing behavior, collectively thought to reflect an internal state of "fear".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An olfactory stimulus can serve effectively as a both a CS
and a contextual stimulus in fear conditioning, and that the basic principles
governing the acquisition of emotional responses conditioned to auditory and
visual stimuli can be extended to the olfactory system. The proposed studies
will examine the extent to which a particular brain structure, the hippocampus,
participates in a variety of forms of Pavlovian fear conditioning. Based on both
neuroanatomical and electrophysiological evidence, it is hypothesized that
different sub-areas within the hippocampus will contribute to different "types"
of emotional learning. Specifically, the hypotheses that dorsal hippocampus
participates preferentially in learning about the emotional significance of
places and that the ventral hippocampus is preferentially involved in learning
about the emotional significance of internal states such as hunger or thirst,
and that the entire hippocampus is involved in learning about the emotional
significance of odors will be tested. Collectively these studies will
significantly enhance our current understanding of the role of the hippocampus
in emotional learning specifically and learning and memory processes in general.
This project will involve undergraduate students and will recruit minority
students from the Rutgers University Program "Research in Science and
Engineering:".&lt;br/&gt;