* 0316793
* Linkage of Nonsense Codons and RNA Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Miles Wilkinson, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2008
* USD 640,000.00

It is widely accepted that post-transcriptional events in eukaryotic cells are
compartmentalized. Transcripts are spliced by spliceosomes in the nucleus and
then translocated to the cytoplasm, where ribosomes and tRNAs collaborate to
read the codons in these transcripts. This view has been cast into doubt,
however, by the surprising observation that premature termination (nonsense)
codons (PTCs) affect not only cytoplasmic events but also nuclear-associated
events. Three distinct nonsense codon-induced responses have been characterized.
First, many mRNAs containing PTCs are degraded in the nuclear fraction of
mammalian cells. Although there is controversy as to whether this nonsense-
mediated decay (NMD) mechanism occurs in the nucleus proper, several lines of
evidence implicate nuclear events as being essential to trigger it. Second, the
insertion of PTCs in some genes increases the levels of alternatively spliced
transcripts that skip the introduced PTC. Because RNA splicing occurs in the
nucleus, this nonsense-associated altered splicing (NAS) response clearly
involves the nucleus. Third, the insertion of PTCs in some genes increases the
levels of their precursor mRNAs at or near the site of transcription in the
nucleus. To solve the paradox of how translation signals regulate nuclear
events, the molecular mechanisms responsible for NAS and NMUP will be assessed.
T-cell receptor-beta (TCRbeta) transcripts will be used for this research, as
the TCRbeta gene frequently acquires PTCs during normal T-cell development, and
therefore mechanisms that monitor acquisition of PTCs in this gene may be
critical for normal immune cell function. Objective 1 is to determine the
molecular mechanism responsible for NAS, including identifying the factors
essential for it to occur and determining whether it occurs by a feedback
mechanism. Objective 2 is to identify the molecular mechanism responsible for
NMUP, including its factor requirements and its triggering mechanism, as well as
to establish whether it is an early event coupled with transcription, whether it
occurs as a result of inhibited splicing or precursor mRNA stabilization,
whether it depends on translation, and what regulatory elements are essential
for it to occur. This research should reveal whether nonsense codon-recognition
occurs in the cytoplasm, triggering a signaling mechanism that regulates nuclear
events (including RNA splicing), or whether instead nonsense codons are directly
read in the nucleus as part of a nuclear scanning mechanism that proofreads
nascent mRNAs, a controversial notion for which there is increasing evidence.