* 0316338
* REVSYS: Killer Snails---Killer Diversity: Biodiversity and Systematics of Conus, the Largest Marine Invertebrate Genus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Alan Kohn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 618,775.00

Abstract: DEB-0316338&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Alan
Kohn of the University of Washington to improve and modernize the classification
and systematics of an unusually diverse as well as ecologically and biomedically
important group of marine snails. Conus, with more than 500 species worldwide in
tropical and subtropical seas, is the largest genus of marine animals. It is
thus a major contributor to biodiversity in the sea, but it presents many
challenges in identification and classification. The project will use both
modern molecular sequencing and quantitative analysis of anatomical features in
classification and will elucidate the history of rapid diversification of Conus.
It will create a website with extensive, illustrated entries for all species and
will enhance access to the results in print as well as electronic media.
Extending revisionary work to the poorly understood Atlantic Conus fauna will
produce a monograph on Western Atlantic Conus, modeled on the 1995 volume on
Indo-Pacific species by Dr. Kohn and colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to its importance for general marine biodiversity, Conus is notable in
that many very similar species-up to 36-co-occur on the same coral reef.
Ecological studies of these assemblages have helped show why tropical reef-
associated habitats support such high biodiversity. All Conus species produce
potent venoms called conotoxins used to subdue prey. These conotoxins are now
widely used in neurobiology, and the number of medicines derived from them is
increasing rapidly. At least three are in current use, and more than 45 patents
for medical uses have been awarded. Each of the many similar species has
specific ecological characteristics as well as its own suite of venoms, and
accurate species determination is essential to both basic scientific and applied
fields, but it is difficult. This project will help understand evolutionary
history and will facilitate research in ecology, biogeography, evolution,
neurobiology, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;