* 0316402
* LTREB:  KLEE (Kenya Long-term Exclosure Experiment): Pattern and Process in an African Savanna
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2009
* USD 325,555.00

This proposal is a request to support continuation of the Kenya Long-term
Exclosure Experiment, which tests the effects of native and domestic herbivores
on each other and on their shared landscape. Interactions between herbivores and
their plants are affected by many factors, including rainfall, soil structure,
nutrients, predators, and disease. In order to separate the effects of
herbivores from these other influences, a large-scale experiment was started 8
years ago in a semi-arid ecosystem in Kenya. This experiment has demonstrated
both the main effects of different types of herbivores and the effects of these
organisms when considered in combination (their interactive effects). Over the
next five years, this ongoing experiment will continue to examine the response
of this ecosystem to herbivores over a time span that includes multi-year
weather cycles; it will focus more specifically on teasing apart the complex
relationships that exist between large herbivores and spatial variation in soils
and in vegetation, and on examining the interactions that take place between
trees and grasses when both are exposed to herbivory. Grassland ecosystems are
important worldwide for both livestock and wildlife, and for the maintenance of
biodiversity. Results from this study will contribute important insights to
conservation biology, ecosystem management, and livestock production in one of
the world's most important biomes. The study also involves scientists from
several institutions in Kenya and the United States, many of whom are under-
represented minorities and women. Results will be broadly communicated within
the scientific community, to the public, and to stakeholders in the region.