* 0316503
* The Diatoms, Ostracodes, and Chironomids of Western Mongolia's Saline Lakes: Biodiversity, Ecology, and Research Applications
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Mark Edlund, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 452,715.00

Western Mongolia -- spanning the Altai Mountains, the Valley of the Great Lakes,
and the western Khangai highland steppes -- is one of the world's most
significant ecological and cultural regions. It contains a tantalizing variety
of lakes ranging from fresh water to brines more saline than the oceans. The
region is highly sensitive to climate variation, home to several rare and
endangered animals, and the primary source of cashmere production in Mongolia by
traditional nomads that are dependent on supply and quality of regional surface
waters. The Mongolian government has striven to preserve these natural and
cultural resources by strictly protecting large expanses of this region and
registering the area on the UNESCO Biosphere Reserve and World Heritage List. In
spite of these efforts, little is known of the region's biological diversity or
of using the organisms as a measure of ecosystem health and change. Therefore,
during two field expeditions in 2004 and 2005, an international team of
scientists (Mongolia, USA, Belgium) will survey the distribution and
biodiversity of diatoms, ostracodes, and chironomids of western Mongolia. These
lesser known biological groups include algae (diatoms), the seed shrimps
(ostracodes), and the non-biting midge insects (chironomids), which are among
the most useful organisms for developing models to understand climate change and
to evaluate water-quality. The biodiversity surveys will serve well in
developing an ecosystem management program for protection and sustainable use of
the singular Valley of the Great Lakes and the Altai and Khangai
highlands.&lt;br/&gt;Fifty lake and stream systems will be sampled and are
expected to yield about 400 diatom, 200 ostracode, and 200 insect composite
collections. Samples will be studied using light and electron microscopes to
identify approximately 450 to 600 species of diatoms, 50 species of ostracodes,
and 50-60 species of chironomids. All groups are expected to have ten to twenty
percent of the species described as new to science. Environmental data taken
simultaneously with biological collections will allow calculation of species
environmental preferences using multivariate statistical analyses, thereby
laying the critical foundation for construction of water-quality and climate-
change inference models. Results will be presented in four formats: conventional
scientific papers; a set of regional floras and faunas; a website for quick
dispersal of data and results to an international audience; and archives of
collections, species distributions, and habitat descriptions in international
museum collections and databases that are web-accessible. This project will
provide infrastructural support for Mongolian collections and train two
Mongolian graduate students and an American Ph.D. student through cooperative
learning from US, Belgian, and Mongolian professionals to ensure a sound
international scientific future for all countries involved. Lastly, because team
members represent academic, research, and museum institutes, even broader
audiences will be touched through exhibit programming and educational outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;