* 0316944
* Phosphazenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Claire Tessier, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 322,000.00

Claire A. Tessier, University of Akron, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies on phosphazenes
and poly(phosphazenes). Poly(phosphazenes) are the largest group of inorganic
polymers, with phosphorus and nitrogen atoms alternating along the backbone. The
properties of the polymer can be tuned by varying the phosphorus substituents.
The main goals of this research project are (1) to develop a convenient, Lewis-
acid catalyzed synthesis of linear dichlorophosphazenes; (2) to understand the
chemistry of small phosphazene rings with three or four P-N units; (3) to
understand the properties of both linear and crosslinked polyphosphazenes.
Multinuclear NMR is a key tool for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poly(phosphazenes) have a wide range of
applications in elastomeric materials, insulating foams, solid solvents for ion
conductors, bioinert films, fireproofing materials and controlled-release drug
polymers. Full commercialization of other promising poly(phosphazenes) has been
hampered by inconvenient and often irreproducible syntheses. This project will
attempt to develop syntheses that will work under milder conditions and give
more of the desired linear polymers. Students trained on this multidisciplinary
project, including women and members of underrepresented groups, will learn key
synthetic, spectroscopic and polymer characterization techniques.