* 0316670
* Peptidases Involved in Signal Peptide Generation and Degradation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Ross Dalbey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2008
* USD 427,000.00

The long-term objective of this project is to understand the structural and
functional relationships among the proteases involved in signal peptide
generation and degradation in bacteria. Typically, proteins that are targeted to
specific subcellular compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum,
mitochondria intermembrane space, or chloroplast thylakoid lumen contain
cleavable signal sequences that provide information for export. Signal
peptidases are proteases that generate the signal peptide by removing the signal
sequence from exported proteins. The signal peptide hydrolases then degrade the
signal peptides that can be toxic to the cell or interfere with protein export.
The objective of this research is to understand which region of the signal
peptidase catalytic domain interacts with the membrane in order to understand
how the enzyme cleaves presecretory proteins at the membrane surface. This
project also examines the role of signal peptide peptidase A, another novel
peptidase, that carries out catalysis by an unconventional mechanism. The
project will 1) define the structural elements within signal peptidase that
allow it to cleave preproteins with exquisite accuracy, 2) determine the role of
the signal peptidase hydrophobic antiparallel Beta-strand below the active site
in membrane association, and 3) elucidate the catalytic mechanism, membrane
topology, and substrate specificity of signal peptide peptidase A. Site-directed
mutagenesis, chemical modification, genetics and biophysics will be used to
achieve these aims. The research will determine how much of the catalytic domain
of signal peptidase is within the lipid phase of the bilayer. The broader impact
of the project is that it will contribute to the understanding of the mechanism
of the unconventional serine proteases and help elucidate how catalysis occurs
within or at the membrane surface. A high priority will be the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students.