* 0316016
* Mechanisms of Avian Perception, Categorization, and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Robert Cook, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 302,523.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of
this research is to understand how small complex systems learn about the world,
in particular how they perceive objects and the relations between these objects
and events and how they use this knowledge to flexibly respond to new
situations. The specific objectives of the current research are to advance three
complementary lines of inquiry examining in detail the behavioral mechanisms of
same/different concept learning, stimulus memory, and motion-based object
perception in pigeons. These are important issues because recognizing difference
and similarity is among the oldest and most fundamental of psychological
discriminations, with important implications for understanding of perception,
conceptual behavior, intelligence-related behaviors, and their mediation by
language. Understanding the processes underlying the large visual memory
capacity of these animals will also advance our knowledge of how brains are
capable of encoding large amounts of information and how and why they fail as a
function of aging and disease. Finally, understanding the mechanisms underlying
visual perception ranks among the most demanding and difficult of biological
issues. Examining how these mechanisms operate in a visually sophisticated
animal system is a key step towards solving such questions. Pigeons are ideal
for such comparative cognitive studies because they evolved small, powerful,
central nervous systems capable of exceptional visual perception and complex
discrimination learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will immediately
impact our understanding of the psychological mechanisms by which complex
animals, including humans, use the combination of specific memories and concepts
to guide behavior. This research is part of the general effort to understand how
the brain generates and controls behavior. An understanding of the mechanisms of
how small biological systems work could be key to the practical engineering of
similar "smart" systems for a variety of purposes (e.g., compact visual
prostheses for the blind, autonomous robots for search and rescue, efficient
information transmission algorithms). This type of comparative research is also
part of a larger scientific enterprise by many scientists to understand the
evolution and mechanisms of cognition and behavior and their functions in the
natural world by investigating the distribution of behavioral similarities and
differences among a wide variety of animal species in both laboratory and field
settings. &lt;br/&gt;