* 0316532
* RUI: Correlating Effects of Boronic Acid Substitution on Flavonoid Subclasses
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Desmond Murray, Andrews University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2008
* USD 269,000.00

This proposal addresses the correlation of physical, spectroscopic, chemical and
biological effects of boronic acid substitution on flavonoid subclasses.
Specific objectives include: (1) synthesis of a new subclass of synthetic
flavonoids -boronic acid substituted chalcones (BASCs), (2) development of
deeply colored BASCs as (a) novel molecular sensors for cyanide and amines, (b)
solvatochromic indicators, (c) DNA photonucleases, and (d) NIR absorbing dyes,
(3) investigation of the antimicrobial activity of hydroxylated BASCs, and (4)
use of BASCs as model systems for the development of other boronic acid
substituted flavonoids (aurones, flavones, anthocyanins). The 'ortho Lewis acid
effect' highlighted in these compounds will be assessed calculationally and
applied in the rational design and development of tunable electron acceptor
subunits for internal charge transfer (ICT) materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With the support of a Research at Undergraduate Institutions award
from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Desmond H.
Murray, of the Department of Chemistry at Andrews University, is studying the
synthesis and properties of a unique class of molecules that incorporate two
unusual substructures. The juxtaposition of these two "functional groups" leads
to a diverse range of unusual and important molecular properties, leading to
potential applications in the areas of molecular sensors for toxic environmental
and industrial agents, molecular sensors for a-hydroxy acids and carbohydrates
for agricultural, food and medical applications, and novel antimicrobial agents.
Professor Murray's research program actively involves a diverse group of
undergraduates and high school students, improves the levels of inclusion of
research-active students from underrepresented groups, and provides early
opportunities for students to experience the excitement of scientific discovery.