* 0316173
* Relation between Optical and Charge Properties of Individual Semiconductor Nanocrystals and Nanorods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2007
* USD 289,000.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division and the Solid State Chemistry Program of the Division of
Materials Research, Krauss will investigate the effect of charges on the optical
properties of single colloidal CdSe nanocrystals (NCs) and nanorods (NRs) in
order to obtain a better understanding of the most fundamental properties of
these materials, such as, for example, their exceptional "on-off" or blinking
behavior. Using a novel atomic force microscope (AFM) and an inverted
microscope, the correlation between charge and luminescent images of single CdSe
NCs will be studied. Similarly, the work will attempt to determine the permanent
electric dipole moment of single CdSe NRs by means of force microscopy.
Correlations between charge and luminescent images for single NRs can be used to
determine the effects of charges on their optical properties. CdSe NCs and NRs
are highly promising materials with potentially great technological impacts,
which, however, can be realized only if the relationship between electric
charges and optical and electronic properties are fully understood, and the
harmful effects of electric charges be minimized or removed. This work will be
done with students and postdoctoral research associates. They will acquire
valuable experience in a forefront area of contemporary science that will
prepare them for advanced studies or entry in the scientific/technological
workforce