* 0316322
* Bifunctional Gold-Platinum Nanoparticle Catalyst:  Fabrication and Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. Chuan-Jian Zhong at SUNY Binghamton to fabricate and
characterize bifunctional nanoparticle catalysts using gold-platinum (AuPt). The
objective is to establish an understanding of the design, synthetic and
processing parameters that control the size and composition of these
nanoparticles and their catalytic properties. A combination of the monolayer-
capped nanoparticle synthesis and the thermal processing will be used to prepare
the monodispersed nanoparticles with controllable composition in the 1-10 nm
range over which the nanoparticles undergo a transition from atomic to metallic
properties. This binary composition is expected to generate synergistic effects
involving the suppression of adsorbed poisonous species and the change in
electronic band structure to modify the strength of chemical adsorption. The
proposed work will involve four specific tasks: (1) the preparation of AuPt
nanoparticles of 1-10 nm core sizes and 0-100% Au composition via an initial
synthesis of alkanethiolate-capped particles of 1-2 nm sizes and different gold
contents followed by subsequent thermal processing towards controllable
compositions and larger sizes, (2) the assembly onto high surface area carbon
nanomaterials (spheres and nanotubes) and the carbon-supported metal oxides with
controlled dispersion and mass loading, and (3) the thermal activation of the
supported nanoparticles with controllable size, composition and spatial
properties, and (4) the evaluation of activities of the activated nanoparticles
toward electrocatalytic methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction. The thermal
processing and activation data will be compared with theoretical models of
coalescence and sintering. A number of surface techniques (AFM, TEM, FTIR, XPS,
XRD) will be used to probe factors controlling the size and composition of the
bifunctional nanoparticles and to establish their catalytic correlation

The results of the proposed work are expected to advance new applications of
binary nanoparticles in both fundamental and practical heterogeneous catalysis.
This project will involve local high school students and undergraduates to work
during the summers. Students will be trained in areas of nanotechnology for the
future workforce.