* 0316916
* GOALI: Nanoscale Characterization and Development of Ultra Low-k Dielectric Xerogel Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Dennis Mueller, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 992,000.00

This work focuses on understanding the fundamental effects of bonding,
composition, and interconnectivity that establish the properties of new, low-
density materials. By understanding these aspects at the nano-scale and how they
relate to the macro-scale properties, we will be able to optimize the desirable
characteristics as we develop new materials with even better characteristics. Of
particular interest is a better understanding of the behavior of porous low-k
films that may be used to develop interlayer dielectric (ILD) materials with
properties commensurate with future semiconductor needs. Porosity must be
introduced into ILD films to attain dielectric constants necessary for future
integrated circuit devices. Increased porosity results in diminished mechanical
properties because less material is available to strengthen the material. The
characterization included in this work relates nano-scale properties to macro-
scale behavior of porous silica xerogel films. These studies will enhance our
understanding of the nano-structural arrangements and surface chemistries that
can optimize film dielectric constants and mechanical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved low-density materials will facilitate the
development of faster, more reliable integrated circuits like those used in
modern computers and cell phones. During the tenure of this program, one
undergraduate, two graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher will be
provided a thorough background in semiconductor material characterization and
thin film synthesis. In addition each will have the opportunity to work directly
work with a semiconductor company on issues critical to future industry needs,
through weekly meetings with our industrial partner, Texas Instruments. This
cooperative venture will also serve to bridge the gap that often arises in
transferring technology from the research arena to the commercial
application.&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;