* 0316893
* Molecular Mechanisms of Glial Progenitor Cell Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Akiko Nishiyama, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Mature oligodendrocytes make myelin sheaths that insulate axons and allow for
fast conduction of electrical signal. Recent in vivo studies by the PI and other
investigators have shown that oligodendrocyte progenitor (immature) cells do not
all differentiate into mature oligodendrocytes, but a significant number of them
persist in the adult brain and spinal cord. There is extensive cellular contact
between the progenitor cells and differentiated oligodendrocytes, indicative of
an active signaling between the immature and mature cells. It remains unclear
how some progenitor cells are stimulated to differentiate into mature myelin-
forming oligodendrocytes while others in the same region remain
undifferentiated. The objective of the proposed study is to investigate whether
a local contact-dependent signal induces differentiation of oligodendrocytes and
simultaneously triggers a signal to inhibit differentiation of neighboring
progenitor cells. The following hypotheses will be tested: 1) increased
progenitor cell density and contact inhibits the intercellular Notch signal; 2)
Notch activity represses transcriptional activation of Nkx2.2, thereby
inhibiting OL differentiation; 3) Nkx2.2 promotes OL differentiation and
activates transcription of the Jagged1 gene, which in turn, activates Notch1 on
neighboring progenitor cells and inhibits their differentiation, thus
counteracting the density and contact-dependent stimulus for differentiation.
The proposed studies using the oligodendrocyte system as a model will address
the fundamental question in developmental biology of how differentiation and
maintenance of the immature cell type are regulated. At the same time, there
will be training opportunities for a graduate student and two undergraduate
students. In addition, this project will impact a diverse group of over 400
students each year, including minority students, through the PI's large lecture
class. The PI also participates in outreach activities to girls in middle
school, through an annual university-wide program to promote women in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;