* 0316296
* The Role of Reactant Vibrational Excitation in Transition Metal Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* H. Floyd Davis, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 388,000.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Davis will investigate the role of reactant vibrational
energy in carbon-hydrogen and carbon-carbon bond activation reactions involving
ground state neutral transition metal atoms and small unsaturated transition
metal complexes. Direct infrared vibrational excitation or stimulated Raman
pumping (SRP) for state-selective preparation of reactants will be employed.
Bimolecular and unimolecular reactions will be studied. Angular and velocity
distributions will be determined using crossed molecular beams and 157 nm
ultraviolet radiation to photoionize neutral reaction products. Vibrational
overtone induced unimolecular decomposition of volatile transition metal
monomer, as well as binary complexes will be investigated.

Chemical changes in normally unreactive hydrocarbon bonds facilitated by
transition metal centers is of great importance in industrial catalytic
processes and in organic and organometallic synthesis. The research done in this
project will provide important benchmark information for tests of state-of-the-
art theoretical and dynamic methods applied to bond activation reactions.
Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this research. They will
be prepared for advanced studies or employment in academia, industry, or
government laboratories.