* 0316823
* New Reactions for Utilizing N and P Atoms Derived Directly from the Elements
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Christopher Cummins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2006
* USD 495,000.00

Dr. Christopher C. Cummins, Chemistry Department, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Program of the Chemistry Division for the development of new reactions that
utilize nitrogen and phosphorus atoms derived directly from the elements. Using
complexes in which a nitrogen or phosphorus is triply bonded to a niobium or
molybdenum, triple-bond metathesis will be developed as a synthetic route to
organic nitrogen and phosphorus compounds. Targets include phosphaalkynes,
nitriles, and acylimido compounds. The metal complexes also will be explored as
carbene trapping reagents that can undergo beta-elimination to produce species
including nitriles. Based on these results, catalytic and stoichiometric systems
that react with elemental nitrogen and/or phosphorus to form metal-nitrido or
-phosphido complexes that will undergo synthetically valuable reactions will be
prepared. This chemistry will be extended to catalytic and stoichiometric
reactions of metal-carbon triple bonds. One objective is to explore molybdenum-
carbon triple bond chemistry as applied to the synthesis of molecules containing
the enediyne functionality.

The most abundant element in the earth's atmosphere is nitrogen. While nature is
able to utilize atmospheric nitrogen in biological systems, modern chemical
science is still seeking technologies for the economical usage of elemental
nitrogen. This project grows from the recent discovery of molybdenum and niobium
compounds that can cleave the nitrogen-nitrogen bond in dinitrogen under mild
conditions. In order to utilize this chemistry, the nitrogen atoms derived from
metal assisted dinitrogen cleavage will be used to prepare organic nitrogen
compounds. In addition, related processes will be devised to use phosphorus
atoms derived from elemental phosphorus. These results will result in new ways
to prepare important classes of organic phosphorus and nitrogen compounds. In
addition to the scientific results, this project will provide training to a
diverse group of undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and visiting senior
scientists.