* 0316284
* PBI: Global Biodiversity of Eumycetozoans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Steven Stephenson, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,099,898.00

Abstract for DEB-0316284, "PBI: Global Biodiversity of
Eumycetozoans"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Frederick
Spiegel at the University of Arkansas to study the worldwide distribution of a
group of microscopic organisms known as the Eumycetozoa. Also, known as slime
molds, the eumycetozoans all have an amoeba-like stage that feeds on the
bacteria and fungi that break down the dead plant matter that builds up in the
environment. When the amoebal stage is done feeding, it develops into a spore-
dispersing fruiting body that looks like a fungus.&lt;br/&gt;It is by the
presence of these fruiting bodies that eumycetozoans can be identified and
enumerated. Amoeboid organisms are important for releasing the nutrients locked
up in the bacteria and fungi and making them available to plants. Therefore,
knowing how representative amoeboid organisms are distributed around the world
may give some idea of how such organisms move around and become established in
an environment. Eumycetozoans are good representative amoebae because their
fruiting bodies can be easily collected and identified. In addition, several
eumycetozoans are important model systems in biology. This grant will fund an
international team of experts on the eumycetozoans who will: 1) conduct field
surveys for eumycetozoans in areas of the world that are undercollected, 2)
compile a major specimen database including existing collections and the data
from field surveys, 3) use this data to compile world distribution maps of all
species, 4) develop a web site on eumycetozoans that will incorporate the
databases, distribution maps, and comprehensive descriptions of the anticipated
1,200 - 1,300 species expected in the world wide inventory, and 5) prepare
educational materials on eumycetozoans for use by interested laypersons,
students, and parataxonomists. This is the first attempt at a global
bioinventory of eumycetozoans (or any group of amoebae) and will produce the
first comprehensive compilation of the world wide specimen base of this
important group of microorganisms. The project is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;