* 0316934
* The Electrochemistry of Nitrogen and Sulfur Oxides: In situ Spectroelectrochemical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Daniel Scherson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

This research project investigates aspects of interfacial structure and dynamics
that control the heterogeneous oxidation and reduction of nitrogen and sulfur
oxides and oxyanions in aqueous solution. With the support of the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Daniel Scherson in the Department of
Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University, uses optical techniques that
enable direct probing of chemical processes at metal-solution interfaces,
including resonance and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopies, ultraviolet-
visible reflectance spectroscopy, X-ray absorption methods, and second harmonic
generation. The binding and reactivity of small nitrogen and sulfur containing
molecules to ordered metal surfaces and metal surfaces modified by transition
metal macrocyclic compounds are studied. An important thrust of the project
involves the development of strategies for achieving temporal resolution in
these measurements on the sub-microsecond scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information obtained from this project improves our
understanding of chemical reactions involving molecular and ionic forms of
nitrogen and sulfur oxides. Interest in this class of compounds spans a wide
variety of disciplines, ranging from atmospheric sciences and toxicology to
catalysts and neurobiology. Fundamental insight into the formation and
dissociation of chemical bonds in nitrogen oxide and sulfur oxide compounds is
obtained from these studies.&lt;br/&gt;