* 0316330
* A Multi-Gene Phylogeny of Maxillopod Crustaceans to Facilitate Comparative Study of Eye Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Nikolaos Schizas, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 271,300.00

Abstract for DEB-0316330&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr.
Todd H. Oakley of the University of California-Santa Barbara to study eye
evolution and evolutionary relationships of maxillopod crustaceans (including
barnacles, ostracods, and copepods). The research has two major goals: first, to
collect extensive DNA sequence data to estimate maxillopod evolutionary
relationships and second to use those results to test important hypotheses about
eye evolution. To achieve their first goal, the researchers propose a three-fold
strategy. First, they have assembled a team of collaborators with complementary
expertise in the major maxillopod groups. Second, they will sample a diverse
array of about 100 maxillopod species. Third, they will obtain DNA sequence from
four different gene regions that will allow not only resolution of maxillopod
evolutionary relationships, but also integration with other studies on
evolutionary relationships of arthropods (including other crustaceans, insects,
spiders, and centipedes/millipedes). To facilitate future study, all data and
results will be made broadly available via a website dedicated to maxillopod
phylogeny. The second major goal is to use the resulting evolutionary
relationships to examine the evolution of eyes; most notably, to test the
fascinating possibility that compound eyes evolved multiple times within
maxillopods.&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the evolutionary relationships among these
crustaceans will be extremely valuable. The Maxillopoda have enormous potential
to inform us about evolution, biodiversity, ecology and global change because
they are benefactors of detailed fossil record, riotous diversity, and
cosmopolitan distribution. These organisms are abundant wherever there is water
and can serve for example as indicators of ecological disturbance. The studies
of eye evolution will also be important. A long-standing question in
evolutionary biology is how often and how rapidly complex traits such as eyes
evolve. This study will address these questions in a group of organisms
particularly amenable to laboratory study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;