* 0316297
* A Laser System for Simultaneous Partcle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) Combustion Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Mark Godfrey Mungal, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 83,425.00

A. PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides for acquisition of a
modern, YAG-pumped dye laser system to perform studies employing simultaneously
particle image velocimetry (PIV) and planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) of
hydroxyl (OH) and methyne (CH). This is used in fundamental studies of turbulent
diffusion flames of interest in combustion and propulsion. By using
simultaneously the combination of PIV and CH-PLIF it is possible to address, in
a unique way, two broad classes of fundamental problems: (a) the velocity,
strain rate, and residence time on the flame surface as marked by CH at
locations ranging from the jet injection nozzle to the flame tip of an attached
diffusion flame; and (b) the nature of the flame-stabilization region spanning
the range from flame liftoff to flame blowout. These results provide new
understanding of fundamental flame structure and flame stability, and a database
for comparison to large-eddy simulations (LES) of these
flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research relate to the
acquisition of fundamental knowledge of combustion systems. Energy will remain a
major issue in the 21st Century and combustion will be a large part of this, so
this broadly contributes to energy issues. These studies also train students to
the Ph.D. level, thus producing a highly trained technical workforce which adds
to national competitiveness; these students, including under-represented
minorities, are fully experienced in all aspects of electronics, computers,
spectroscopy, high-powered lasers and combustion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;