* 0316132
* Impact of Specific Counterion Binding on Surfactant Aggregates and Polyelectrolytes:  Beyond Electrostatic Screening Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 399,000.00

Linda Magid of the University of Tennessee Knoxville is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program for research that focuses on how changes
in counterion structure change the three-dimensional structure (shape and
conformation) of surfactant aggregates, and how these changes affect the
macroscopic properties (such as viscosity, detergency, and wetting) of their
solutions. Surfactants self-assemble in aqueous solution to form aggregates with
a variety of molecular shapes, including spheres, extended wormlike structures,
branched networks of worms and vesicles, and bilayer structures. Ionic
surfactant aggregates carry a net electrical charge and have a variety of
similarities to conventional polyelectrolytes. At the core of this research is a
technique for tuning the aggregates' structures by changing the chemical
structure of the surfactant ions. Special emphasis is placed on understanding
which structural features lead to aggregate branching, and which lead to
shrinking of wormlike structures back to spheres. Scattering methods (light,
x-rays, and neutrons), microscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
will be used to investigate both the microstructure and dynamics of aggregates.
Deuterated surfactants and polyelectrolytes will be synthesized for neutron
scattering experiments. Teaching and training will be promoted through two
curricular development activities benefiting high school students and
undergraduates.

Understanding the properties of surfactant aggregates is of significant
fundamental as well as practical interest. Surfactant aggregates are used widely
in personal care products, drug delivery, and a variety of other applications. A
long-term goal of this research is to establish a "chemical dictionary" that
allows surfactant scientists to understand how bulk properties like viscocity
can be manipulated by simple changes in counterion content. In addition, this
research has important connections to understanding the impact of counterions on
the flexibility of biological molecules such as DNA.