* 0316298
* Using Manipulated Phenotypes to Evaluate the Contribution of Maternal Effects to Life History Evolution in an Herbaceous Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Laura Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 06/30/2009
* USD 428,454.00

The contribution of parents to their offspring often extends beyond genes. For
example, maternal body size and nutritional condition influences offspring trait
expression in many species. Although such maternal effects have been widely
documented, the extent to which they influence evolution in natural populations
is not known. This research will use the herbaceous plant Campanula americana as
a model system to (1) evaluate a mechanistic model of maternal effects in a
natural population, and to (2) fit a quantitative genetic model to determine the
importance of maternal effects for evolution. Artificial selection and
controlled growth environments will be used to create genetic and
environmentally based changes in the expression of maternal traits. The
consequences of these manipulations for offspring trait expression will be
evaluated under natural conditions and associated with offspring success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory predicts that maternal effects may cause delayed,
negative or cyclical responses to selection. Understanding the importance of
these intergenerational effects through empirical studies and fitting genetic
models will enable more accurate predictions of evolutionary response to natural
and man-made changes in the environment. Such predictive models are necessary
for evolutionary biology to contribute to conservation, epidemiological, and
agricultural challenges. The project will also provide training opportunities to
postdoctoral and undergraduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;