* 0316231
* Probing and Manipulating the Luminescence Properties of Porous Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Steven Buratto, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 346,000.00

Steven Buratto of the University of California at Santa Barbara is supported by
the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program for research that aims to probe and
manipulate luminescence properties of porous silicon nanoparticles. To avoid
deleterious averaging effects, optical properties will be probed on isolated
nanoparticles derived from bulk porous silicon, using single molecule
spectroscopic techniques. Project goals include obtaining a detailed
understanding of the luminescence properties of these nanoparticles and how such
properties depend on the surface functionality, the size of the emitting silicon
quantum dot (i.e. porosity of the bulk porous silicon) and the dopant
concentration of the silicon starting material. Another goal is to correlate
more accurately the size of the emitting species with the luminescence
wavelength, in order to determine the degree of quantum confinement. Finally,
experiments will determine if the single nanoparticles under study consist of a
single two-level system by measuring antibunching in the sample emission.
Outcomes are expected to enable new understandings of nanoparticle luminescence
properties, aid in the development of porous silicon as an optical material, and
suggest new directions to maximize the optical properties of porous silicon.

The observation of visible light emission from porous silicon has stimulated
tremendous interest over the past several years due to its applications in
optoelectronic devices and lasers, and the potential for integration with
current silicon processing technologies. Luminescence from porous silicon was
first observed over a decade ago, and since that time scientists have struggled
to develop a mechanism to describe the photophysical properties of this
material. Although a consistent physical description is still lacking, a host of
test devices has been produced making use of the tunable luminescence and high
surface area of porous silicon. These devices include molecular sensors, light
emitting diodes, optical switches, and photovoltaic cells. Successful outcomes
for this research are expected to impact the development of further useful
devices using porous silicon.