* 0317375
* Transaction Costs and Institutional Change:  An Analysis of Western Water Law Regarding Transfers from Agriculture to Urban and Environmental Uses
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Gary Libecap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 385,498.00

Prop ID: 0317375 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Libecap, Gary D.
&lt;br/&gt;Organization:National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Transaction Costs and Institutional Change: An Analysis of
Western Water Law Regarding Transfers from Agriculture to Urban and
Environmental Uses &lt;br/&gt;CO-PI: Robert J. Glennan &lt;br/&gt;CO-PI: Alan
Ker &lt;br/&gt;Institutional Affiliation: University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The water problem in the semi-arid American West
requires a reallocation of water from agriculture to urban and environmental
uses. The research question is whether water law and institutions facilitate the
reallocation, or transfer, from historic uses to new uses. This project examines
water transfers from agriculture to urban and environmental uses in western
states to determine how water law affects the transaction costs of transfer.
More specifically, it analyzes water law in 12 states by examining statutes,
judicial opinions, and administrative rules across the states, and also Federal
law, with respect to a list of factors that affect the transaction costs of
transfer; by determining the relative importance of legal rules relative to
economic variables in explaining differences in observed water transfers across
the 12 states; and by determining whether water law has changed between 1980 and
2002 to facilitate transfers to allow water to flow to potentially higher-valued
uses in the 12 states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit: The project adds
to the body of scientific knowledge regarding the process of institutional
change in the presence of high transaction costs. The research will contribute
to the economics and legal literatures on transaction costs and institutional
change, and it will be part of the resources literature on water. The project
also adds to the body of scientific knowledge regarding the ways in which the
legal structure in western states is or is not responding to pressure to
reallocate a critical resource, water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Efficient use of water is a growing issue, not only in the &lt;br/&gt;semi-arid
American west, but also more broadly, throughout the world where water supplies
are increasingly limited relative to growing demand. The project will provide
insights into the legal, economic, and political factors that inhibit the
transfer of water to higher-valued uses with implications for economic
development, growth, and welfare. Policy recommendations may be
&lt;br/&gt;possible. Undergraduate and graduate students in economics, law, and
resource economics will be centrally involved in the research, discussion, and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;