* 0317172
* RUI: Photoregulation of Phycoerythrin Synthesis in the Cyanobacterium, Fremyella Diplosiphon
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* John Cobley, University of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 375,400.00

Brilliantly colored phycobiliproteins absorb most of the light which drives
cyanobacterial photosynthesis. These phycobiliproteins interact with colorless
linker polypeptides to form an antenna, the phycobilisome. The cyanobacterium,
Fremyella diplosiphon, can sense the color of the available light and responds
by regulating the synthesis of two differently colored phycobiliproteins,
phycoerythrin (PE) and phycocyanin (PC2). PE predominates in green light, and
PC2 in red light. This chromatic adaptation maximizes light absorption for
photosynthesis. Genes for most of the phycobilisome polypeptides from F.
diplosiphon have been cloned and sequenced. In our laboratory tools have been
developed for the genetic analysis of chromatic adaptation in F. diplosiphon.
Using these genetic tools an activator, CpeR, has been identified which is
required for the synthesis of PE and which is encoded with the PE-associated
linker polypeptides, CpeC, D and E in an operon, cpeCDESTR. It has been proposed
that the concentration of CpeR determines the rate of PE synthesis. Mutation
either in cpeS or in cpeT markedly decreases the PE level in the cell. Genetic
evidence suggests that CpeS strongly enhances the action of CpeR in green light
but not in red light. The primary goal of this project is to discover the roles
of CpeR, CpeS and CpeT, and thereby resolve the long standing question of how
the synthesis of PE is coordinated with the synthesis of its associated linker
polypeptides. Undergraduate students and masters degree students, with close
supervision by the principal investigator, will directly experience the demands
and satisfactions of biochemical research on a fundamental phenomenon which is
genetically tractable. The acquisition and use of a molecular imager will
encourage students to apply digital ideas to biochemistry.