* 0317668
* Enhancing the PSID Child Development Supplement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 330,079.00

This project will enhance the data being derived from two waves of the Child
Development Supplement (CDS), a longitudinal study of a nationally
representative sample of children with an oversample of children from low-income
families. Initially conducted in 1997 with children aged 0-12, the same
children, now aged 5-18, were interviewed 5 years later in 2002-2003.
Information on the parents, grandparents, and family members of these children
has been collected in 33 waves since 1968 in the nationally representative Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The focus of this project is to seek funds to
improve the data in four ways. First, detailed coding of middle school/high
school course enrollment and performance information about the children will be
provided, including codes for educational opportunity, academic progress and
achievement. Second, links will be created between the CDS data and other data
sources that provide information about school characteristics of the children in
the CDS sample, such as administrative data from the National Center for
Education Statistics. Third, various scales and indices will be created from the
raw data and provided on the Internet-based data center, including scales
assessing personality, psychological well-being, home environment, and cognitive
and academic achievement. Finally, this project will enhance an Internet-based
data infrastructure by creating merged data sets for researchers to use to
analyze both the CDS data and the parent/family data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID). These activities will promote teaching, training, and
learning by facilitating the use of highly complex intergenerational data by a
broad research community. With these enhancements, the combined data structure
of the PSID-CDS will allow analysts from many disciplines Internet access to
linked information on children, their parents, their grandparents, and other
relatives to take advantage of the rich intergenerational and long-panel
dimensions of the PSID. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;