* 0317026
* Linkage of Protein Folding and Assembly to DNA Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Michael Mossing, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2007
* USD 359,803.00

The Cro repressor helps to regulate the master switch that controls the
development of bacteriophage lambda. The lambda system has served as a paradigm
for the control of gene expression circuitry. This project aims to explore the
extent to which the physical characteristics of Cro determine the behavior of
this model biological control circuit. A dimer of 66-residue Cro subunits is
required to form a specific complex on its operator DNA site. Previous work has
shown that two factors can limit the rate of assembly of Cro dimers, (1) proline
isomerization and (2) competing folded monomeric conformations. In unstructured
polypeptide chains, peptide bonds preceding proline residues in the dimer
interface can adopt non-native configurations that slow the assembly of dimers
by more than 10,000-fold (from milliseconds to hundreds of seconds). At
equilibrium, exchange of subunits between dimers is also very slow (hundreds of
seconds) even under conditions where dimers and monomers are roughly equally
populated. This project seeks to extend these observations in three ways. First,
the proline residues in the dimer interface will be replaced to determine if it
is possible to streamline the folding process. Second the kinetics of assembly
of protein dimers, will be monitored in the presence of DNA. Third a new
fluorescent tracer assay will be developed to characterize monomeric species
that are critical intermediates in the DNA binding process but rare under
conditions that are typically used for protein stability measurements.

Broader impact: The University of Mississippi is committed to strengthening the
diversity of the workforce in science and engineering. Several programs are in
place to recruit, train and retain future scientists from historically
underrepresented groups and to foster interactions and the flow of information
between researchers at the University of Mississippi and students in K-12
education. Using these opportunities, this project will continue to foster the
participation of underrepresented minority students in research. In addition,
concepts and materials developed during the course of the previous award have
been applied to undergraduate and graduate education through integration into
laboratory and lecture courses. Undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in
the biochemistry laboratory course will be direct participants in the
mutagenesis, screening, preliminary protein expression and purification of Cro
variants constructed by combinatorial mutagenesis.