* 0317110
* Multidimensional Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Condensed Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* David Jonas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2008
* USD 822,299.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division funds this
project. Experimental and theoretical studies will be undertaken to develop
techniques for two-dimensional (2D) Fourier transform optical and infrared
spectroscopies in analogy to the well-established 2D Fourier transform nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) methods. To this end work will focus on four broad
areas: 1) theoretical studies will be undertaken of pulse propagation and signal
generation in a sample to enable quantitative experiments on optically dense
samples; 2) experiments will be done to attempt a demonstration of optical
analogs of the "intramolecular" and "intermolecular" double quantum coherence
found in magnetic resonance; 3) 2D vibrational correlation spectra will be
measured for a series of molecules with identical oscillators in various
geometries; and 4) the electronic dynamics in the degenerate states of a few
molecules will be probed by 2D spectroscopy and polarization dependent pump-
probe experiments using femtosecond pulses from a high stability visible optical
amplifier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2D Fourier transform infrared and optical
spectroscopy is a relatively new t that has the potential of becoming an
important analytical tool. Just as in 2D-NMR, analogous 2D-optical and infrared
Fourier transform spectra may show characteristic vibrational frequencies in
two-dimensional patterns that reveal adjacent bonds and their relative geometry.
A long-term goal of this work is to develop of new 2D optical spectrometers for
the measurement of new molecular properties. Graduate and undergraduate students
as well as postdoctoral research associates will participate in this research.
They will acquire new knowledge and skills in preparation for advance studies or
entrance into the scientific/technological job market.&lt;br/&gt;