* 0317699
* Research on Improved Methods of Estimating Production and Income Across Nations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Alan Heston, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2007
* USD 591,052.00

Prop ID: 0317699 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Feenstra, Robert C.
&lt;br/&gt;Organization:National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Research on Improved Methods of Estimating Production and
Income Across Nations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a demonstrated demand for
internationally comparable measures of purchasing power parities (PPP) and of
national accounts aggregates across space as well as time. Systematic research
on comparing PPP's across countries began with the UN International Comparison
Project in 1968, where benchmark comparisons were jointly directed by Irving
Kravis at Penn and continued under EU, OECD and World Bank direction. An
extension of this work on the expenditure side is embodied in the Penn World
Tables (PWT), which includes over 20 variables covering 170 countries for some
or all of the years from 1950-2000, a widely used research and teaching tool. In
a parallel fashion, studies on the production side have been carried out for a
large number of countries at the University of Groningen and made available for
the use of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal is to a) more clearly distinguish conceptually and empirically between
production and income of countries, drawing on the expertise of the
investigators and consultants on international trade, prices, and productivity
measures from the Center for International Data at the University of California,
Davis and the Groningen Growth and Development Center in the Netherlands; and b)
to improve the way in which price parities used in research are estimated and
aggregated for expenditure and production categories, research that will
additionally involve the School of Economics at the University of Queensland in
Brisbane. These improvements will focus on clearly indicating the errors
involved in the estimates, and providing new and/or improved measures of the
economic structures of economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the research will be to a) suggest estimation techniques that would improve
temporal indexes like the CPI and spatial comparisons of prices, production, and
income such as those contained in PWT and which other groups like the OECD and
World Bank produce; b) the proposal involves improvements in the dissemination
and coverage of PWT, including additional variables, preliminary current year
estimates of PPP's that will have more policy applications, and the development
of interactive software that will be of use to researchers and for students as a
pedagogical tool; and c) as a by-product of the research, the research centers
will develop an initiative to create an archive of international prices with
associated product and outlet characteristics that would be made available for
users on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;