* 0317867
* Prescriptive Models for Improving Subjective Probability Judgments
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Clemen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 217,330.00

Decision making in public policy as well as commercial settings is
often&lt;br/&gt;complicated by disagreement among experts regarding
estimates,&lt;br/&gt;forecasts, and even the nature of the problem under
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, it is often necessary to make a decision in the
face of such&lt;br/&gt;disagreements; collecting the required "hard evidence"
may simply be&lt;br/&gt;infeasible within a reasonable period of time. Thus, it
is important to&lt;br/&gt;find ways to use the valuable knowledge that experts
possess. Expert&lt;br/&gt;knowledge often is best characterized as "opinions"
that can be&lt;br/&gt;expressed as probability judgments, the expert's
assessment of the&lt;br/&gt;chance that something is true. Typical public-policy
settings where&lt;br/&gt;expert probability judgments are used include energy
(especially nuclear&lt;br/&gt;power and engineering), military, intelligence and
security, environment&lt;br/&gt;and health policy, and economic forecasting. In
commercial settings,&lt;br/&gt;expert judgments play large roles in overall
strategic decision making&lt;br/&gt;and situations such as oil and gas
exploration and pharmaceutical&lt;br/&gt;research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No simple answer exists for improving experts'
probability judgments.&lt;br/&gt;Psychological research has documented many ways
in which such judgments&lt;br/&gt;are biased. Because different psychological
processes may be at work in&lt;br/&gt;different situations, methods to
counteract the corresponding biases&lt;br/&gt;must be adapted to the specific
situation. The proposed research offers&lt;br/&gt;three practical methods for
improving experts' probabilities. All three&lt;br/&gt;methods are grounded in
psychological theory and are designed to be&lt;br/&gt;applicable to a variety of
probability-assessment situations. Each&lt;br/&gt;method will be subjected to
rigorous evaluation to demonstrate its&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness. The three
methods further provide models for how a&lt;br/&gt;scientist can use
psychological results and theory for developing&lt;br/&gt;additional adjustment
methods for improving expert probabilities.