* 0317239
* 2003 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Neurobiology of Drosophila Conference to be held in Cold Spring Harbor, NY, October 1-5, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 08/31/2004
* USD 15,987.00

Neurobiology of Drosophila Meeting Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory October 1-5,
2003

The planned conference on the "Neurobiology of Drosophila" will convene a group
of junior and senior scientists to discuss the latest advances in the
neurosciences which are being made in the highly successful model system of the
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. This proposal seeks support for the 2003
conference, which is the 10th biennnial international meeting in a series that
focuses on the advances made as the combined power of genetics, molecular
biology, biochemistry, cell biology, and behavioral analysis are brought to bear
on fundamental problems in neurobiology. The topics covered will range from
molecular biology to complex behavior and include: neuronal and glial
specification, axon guidance and target recognition, synaptic function,
neurophysiology, neuronal cell biology and pathology, and complex behavior
(e.g., circadian rhythms and learning and memory). By vote of the previous
participants, the meeting will remain of moderate size (300 participants) and
will have no parallel sessions, in order to facilitate discussion, exchange of
ideas and techniques, and to promote new collaborations in this rapidly evolving
field. All applicants will be encouraged to submit an abstract and the majority
of participants will either give a talk or present a poster. The speakers will
be chosen from the most timely and interesting abstracts submitted a few months
in advance of the conference, to ensure that late-breaking science is covered in
all of the talks. In the event that the conference is oversubscribed,
participants will be chosen to include at least one representative from each
participating laboratory. This conference has an established history of
highlighting the work of younger investigators and women. To encourage
participation by junior investigators, a special lecture is presented by the
graduate student who has written the best Ph.D. thesis since the previous
meeting (Elkins lecture).