* 0317171
* Population Analysis of all Transposable Elements in the Sequenced Drosophila Genome
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Dmitri Petrov, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2006
* USD 476,001.00

The project will determine the population prevalence of all ~1500 transposable
elements ("jumping genes") found in the sequenced genome of the fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster). The work will take advantage of the known location of
all transposable elements in the D. melanogaster genome to design specific tools
to estimate the prevalence of each copy in populations. Unusually frequent
transposable elements will be identified and assayed for potential functional
roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposable elements are parasitic genes that
persist by actively multiplying within genomes. As a result they are the most
genetically active component of many eukaryotic genomes. For example more than
90% of the human genome consists of old transposable elements. In Drosophila
more than half of all mutations are caused by transposable elements. This
project will be the first to comprehensively investigate population variability
of transposable elements in any eukaryotic genome. It will shed light on the
forces that maintain these parasitic genes in limited numbers, and the
consequences they have for genome evolution. It will help determine the
frequency with which transposable elements generate advantageous, adaptive
changes and will identify these for further study. This project will also
provide key information for annotation of the sequenced Drosophila
genome.&lt;br/&gt;