* 0317234
* Comparative Mechanisms Of Gonad Organogenesis in the Red-Eared Slider Turtle (Trachemys scripta)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Blanche Capel, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/29/2008
* USD 388,545.00

0317234&lt;br/&gt;Capel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary step in vertebrate sex
determination is the initiation of testis development in the bipotential gonad
primordium. In mammals this switch operates through the Y-linked gene, Sry. In
the red-eared slider turtle, as in many reptiles, the incubation temperature of
the egg determines the fate of the gonad. Despite this difference, the structure
of the adult testis is highly conserved among species. This observation led to
the hypothesis that, although the switch initiating the testis pathway is
variable, the pathways downstream that lead to the morphological development of
testis cords and the differentiation of testis cell types would be conserved.
Surprisingly, recent work in the lab has indicated that the organization of
cells into testis structure occurs in a completely different manner in
T.scripta. The main goal of this proposal is to understand how molecular signals
are deployed and cellular processes are integrated to produce a testis in
T.scripta compared to how these processes work in mammals. A number of molecular
and cellular pathways have been defined that intersect in the testis
determination process in mammals. This work will focus on the roles of three of
these independent, yet mutually interactive, components of the sex determination
process: cell signaling molecules, cell proliferation, and primordial germ
cells. First the roles of cell signaling components of the mammalian sex
determination pathway (Fgf9, Dhh, Ptc1, Pdgfra,Wnt4, Fts, and Bmp2) will be
investigated in T.scripta and their hierarchical relationship to structural and
cellular differentiation of the testis or ovary will be determined. Next, the
role of proliferation in T.scripta will be determined by blocking proliferation
before, during, and after the temperature sensitive window and determining the
effect on sex determination. Third, the role of primordial germ cells in
organogenesis of the testis and ovary in T.scripta will be investigated by
depleting germ cells before, during, and after the temperature sensitive window
and determining the effect on sex determination. This project will advance
discovery while providing an excellent training opportunity for graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows interested in using comparative approaches to
study development and gene function. Results will be broadly disseminated
through meetings and publications and the reagents produced will be freely
distributed to investigators in the field. The mechanism of sex determination in
temperature dependent systems has been a long-standing puzzle in biology. In
this work, the signaling processes involved will be investigated and ordered
with respect to the temperature switch and hormonal regulation. The work will
have direct intellectual application to the question of how temperature-
dependent sex determination works, and will enhance the study of mammalian sex
determination as well. In addition, it will have broader relevance for the
fields of cell signaling, morphogenesis, organogenesis, germ cell biology,
proliferation, and the evolution of developmental systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;