* 0317572
* Exploring Borehole Temperatures and Other Proxy Data for New Insights into the Global Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Shaopeng Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 209,628.00

The long-term climate trend information preserved in borehole temperatures is
complementary to the short-term variability recorded by conventional proxies.
This award will continue data acquisition for the global database of borehole
temperatures. Extension of the geographical coverage will enhance the analysis
of the air-ground temperature interaction and allow a better assessment of
regional climate variability at sub-continental, continental, and hemispheric
scales. The uncertainty of a regional climate reconstruction derived from
borehole temperatures is constrained by multiple factors including the noise
level of the employed data, the spatial distribution of the borehole sites, and
the perturbation from surface processes such as land use and land cover.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help refine and assess the uncertainty of
borehole temperature based regional climate reconstruction by developing and
refining strategies for combining the direct but low-resolution record preserved
in the geothermal data with the indirect but often higher resolution record
contained in traditional paleoclimatic proxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this research will help the paleoclimate science community further its goals
to advance our understanding of global climate change over the past several
centuries and its natural and anthropogenic aspects. Research on temperatures
from boreholes will enhance our ability to model and predict future change in
climate. The data products will be available online for scientific research and
educational purposes.