* 0317752
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Prices and Allocations in Markets: Theory and Experiment
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* William Zame, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 190,938.00

Prop ID: 0317715 P I: Plott, Charles R. Organization: California Institute of
Technology Title: Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Prices and
Allocations in Markets: Theory and Experiment CO-PI: Peter Bossaerts/Cal Tech;
William Zame/UCLA (Collaborative)

The goal of the proposed research is to understand the dynamics of prices and
choices in multi-security/multi-good markets. Do markets get to equilibrium, and
how? This research concentrates on a simple environment: trade takes place
during some period of time, but information is revealed and consumption takes
place only at the end of the period. Within this context, the investigators
study price and allocation dynamics experimentally and discover a number of
regularities in the data: (i) prices eventually settle close to the theoretical
equilibrium; (ii) price changes for a particular good are correlated with excess
demand of all goods; (iii) trades are small. Motivated by these empirical
findings, the investigators propose a local adjustment model, in the spirit of
local models suggested by Smale, to explain these phenomena. The purpose of this
project is to study the theoretical properties of the model and to link it to
data through a series of experiments.

Because agents in the model make adjustments that are only locally optimal, the
model is in the spirit of much work on limited rationality. However, the end
process of the adjustment process is quite rational, and the adjustment process
is more robust than most models in the literature. Thus the model illustrates
how markets can be smart even though they are populated by human beings of
limited capacity. The proposed research is meant to provide a more solid
empirical foundation for our theoretical understanding of the evolution of
prices and choices in competitive markets for several goods/securities. At the
core of the research is a dialogue between theory and data, with econometrics
providing the link.

Broader Impacts: The issues studied here are critical for the many important
existing markets in which several goods (including services and risky assets)
are traded at the same time and in which the supply, demand and price of each of
these goods depends in a complicated way on the supply, demand and price of
other goods. The proposed work should lead to a better understanding of such
interdependencies and therefore to a better understanding of the management of
risks in such markets. The experiments proposed here depend on a web-based
experimental technology (using unique facilities to which the research team has
access) that permits the interaction of many participants in real time. Although
technical challenges will continue to arise, there is no doubt that this
experimental technology can be adapted to meet them. In addition to its
usefulness as a research tool, this experimental technology will be useful as a
teaching tool, and for providing broad based demonstrations of the science.