* 0317528
* MRI/RUI Acquisition of an Energy-Dispersive X-Ray  Fluorescence (EDXRF) Analyzer for the Geochemical Characterization of Archaeological Lithics in the Hawaiian Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Peter Mills, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 143,977.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
award, Dr. Peter R. Mills and Dr. Ken Hon at the University of Hawaii at Hilo
will establish a long-term research project identifying prehistoric trade
patterns through the analysis of Hawaiian stone tools. Using an Energy
Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence (EDXRF) spectrometer, they will establish
geochemical "fingerprints" of stone tools that prehistoric Hawaiians quarried
from various sites, and track the extent to which that material was traded
throughout the islands. There is a continuing debate in Hawaii regarding the
extent of self-sufficiency that Hawaiians maintained in their various island
districts (ahupua`a). Some archaeologists argue that ahupua`a were virtually
closed economic systems, and that Hawaiians rarely engaged in long-distance
trade between districts or islands; others feel that long-distance trade in some
valued commodities was common. The EDXRF analyzer will allow archaeologists to
conduct rapid and non-destructive analyses of stone artifacts to determine the
extent and distance to which stone tools were traded from the quarries. Attempts
will be made to match tools and chipping debris found in domestic sites, with
geochemical data collected on known prehistoric quarry areas. Samples that do
not match known quarry sites may lead to the discovery of currently unknown
quarry sites, or possibly to the identification of stone tools derived from
other island groups, such as Tahiti and the Marquesas. By examining the extent
to which stone tools in various districts were derived from non-local sources,
archaeologists will be able to quantify prehistoric commodity exchange through
time and space, and possibly identify some tools that were carried over
thousands of miles of open ocean on prehistoric
voyages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mills and Dr. Hon will oversee the purchase,
installation and calibration of an EDXRF spectrometer with the assistance of a
laboratory technician who will prepare standard samples to help calibrate the
data with other laboratories in California, Oregon, Washington, Otago and
Aukland (that are working on similar projects in other regions). Over a three-
year period, a multi-scalar research project will be initiated that will process
thousands of stone samples obtained from sites on Hawaii Island, and currently
housed in UH Hilo collections. This EDXRF system, which is especially designed
for rapid and non-destructive analyses, will generate a quantum change in the
level of sampling of prehistoric Hawaiian stone tools. A key feature of the
equipment is that it is well adapted for undergraduate use, and will allow a new
generation of Pacific Islander students (21% of the UH Hilo student body) to be
trained in state-of-the-art geological and archaeometric techniques.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the research, this project is important for the
contributions it will make towards better understanding prehistoric trade in
Hawaii and prehistoric open-ocean voyaging between islands and archipelagoes. It
should also be highly significant in terms of attracting under-represented
students to the fields of archaeology and geology. By providing UH Hilo students
with the opportunity to learn a non-destructive method of analysis of
prehistoric Hawaiian stone tools, it is hoped that more Native Pacific Island
students will find common ground between scientific methodologies and the
understanding/appreciation of their ancestral past.&lt;br/&gt;