* 0317735
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Issue publics and Web use
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* David Tewksbury, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,070.00

The landscape of available political information in America has changed
dramatically in the past three decades. Of central importance, many scholars
argue, has been the rapid development and adoption of the Internet. Observers
have painted this change in variously optimistic and pessimistic terms, but
there is some consensus that this new medium appears to have the potential to
bring significant changes to the American democratic system. Given that
information is essential to citizens for making adequate political decisions and
that democracy is best sustained when citizens effectively give voice to their
needs, wants, and values, it is imperative to examine how individual citizens
interact with recent changes in the political information environment. Despite
its importance, we know little about how and why individual citizens use the
Internet in their political judgments. This dissertation project narrows this
gap. The academy's failure to fully assess how and why citizens use online
political information stems largely from three chronic problems in previous
research: a) much of the existing research has tended to be descriptive rather
than theoretical; b) prior studies have had limitations in the adequacy and
precision of their measurement of how citizens process information on the
Internet; and c) most importantly, prior research has applied a mass society
paradigm, one in which researchers have somewhat naively thought of citizens as
a single aggregation of individuals (i.e., the mass).

This dissertation project examines how citizens use the Internet in their
political judgments. Conceptually, the dissertation project adopts a pluralist
perspective, emphasizing issue publics--groups of people particularly interested
in a given political issue--and their motivated information seeking. Whereas
previous studies have focused on a causal link from content in the national news
media agenda to the public's knowledge and agenda, we direct more attention to
the impact of individuals' personal agendas on online information seeking.

This dissertation project also has a sharper focus on information processing
than has been the case in previous research. Explicating the political judgment
process, the dissertation project studies how citizens gather, assemble, and use
information in attitude formation. Methodologically, the dissertation project
will directly measure naturally occurring Web site viewing at the page level in
order to adequately and precisely measure online information acquisition and
use. This dissertation project will use an innovative Web tracking program
developed by the research team.

This dissertation project involves a set of two studies that look at how people
acquire and use online political information. The first study features
measurement of the political attitudes of a set of Internet users and
observation of their online information searching behavior. Observing the nature
and extent of information searching that varies by a level of personal issue
salience will inform how issue public members search for information differently
than do non-issue public members. The first study will also examine the effects
of personal issue salience, information search, and the interaction between
these two factors on domain-specific and general political knowledge gain,
attitudes toward issue policies, and candidate evaluations in a hypothetical
campaign context. This will reveal how the differences between issue publics
members and non-issue public members' information searching may produce
different consequences in terms of political knowledge acquisition and decision-
making. The second study is designed to assess the impact of basic information
search motivations on the acquisition and use of political information. The
second study will focus on possible moderating effects of motivations in issue
publics' information search behavior.

This dissertation project draws upon core areas of theory and research in
diverse fields of social inquiry and integrates them in novel ways. Thus, it is
well grounded in established theory, yet it suggests news approaches to
addressing pressing questions about the changing nature of citizens and
contemporary political environments. As a result of these features, the proposed
dissertation project is expected to produce broad impacts. The dissertation
project will enhance current research tools in measuring Internet use and its
antecedents. The results of the dissertation project should inform basic theory
across disciplines including communication, public opinion, and political
psychology. The proposed dissertation project is also relevant for policy
discussions among governments, interest groups, or other political organizations
about the social role and future of the Internet in modern democracies.