* 0317878
* The Global Structure of the Internet and Its Critical Infrastructure: World Cities and Telecommunications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Edward Malecki, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 89,964.00

People, businesses, governments, and other organizations rely on
telecommunications networks not only to communicate with others but also as a
key source of information. The Internet and its web sites have become a vast
database, linked to nearly all points on the globe, yet its critical
infrastructure (such as hubs of telephone networks and interconnection points
with other networks) is concentrated in large cities. This research is designed
to unpack the Internet into its component networks, particularly the large
global networks that span national boundaries, and to identify their geography
as nodes and links. This project will identify emerging and established hubs and
gateways within the Internet's structure both in and outside the USA, and
especially in Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America. The research
also will identify how changes in industrial structure and location have
affected telecommunications infrastructure at the local scale in the United
States, where both deregulation and competition have created new but largely
unplanned patterns of critical infrastructure. Telephone networks remain the
hubs for Internet dial-up and broadband access for households and businesses.
Thousands of telephone system central offices house the points of presence for
local access to Internet backbone and long-distance networks, and are
agglomerations of telecommunications infrastructure in cities. This project will
utilize a geographic information system to determine the coincidence of network
nodes, such as major co-location facilities, interconnection points, and major
digital switching wire centers. The research will use bandwidth pricing data to
estimate the demand for actual flows of digital information on dozens of routes
and to estimate traffic flows. Focusing analysis on world cities where networks
converge will untangle supply and demand for Internet connectivity via trends in
the price of bandwidth. The research is synthetic and analytical, aimed to
combine detailed characteristics of nearly 40,000 central office switches in the
USA with trends in pricing data for 80 global routes. The global and local
aspects of the research are merged only upon distillation of the central office
and wire center data into a smaller number of urban nodes.

Telecommunications networks comprise a critical infrastructure on which the
global economy increasingly depends. This research will track the continuing
evolution of the Internet/telecom infrastructure, and relate this infrastructure
at the global scale to the network of world cities. This research will monitor
the major local elements of critical Internet and telecommunications
infrastructure, including co-location facilities and large wire centers. The
project also will update knowledge about the extent of Internet infrastructure
and about the flows of data on its networks. As the telecommunications industry
consolidates through bankruptcies, mergers and acquisitions, industry evolution
affects the spatial form of the networks and their urban locations.