* 0317762
* Formation and Engineering of Spatiotemporal Structure:  Studies in Electrochemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2003,03/31/2007
* John Hudson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2007
* USD 256,739.00

Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is investigating the formation and
control of spatiotemporal patterns in chemically reacting systems and is thus
contributing to the emerging branch of research on the engineering of chemical
complexity. The work is largely experimental and is a test-bed for existing
idealized theories although a few modeling studies relating to the experiments
will also be carried out. The study will add to the fundamental understanding of
the interaction of coupling and reaction in chemically reacting systems. The
delineation of the relative importance of short-range and long-range coupling
has relevance to general chemical reactor design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;He is
investigating the effects of external signals on developed patterns and the
relationship between the imposed temporal scales and resulting spatial scales. A
recently discovered phenomenon in chemically reacting systems, the development
of clusters in which various regions of a reacting system synchronize but remain
different from the remainder of the reaction area, is being investigated in
detail; both stationary and temporally varying clusters are to be studied. He is
developing addressable arrays and investigating the effects of spatially
inhomogeneous forcing and feedback signals on reactions, both metal
electrodissolution reactions and electrocatalytic reactions. The input of
temporally and spatially varying signals gives improved control over reaction
conditions. The relationship between temporal and spatial scales is exemplified
and is being exploited in high resolution patterning of metal surfaces with the
use of ultra-short voltage pulses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses fundamental issues that are driven
by practical applications of commercial importance. Corrosion of metals has a
major recurring impact on the national economy. The oxidation of small organic
molecules and of hydrogen is of potential importance in several applications
including fuel cells and electro-organic synthesis. The ability to manipulate
temporal and spatial structures with ultra-short voltage pulses has direct
applications in the electrochemical machining of metals. The work on engineered
pattern formation can lead to improved reactivity and selectivity in chemically
reacting systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong emphasis of these studies is on
the training of students. The PI endeavors to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups. At the present time two of his six graduate students
are women and in the past ten years three African-American graduate students
have completed their PhD studies. The PI is presently associated with a training
grant from NIH for minority students along with other faculty at Virginia,
Northwestern, and Morehouse. He carries out extensive collaborative studies with
international partners in Germany, China, Mexico, and Lithuania; as part of
these studies he has an active exchange of graduate students. He plans to
continue his participation in presentation of his work in the USA and overseas;
this includes workshops organized for students and investigators from third
world countries.&lt;br/&gt;