* 0317292
* Late Pleistocene Homo erectus in Java?: Investigating the context, associations, and age of the world's youngest H. erectus sites
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Susan Anton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/2004
* USD 105,000.00

Populations of Homo erectus may have survived into the late Pleistocene of Java
(&lt;50,000 years ago), possibly coexisting with modern humans (H. sapiens) in
both time and space. Such survival of H. erectus would parallel the coexistence
of Neandertals and modern humans in Europe and also begs the question of why
only modern humans remain in both regions today. This project tests whether such
late-surviving populations of H. erectus existed in Indonesia through a two-year
field program in the Solo River Valley, Java. The team will undertake new
excavations, microstratigraphic work, and systematic faunal and taphonomic
analyses of recovered remains at known sites in the 20 meter terrace (e.g.
Jigar, Ngandong) and identify other sites in a similar geological context for
test excavation. The team will also test the accuracy of the previously acquired
radiometric age estimates (U-series/ESR ages) using other techniques (including
radiocarbon (14C), closed system U-series, luminescence and cosmogenic
radionuclide techniques). This is the first project to focus explicitly on
questions of assemblage formation in Indonesia. These data, in conjunction with
those developed for African and Eurasian localities, are critical pieces to
modeling the evolution and dispersal of H. erectus.&lt;br/&gt;This project
establishes a long term collaborative research and training program between
Indonesian and American scholars dedicated to answering scientific questions and
to the development of Indonesian scientific opportunities. The program is
designed to include training opportunities for Indonesian and American students
and infrastructure for Indonesian scientists and collections. Field and
laboratory training opportunities and at least two PhD projects will be provided
for Indonesian graduate students in addition to practical training in curation
of systematic collections, taphonomic analyses, and geological field and
excavation techniques. International field training will be provided for at
least two American graduate students. The program is likewise designed to foster
relationships between Indonesian and American graduate students with the goal of
encouraging the creation of additional productive collaborations, such as the
one between the PI and her Indonesian counterpart. The U.S. graduate students
are female, the project thus provides field opportunities in areas (field
geology and field paleoanthropology) in which women have been traditionally
underrepresented. The project also supports laboratory training of at least one
American undergraduate. Scientific research will be supported by augmenting the
laboratory collections of Gadjah Mada University with additional computer
equipment for field and lab archiving and by assisting in systematic curation
efforts. Infrastructure, including curatorial equipment, are provided to ensure
an appropriate environment for long term study. &lt;br/&gt;