* 0317802
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Institutions or Culture or Both? A Comparative Study of Government Performance
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Brainard Peters, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2004
* USD 9,400.00

Why some governments perform better than others has been a core question in
political science for decades, but it has lately taken on debate
characteristics. One line of argument holds that variables exogenous to
government -civic culture or social capital-explain differential performance.
Another line contends that there is, at best, a minimal link between social
capital and government performance and that research should concentrate on
institutional analyses and focus on variables endogenous to governments. This
project intends to achieve theoretical reconciliation between currently
competing explanations to one of the most enduring puzzles of the discipline of
political science. &lt;br/&gt;These competing explanations arise from different
research traditions and different conceptualizations of government performance.
Therefore, the project has two objectives. The first is to clarify the concept
and improve measurement of government performance by defining it on two equally
important dimensions: administrative effectiveness and policy responsiveness.
The second objective is to explain variance along both dimensions, arguing that
administrative effectiveness is mainly associated with endogenous or
institutional variables, and policy responsiveness is more closely associated
with exogenous or societal variables. The project uses a combination of
quantitative and qualitative research methods with data from local governments
of two federal systems: the U.S. and Germany. Such a case selection serves two
purposes: 1) it provides a sample of cases large enough in order to perform
statistical analyses and reveal general patterns of relationships, 2) it allows
for cross-national verification of the results avoiding the fallacy of deriving
general conclusions from the idiosyncrasies of a single national context. Thus,
the level of analysis is within system, the results are verified across systems.
The research methods employed include statistical analysis of the available
data, elite interviewing for gathering original data, as well as analysis of
available documentation. Factor analysis of data on the commonly used indicators
of government performance is used to &lt;br/&gt;empirically determine the
dimensionality of the government performance measure. Regression analysis helps
to determine the general patterns of relationships with societal and
institutional variables.&lt;br/&gt; The data for these two types of analyses is
compiled from the local government data sets of the U.S. Census Bureau and
German Association of Cities, surveys of city governments, the Government
Performance Project and German Association of Cities), mass surveys (Putnam's
Bowling Alone dataset and German Social Survey) and coding from the available
documentation, such as the municipal codes of the U.S. cities and from German
local government constitutions. The quantitative analyses are complemented by
comparative case studies of four selected cities from each country in order to
validate the results and illuminate the processes by which the various societal
and institutional variables influence different aspects of government
performance. &lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit is both theoretical and
practical. The project refines one of the most enduring puzzles within the
discipline - the determinants of government performance. In addition it
contributes to the growing intellectual debate on the effects of social capital.
Finally, in order to improve governance, it is necessary to accurately measure
government performance and this project will serve as a guidance tool for
assessing and improving the performance of specific governments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;