* 0317942
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Politics of Education Reform in Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Kenneth Roberts, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2004
* USD 10,469.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project examines the politics of
education reform at the sub-national level in Mexico. In the context of market-
oriented economic reforms that have prevailed in Latin America and much of the
developing world, scholars and policymakers have begun to emphasize the need to
reform areas of social policy. Education is particularly important, both because
of the relatively low levels of achievement throughout the region, and because
of its potential to complement macroeconomic policies to achieve long-term,
equitable growth. Mexico's education system has undergone a process of
decentralization over the last 25 years that offers an opportunity to examine
the political determinants of significant variation in reform strategy across
the Mexican states. This research builds upon studies of the causes of levels of
social spending in Europe and Latin America by moving from cross-national
analysis to cross-state comparison within a single federal system. Furthermore,
it contributes both theoretically and empirically to a nascent literature on the
politics of social policy reform in developing countries in the context of
economic structural adjustment policies. An in depth examination of three case
studies- -Guanajuato, Michoacan, and Puebla - -are nested within a broad
statistical analysis of the 32 federal units (31 states and the Federal
District) in Mexico. The latter utilize data gathered from statistical and
educational institutions in Mexico City, and the former are based upon
interviews with politicians, teacher union officials, business leaders, and
educators in each of the three cases. The research can contribute a broad social
understanding of how social policies change in response to market
liberalization. In addition to its contribution to political science, this study
adds to debates on curricular reform and the socioeconomic returns to education
by highlighting the political viability of policy suggestions. Finally, this
research contributes practically to economic development strategies by offering
insight into the political feasibility of policies that offer higher levels of
educational access and quality to people in developing countries.

