* 0317755
* ADVANCE Leadership Award:  CeMENT: Workshops for Female Untenured Faculty in Economics
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Janet Currie, American Economic Association
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 09/30/2009
* USD 350,000.00

In 1971 the American Economic Association (AEA) created the Committee on the
Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) with the goal of increasing
the number and stature of women in economics. While CSWEP has recorded, and in
some cases facilitated, many gains, there remains a significant difficulty in
increasing the representation of women in the ranks of senior (tenured) faculty.
A study by Ginther (2002) finds that, controlling for measured characteristics,
gender differences in promotion rates are considerably larger in economics than
in both the humanities and in the natural sciences. This suggests that women in
economics have a particularly difficult time making the transition from
untenured to tenured professor, compared both with men in economics and with
women in other fields. This proposal is designed to aid in this transition and
bring economics to parity with other sciences in this area. The proposal
involves workshops at the national (ASSA) meetings and at regional economics
association meetings that will be attended by selected junior faculty, and which
will serve to connect them with senior and mid-career researchers and to each
other. These workshops will offer resources, information, and networking
opportunities to enhance careers and improve the chances of professional
success, and will create and cement relationships between senior and junior
faculty and between and among junior faculty as well. The proposal seeks to put
in place an institutionalized process that will rely on the commitment of the
AEA and CSWEP for its continued and ongoing success. The proposal's broader
impacts stem from the impact on the economics profession that these workshops
will have. The objective is to increase the tenure rate for women in economics
to the rate we observe for men, and to bring economics to parity with other
sciences in this regard. This improvement will benefit not just the participants
in the proposed workshops, but the field as a whole. First, it will increase the
perceived and actual promotion likelihoods for women, attracting more and
better-qualified women to economics as a career. Second, it will increase the
number of tenured female faculty in economics, who can then serve as mentors and
role-models in their own right for future generations of junior women. This
proposal's intellectual merit stems from the random assignment methodology
proposed to allow us to evaluate the impacts of this program. While there has
been some research on the importance of mentors, there has been little rigorous
evaluation of these types of programs, and no evaluations that use random
assignment. As in the medical domain of drug testing, random assignment is
considered to be the "gold standard" for evaluation of an intervention's
impacts. By establishing conclusively the impact of this program, it is
anticipated that it will be perceived as a model on which similar interventions
can be based, both in other fields and in economics for other underrepresented
groups.