* 0317073
* Protein-Surface Interactions: MALDI MS Based Fundamental Studies and Bioselective Probe Development
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Gary Kinsel, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2005
* USD 332,000.00

Professor Gary Kinsel of the University of Texas Arlington is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to systematically explore protein-
surface interactions as a fundamental determinant of the performance of matrix
assisted laser-desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI). The PI seeks an
understanding of how surface properties affect MALDI and how these properties
can be used to enhance its bioanalytical utility. Through the PI's previous
CAREER Award, the importance of surface effects on MALDI signal for peptides and
proteins has been quantitatively demonstrated, and has lead to the conclusion
that the limit of detection (LOD) for MALDI is at least in part regulated by
protein-surface interactions. In collaboration with Prof. Richard Timmons, the
PI will examine a variety of non-fouling surfaces produced by rf plasma
polymerization in an effort to further lower the MALDI LOD. A second conclusion
drawn from the CAREER Award results is that surface chemistry can be used to
selectively modulate peptide and protein signals. Here, metal impregnated
surfaces will be explored as a means to selectively isolate phosphopeptides,
which are currently of great interest in the proteomics community. They also
propose to use surface charge as a means to concentrate analytes; surface charge
can be varied as a function of pH, which will allow for the selection of
specific pI fractions to be concentrated and later released for MALDI
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MALDI is an important approach for the sequencing
of peptides and polymers, but the fundamental processes and factors that affect
sensitivity and response are not fully understood. This work will advance the
state of the analytical art by improving sensitivity and specificity in MALDI
analyses. It will also further develop the interface between materials science
and analytical chemistry, by showing how specifically tailored materials and
surfaces can be rapidly integrated into analytical methods. Finally, it will
continue to develop new tools for the study of protein-surface interactions,
which are important in many areas, for example, in the understanding of cell
surface biology and the development of biosensors. The practical importance of
the proposed program is demonstrated by the industrial support and ongoing
industrial collaborations that the PI already has in place for the further
development of MALDI MS technology for applications including drug discovery and
bioanalytical testing for disease.&lt;br/&gt;