* 0317285
* SBIR Phase I:  High Density Optical Data Storage Based on Photonic Band Gap Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Gregory Behrmann, EM PHOTONICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,814.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project addresses the
market need for advances in commercial optical data storage technology. The
demand for increased data capacity, higher performance, and the commercial
success of products such as digital versatile disks (DVDs) is ever increasing.
Despite improvements in recording media, laser sources, and electro-mechanical
design, ultimately the data density is limited by the minimum spot size that can
be produced for recording and reading. Recently, it has been demonstrated that
near-field optical systems, which produce optical features below the diffraction
limit, have the potential to significantly increase data storage capacity.
Researchers have investigated a variety of near-field methods including tapered
fibers, solid immersion lenses, and mode index waveguide lenses. Based on
advances in semiconductor processing techniques, a new class of optical devices
based on submicron periodic structures has emerged and is referred to photonic
band gap (PBG) devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research indicates
that these devices will be capable of performing a wide variety of optical
functions including switching, modulation, and filtering. PBGs can be integrated
into small packages making them desirable for applications such as optical
interconnects and wavelength division multiplexing, sensors, and engineered
coatings. Our preliminary studies indicate that waveguides based on PBG
structures may be useful in near-field optical data storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;