* 0317368
*  Skilled perceptual-Memory and the Cross-Race Effect
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Christian Meissner, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 02/28/2006
* USD 196,977.00

Recent analysis has suggested that the cross-race effect (CRE), the tendency for
people to have poor identification and discrimination of other-race compared to
same-race faces, might be due to perceptual learning processes. The current
proposal seeks to develop a more elaborate skilled perceptual-memory account of
the CRE that is grounded broadly in the cognitive skill acquisition literature.
The intellectual merit of the proposal is aimed towards advancing our
theoretical understanding of this phenomenon, and bridging the findings of such
a framework to field investigators and eyewitnesses in multicultural
communities. Given the over-representation of minorities in the U.S. prison
system, yet their under-representation in the law enforcement community, each of
the proposed studies will focus upon the participation of Hispanic and Black
individuals. Florida International University, located in Miami, Florida,
provides a unique multicultural setting for exploring this phenomenon. Thus, the
broader impacts of the proposal involve improving the discrimination and
identification of CR faces for field investigators working in such multicultural
communities or in other countries, and reducing the fallibility of eyewitness
evidence leading to the wrongful conviction of these minority populations. The
first three studies in the proposal are designed to address remaining issues of
theoretical interest, including the assessment of early perceptual processes in
the CRE. In Study 1, the variation in research exploring the expertise-based
"inversion effect" within the CR domain will be assessed, and a paradigm will be
proposed to validate predictions based upon a skilled perceptual-memory
framework. Study 2 will explore several aspects of expert-novice performance
differences that have received little attention in the CR domain, including (a)
perceptual identification, (b) short-term memory span, and (c) "speedup" in
recognition performance. Recent research on "change blindness" has provided a
paradigm for exploring attentional and metacognitive effects of perception,
including expert-novice differences, and Study 3 will explore such effects in
the perception of own- and other-race faces. The final three studies are
designed to examine the potential application of a skilled memory framework of
the CRE. Given recent national events and the over-representation of minorities
in the criminal justice system, of critical necessity is the development of a
training program that can be administered to field investigators working in
local multicultural communities or in other countries. A 2-week intervention
will be tested in Study 4 involving a novel computer-based discrimination and
memory task. Study 5 will attempt to extend previous research on the
construction and assessment of own- and other-race photograph lineups, while
Study 6 will introduce a novel paradigm for assessing the influence of lineup
administration procedures with the potential for improving the diagnosticity of
CR identifications.