* 0318208
* An Empirical Model of Nonlinear Pricing Competition
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Eugenio Miravete, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 182,623.00

This research suggest a framework to estimate equilibrium models of nonlinear
pricing competition using data that is readily available for many industries
such as power, telecommunications, and other utilities. The basic idea behind
the econometric approach is to make use of the information contained in the
shape of tariffs actually offered to consumers to derive information about the
distribution of consumers' usage intensity. The shape of the tariffs identifies
the optimal markup that a seller charges for different quantity or quality
levels to induce a population of customers to self-select according to their
type, i.e., the intensity of their preferences, or their different elasticity of
demand. The model thus overcomes the absence of individual consumption data,
unlikely to be available for large customer markets. I consider a model of
optimal nonlinear pricing, both in its monopoly and duopoly versions. Specific
assumptions on demand and the distribution of consumer types allow obtaining a
flexible closed form solution of the model for these different market
configurations. This approach applies to cases where products are horizontally
differentiated and where consumer tastes are allowed to be correlated. The
prediction of the model is a quadratic tariff function that depends on
observable market and firm specific characteristics. The curvature of the tariff
solution is related to the hazard rate of the distribution of unobservable
individual characteristics of consumers, and drives the optimal pricing rule for
each purchase level. The quadratic tariff predicted by the model is then fitted
to the actual nonlinear tariff of each firm in each market and time, thus
allowing to estimate the structural parameters of the model, i.e., market
specific demand effects, firm specific cost effects, and consumer specific
unobserved heterogeneity.

While price discrimination practices are common, they have been theoretically
addressed only recently. The empirical makes possible to identify the
determinants of the optimal markups for different types of consumers. The major
advantage of this structural approach is the possibility of conducting several
policy evaluations. For instance, we could account for the gains in welfare and
profits of using nonlinear pricing instead of linear pricing strategies. Perhaps
the most interesting policy evaluation, given the structure of the data, could
be to study the welfare effects of horizontal mergers when firms engage in
nonlinear pricing. Dealing explicitly with second-degree price discrimination in
a competitive as well as monopolistic environment makes possible to study not
only how are efficiency gains or losses spread over different consumer types,
but also whether approval decisions on horizontal mergers could be subject to
restrictions on the way firms price their products.



