* 0318311
* Reference Points and Risk Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Judith Bryant, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 240,040.00

How people feel about taking a risk can change based on how the risk is
described. In their famous Asian disease demonstration, Amos Tversky and Daniel
Kahneman showed that people tend to prefer a sure thing when treatment options
are described in terms of the number of people whose lives will be saved, but
that people tend to prefer to take a risk when those same people are described
in terms of the number who will die from the disease. This powerful
demonstration has had an enormous impact on the field of decision making,
prompting literally hundreds of studies that confirm the importance of gain/loss
reference points as pivotal variables influencing risky choice. Despite the
ubiquitous nature of these effects, there has been relatively little serious
attention to the question of why gain/loss reference points exert the influence
that they do. The goal of this project is to evaluate three reasons why these
reference points may be so influential in risky decision making.&lt;br/&gt;1) Do
reference points imply different underlying situations? One way that reference
points might affect risk preferences is by causing people to make different
assumptions about the underlying situation. The empirical studies in this
portion of the project explore the extent to which positive and negative frames
typically lead to differences in what people assume about the risky decision
context. &lt;br/&gt;2) Do reference points indicate implicit goals? Reference
points may selectively highlight fundamentally different motivations by focusing
on approaching positive outcomes as contrasted with avoiding negative outcomes.
In a novel Ticket Transfer paradigm, a series of hypotheses are tested to
determine whether and to what extent people are differentially sensitive to
approach/avoidance goals in their responses to multi-outcome lotteries with
variations in salient reference points.&lt;br/&gt;3) Do reference points capture
motivational predispositions? A growing body of evidence continues to reveal
individual differences in the adoption of reference points, with different types
of people (e.g., optimists versus pessimists) varying from one another in their
typical approach to interpreting risky or uncertain situations. In this portion
of the project, a measure will be developed to capture these intrinsic reference
point differences both as a function of risky options and as a variable
reflecting individual differences in risk attitude. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is reflected in the innovative approach to understanding
potential sources of reference dependence, with consideration of critical
cognitive and motivational variables that are frequently overlooked. In
addition, the work may contribute to improved risky decision making. The broader
impacts of this project include intensive research training of graduate and
undergraduate students, interdisciplinary publications and graduate seminars,
and novel class demonstrations. Publications will be targeted to diverse
audiences, and diversity among participants will be encouraged. &lt;br/&gt;