* 0318629
* Space Weather:  Spatio-Temporal Dynamics During Strong Solar Wind - Magnetosphere Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mikhail Sitnov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 07/31/2007
* USD 268,805.00

The main solar wind features that drive magnetic storms are the dynamic pressure
and the induced electric field. In the magnetosphere, plasma convection and
magnetic substorms are the dominant processes that influence the ring current.
This project will use the observational data from multi-spacecraft and multi-
station ground-based measurements to study the different factors that lead to
the extreme conditions in the magnetosphere. The techniques of reconstruction of
dynamics from time series data will be used to build models of magnetospheric
dynamics, and in particular the ring current build-up and decay. Global storm
features can be predicted using data-derived models. Multi-scale features can be
predicted only in the statistical sense, but the statistical variations can be
used to place limits on predictability of storms. The primary task for the
project will be a study of the spatial structure of the storm time disturbances,
the global and multi-scale features of storms and their predictability, and the
relative role of solar wind variables (electric field, dynamic pressure,
density, etc.) as drivers of extreme conditions. The stressed magnetic field in
the Earth's magnetotail is one of the most important forms of stored energy and
its contribution to space weather hazards will be studied using multi-spacecraft
data of the lobe field, polar cap size and related variables. An important
feature of the dynamical techniques that will be used is their ability to
determine the causal relationship between the solar wind and magnetospheric
variables. These causal relationships will be used to identify the key solar
wind variables responsible for the extreme conditions in the magnetosphere.