* 0318375
* The Interconnected Genomic and Cerebral Evolution that Shaped Human Origins
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Johnson, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 259,763.00

This research team is conducting a genome-wide search for advantageous genetic
changes in humankind's ancestry. A focus is on discovering the genetic changes
that shaped humankind's enlarged brain and complex cognitive abilities. The
first step in the method of discovery is to identify the many thousands of genes
encoding proteins that function in the cerebral cortex of humans and other
catarrhine primates such as chimpanzees, gorillas, and rhesus monkeys. Next, for
these cerebral cortical brain expressed genes, determine which ones show species
differences in expression patterns, especially identify those genes with
expression patterns that differ between humans and the other catarrhines.
Finally, by data mining take full advantage not only at the completed DNA
sequence of the human genome but also of the soon to be completed chimpanzee
genome and, for many of the genes of interest, the growing bodies of DNA
sequence data from a range of primates. With this mined sequence, data for genes
of interest (those that cerebral cortical cells express) identify by
phylogenetic analysis the actual mutational changes that occurred either in gene
regulatory regions or in protein encoding regions and that were favored by
natural selection. Results obtained so far indicate that both types of
mutational changes, gene regulatory and protein-encoding, shaped the distinctive
features of the human phenotype. By combining the considerable expertise of
geneticists, biochemists, neuroscientists, and anthropologists, this research
will bridge diverse disciplines in order to elucidate the linked genotypic-
phenotypic evolution of the human brain and thereby contribute to studies that
seek a fundamental understanding of human origins.&lt;br/&gt;This research
should have broad societal impact. It will increase understanding of the genetic
underpinning of the enlarged brain humans have. In doing so, it will identify
those encoded proteins and DNA regulatory elements that evolved in more recent
human ancestry under the force of positive selection. This information could be
of great value in the field of mental health such as in the search for new
therapeutic agents for mental health practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;