* 0318547
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: A Data Mining-Based Approach to Semantic Integration of Stream Data
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Christos Faloutsos, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2005
* USD 15,780.00

0318547&lt;br/&gt;Faloutsos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
international collaborative research project. The principal investigator for the
project is Professor Christos Faloutsos at Carnegie Mellon University in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and the Japanese collaborator is Hiroyuki Kitagawa at
the University of Tsukuba in Japan. They will be undertaking research on a data
mining-based approach to semantic integration of stream data. Recent progress of
high-speed network, mobile communication, and low-cost sensor device
technologies permit the continuous collection of stream data such as
temperatures, stock prices and news feeds. Stream data can be acquired from
various sources, for example, sensors, cameras and information dissemination
servers such as news delivery channels. The goal of the research is to find
patterns and outliers and strange behavior, such as - these temperatures are
abnormally high given the respective humidities. One of the problems in stream
data is event detection. They hope to develop data mining techniques to extract
events and metadata automatically and efficiently, by analyzing the given
streams. They also propose to develop event-driven data integration techniques
to take appropriate actions (e.g., issue alerts) according to the events
detected. They further hope to develop stream classification methods and data
integration methods to merge stream information with traditional information
sources such as relational databases. Finally they plan to implement all of the
above tools in a prototype system with a visual interface. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two groups that
have complementary expertise and research capabilities. These joint efforts
should have a positive impact in many areas such as (1) civil infrastructure -
sensors on bridges and highways measuring wear and tear, number of cars and road
conditions; (2) military applications - with smart cheap sensors measuring
ground and air conditions; (3) environmental applications - with sensors
measuring water and air pollution and contamination levels. The project advances
international human resources through the participation of graduate students.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.
Results of the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in
scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;