* 0318282
* RUI: Function and Structure of Dynein-2 in Tetrahymena thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* David Asai, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2009
* USD 529,718.00

Molecular motors are nature's nanomachines, proteins that efficiently transduce
chemical energy into mechanical movement. Among the three well-characterized
motor proteins, myosin and kinesin share the same basic design for movement, but
dynein appears to work in a fundamentally different way from the other two motor
proteins. Dynein proteins themselves show considerable diversity across the
evolutionary spectrum. This diversity is readily apparent in organisms with
cilia or flagella, which express 14-15 different dynein heavy chain isoforms.
Because the isoforms differ from one another in the parts of their structures
involved in motor activity, it is expected that each isoform generates a
specific range of movement. The focus of this project is Dyh2, one of the dynein
isoforms produced by the ciliated protist Tetrahymena. Although poorly
characterized at present, Dyh2 is particularly intriguing because of the several
tasks in which it is implicated. This project uses a combination of microscopy,
genetics and biochemistry to gain new information about the molecular structure
of Dyh2 and its roles in cell motility and cell organization. Tetrahymena is
particularly well-suited as an experimental system because it possesses the cell
biological complexity of "higher" organisms (including mammals) in a simple,
genetically-accessible single cell. Importantly, any Tetrahymena gene can be
readily modified by homologous replacement, a feature that is unusual among
higher eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing new
information about the organization of dynein motor proteins and their roles in
cells, this project will engage significant numbers of undergraduate students in
biological research. The students at Harvey Mudd College participating in the
project have strong backgrounds in engineering and the physical sciences.
Biology now offers many compelling future problems for physical scientists and
engineers, e.g., bioengineering and biophysics of molecular nanomachines. This
project provides students with a meaningful research experience that introduces
them to the complexity of biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;