* 0318536
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Role of the Interface in the Reinforcement of Nanofilled Polymer Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Haskell Beckham, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0318536&lt;br/&gt;Beckham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Haskel Beckham, Department of
Textile and Fiber Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
and Dr. Mohamed A. Sharaf, Department of Chemistry, Helwan University, Helwan,
Egypt. Nanoscopic-filler-reinforced polymer composites will be prepared for
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) investigation of the molecular
structure and dynamics within the filler-polymer interphase. Polymers reinforced
with nanometer-sized filler particles exhibit significantly enhanced strength
compared to those reinforced with micrometer-sized fillers. Due to the small
particle size, the interfacial volume is sufficiently high that advanced solid-
state NMR techniques may be used for in situ studies. Silica particles will be
prepared with controlled size and surface treatment for incorporation into a
noncrystalline matrix of poly (dimethylsiloxane) and also into a semicrystalline
matrix of poly (ethylene). The surface treatment will modify the intrinsically
hydrophilic silica surface to varying degrees of hydrophobicity and
compatibility with each of the two matrix polymers. Solid-state NMR will be used
to examine the interfacial molecular structure and dynamics. The nanocomposites
will also be characterized by microscopic methods and by mechanical testing
methods. The results from this project will allow construction of molecular
structure/property relationships in nanofilled polymer composites. Such
relationships can be used to improve properties of existing materials (e.g.,
tires), and the design of new filler reinforced materials for novel applications
(e.g., high-strength fibers in transportation or architecture). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This proposal deals with an important and current issue as the
role of the interface in filler reinforcement is of interest to the elastomer
and nanocomposite communities. There are many potential applications for
polymers filled with nanoparticles. The facilities at both Georgia Tech. And
Helwan University are adequate for conducting the proposed research and, through
their collaboration, the investigators have the ability to prepare and study
novel materials. The facilities and expertise to use solid state NMR are present
at Georgia Tech. The research involves a very fundamental approach to the study
of polymer dynamics but the PIs are knowledgeable in the technological aspects
of the materials. The project will foster scientific collaboration between the
US and Egypt. U.S. students will have roles in this project, and will further
their preparation to be independent scientists. The project should result in
well-trained, multi-disciplinary, students. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;