* 0318644
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Girltalk: Adolescent Girls, Friendships, and the Making of Identities
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Sally McConnell-Ginet, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,582.00

Under the direction of Dr. Sally McConnell-Ginet, Ms. Tanya L. Matthews will
conduct fieldwork in a Salt Lake City area high school. She will interview girls
individually and in groups, asking them to talk about their friendships and
their views of social groupings and categories among the high school students.
The interviews will be recorded for later transcription and analysis. Analysis
will focus on categorizing practices, including social labels (e.g., stoner,
Poly [Pacific Islander], Molly Mormon) and attitudes towards labeling of others
and self. With recent waves of new immigration and a long tradition of a large
Mormon-identified population, Salt Lake City is an interesting area for
exploring the complex relation of ethnic and religious affiliations in
adolescent girls' developing identities and social networks. Girls' social
affiliations and divisions also offer an illuminating contrast to the more
widely studied boys' social relations, highlighting many kinds of conflicts that
often go unnoticed.

This research gives a "girls'-eye view" of the institutional arrangements in
high schools that constrain and promote particular modes of social division and
connection. It should also improve understanding of social tensions that affect
the educational environment. At the end of the research period, Ms. Matthews
will return to Salt Lake City to conduct workshops on her findings for teachers
and school administrators.