* 0318776
* Follicular Patterning Directed By Janus Kinase Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Douglas Harrison, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 12/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

0318776&lt;br/&gt;Harrison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A small number of defined
signaling pathways have emerged as reutilized intracellular signaling cascades
that initiate cellular responses. One of these is the Janus kinase (JAK)
signaling pathway. JAK signaling is the primary component of the response of
many vertebrate cells to a many cytokines and growth factors. Consequently, the
JAK pathway is essential for a many developmental events, including
hematopoiesis, immune system development, and general growth. The pathway has
been evolutionarily conserved from insects to human. Study of JAK signaling in
the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, is particularly attractive because it is
amenable to genetic and developmental manipulation and is much simpler than the
vertebrate counterpart, with only single representatives of each type of pathway
molecule. As in vertebrates, the pathway is critical to many developmental
events. Previously funded NSF activities have uncovered a requirement for JAK
signaling in the patterning of the follicular epithelium, the monolayer of
somatic cells that covers the developing egg and forms the eggshell and
specialized structures. The follicular epithelium is comprised of 5 different
cell fates that are determined by their position along the anterior-posterior
axis The JAK ligand, Upd, as well as a homologous protein, are secreted from the
poles of the egg chamber and a gradient of JAK pathway activity is created that
is highest at the anterior and posterior termini. The gradient of JAK pathway
activity determines the fates of the follicular cells. This suggests that Upd
may act as a classical morphogen, a molecule that patterns a field of tissue
into different cell fates that are assigned by virtue of position relative to
the morphogen source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two primary goals of this
research will address the hypothesis that Upd may act as a morphogen. First, the
mechanisms by which a gradient of JAK pathway activity is established in the
follicular epithelium will be determined. The distribution of the Upd and
homologous proteins their contributions to activation of the JAK pathway and
establishment of epithelial pattern will be assessed. Second, the mechanisms by
which the Upd ligand is transported to receiving cells will be examined. Known
morphogens are distributed by passive diffusion, active endocytic transport, or
a combination of the two. The contributions of these mechanisms to distribution
of Upd and homologues will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will be carried out primarily as the major training activity of
graduate students. Additional roles will be played by undergraduates seeking
learn about biology through conducting independent research projects. As in the
past, the majority of students involved in these research activities are likely
to be women and/or Kentucky natives. Results of the proposed activities will be
presented at professional meetings by the students who carry out the
research.&lt;br/&gt;