* 0318326
* Collaborative Research -- The Role of Mating Signals in Sympatric Speciation: An Integration of Comparative and Experimental Approaches
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Reginald Cocroft, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 07/31/2005
* USD 197,000.00

TITLE: Collaborative Research -- The role of mating signals in sympatric
speciation: an integration of comparative and experimental approaches
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Reginald B. Cocroft and Dr. Rafael L.
Rodriguez&lt;br/&gt;University of Missouri-Columbia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Randy Hunt&lt;br/&gt;University of Indiana-Southeast&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-
feeding insects constitute a large fraction of the earth's biological diversity.
The formation of new species of plant-feeding insects may occur in the absence
of geographic barriers to interbreeding between diverging populations (thought
to be the usual mode of species formation). Under these conditions, new species
can form if behavioral and ecological factors prevent individuals of one
population from interbreeding. The research proposed here will examine this mode
of diversification (called sympatric speciation) in a group of plant-feeding
insects, the Enchenopa binotata species complex of treehoppers.&lt;br/&gt; The
life cycle of E. binotata treehoppers is tightly linked with the growth cycle of
their host plant. Females lay their eggs in late summer inside the stem and
development in the spring is triggered by the movement of fluid inside the
plant. When insects colonize a novel species of host plant with a different
growth cycle, the populations on old and new hosts will differ in the timing of
egg hatch and mating. These differences reduce interbreeding, but this partial
isolation may not be sufficient for differentiation of the populations to occur.
The recent discovery of substrate-borne vibrational mating signals that are
transmitted through the plant tissue in E. binotata treehoppers suggests a
factor that may complete isolation and lead to divergence (sympatric
speciation). &lt;br/&gt;Mating in E. binotata occurs after a duet between a male
and a female. Male signals consist of a tone about 1 sec long, followed by
several short pulses. Females indicate receptivity to a particular male by
alternating their own response signals with his. Males use female responses to
locate them, and duets typically end in mating. Female responses thus provide an
excellent assay of mate recognition.&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize
the mating signals, and female preferences for those signals, in the E. binotata
complex. It will also examine the ways in which colonizing a new host plant can
influence the mate communication system. This approach will help us understand
the causes of diversity in mate communication systems, as well as the
relationships between communication and biological
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;