* 0318944
* RUI MRI Genomic and Genetic Analysis Research in Molecular Biology at Pomona College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Clarissa Cheney, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 235,780.00

A grant has been awarded to Pomona College under the direction of Dr. Laura
Hoopes to facilitate genomic and genetic analysis research. The grant will
provide funds for the acquisition of a microarray scanner, associated computers
and software, a phosphoimager, and a sequence detection system for real-time
PCR. All of these instruments will be used in faculty-student collaborative
research in 5 different laboratories at Pomona College.

The microarray scanner will be used to examine gene expression changes in yeast
aging, in mutants affecting the ability of yeast to recombine by recognizing
short sequences of similar DNA, and in archaebacteria that grow in hot vents on
the ocean floor. In addition, the microarray scanner will be used in projects to
look for changes in gene expression in strains with a homing endonuclease (and
mutant versions of it) cloned into the bacterium Escherichia coli. It will also
be used to examine gene expression in developmental mutants of Drosophila that
disrupt transport of membrane-enclosed vesicles within cells. Real-time PCR will
be used to quantitate the results of microarray analyses, and to examine
plasmids for double strand break (DSB) repair. The phosphoimager will be used in
faculty-student research to examine the creation and repair of DSBs, and in ChIP
assays. The phosphoimager will also be used to quantitate the amounts of various
DNA replication structures that can be detected using 2-dimensional gel
electrophoresis, allowing us to analyze replication fork stalling in aged vs.
mutant cells.

There are a number of ways this grant will impact the scientific infrastructure.
Many students at Pomona College will gain experience in cutting-edge genetics
and genomics research, thus reinforcing their interest in pursuing careers in
these fields. The microarray scanner and phosphoimager will facilitate a major
experiment in the Genetic Regulation in Eukaryotes and other research-style
classes at Pomona College, where students will learn the context of these
techniques, as well as apply their knowledge to a real problem in the
laboratory. Finally, the microarray scanner will enable scanning for the Genome
Consortium for Active Teaching (GCAT) West Coast members, whose undergraduate
student research projects and research-oriented courses impact more than 100
students annually.