* 0318313
* Perceptual Invariants as a General Mechanism for Human Interception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael McBeath, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* ping li
* 07/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Michael McBeath and Thomas Sugar
will conduct three years of psychophysical research with perception studies and
robotic simulations to test and instantiate navigational principles that guide
human interception of moving targets. They will use interception tasks to study
intrinsic perceptual principles that use unconscious, invariant, viewer-based
control variables. Interception tasks will be examined with targets above and
below the horizon, in simple and complex hilly terrains, and with ballistic and
non-ballistic trajectories. Three test domains will be included: (1) large-scale
real-world tests with miniature head-mounted cameras to measure ongoing optical
positions of target objects, (2) specialized motion laboratory tests replicated
in a new state-of-the-art motion laboratory specifically designed to monitor
body and projectile position using point light technology, and (3) robotic
simulations to further establish the viability of the proposed perceptual
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to a unified fielder
theory for interception based on control of simple perceptual invariants that
can generalize across different types of interceptive tasks. The underlying
invariant perceptual principles developed and modeled in this research will be
applicable to a variety of other tasks such as the development of autonomous
mobile robots, mobile tracking systems in automobiles and aircraft, and a better
understanding of models of the pursuit of prey. Finally, the project includes
synergistic research between perceptual psychology and robotics. The
interdisciplinary research team with expertise in both perceptual modeling and
robotics provides unique tools to succeed in this new and exciting approach to
understanding perceptual principles. From this research, new principles will be
discovered and enable a better understanding of generic navigational behavior
that generalizes across many domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;