* 0318001
* Engineering Research Equipment:    Ultrafast Laser System for Microscale Radiation Transport Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Zhixiong Guo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 07/31/2004
* USD 77,327.00

An award has been made toward the purchase of a femtosecond Ti:sapphire laser
system. The equipment will be utilized in support of innovative research
addressing emerging nanotechnology and bioimaging applications. Specifically,
the requested equipment is necessary for the proposed experiments in developing
a subsurface imaging method with temporal log-slope analysis for noninvasive
detection of small breast tumors, a two-photon fluorescence microscopy system
for investigation of drug delivery and oxidative stress in skins, and a
nanoscale sensing system for time-resolved detection of adsorption or attachment
of nanoscopic entities to a surface. The subsurface imaging method is original
and does not require complicated inverse design. The study is aimed at enabling
real time clinical use of diffuse optical tomography. The broad impacts of the
proposed research include a boost to interdisciplinary research at Rutgers and
the development of capabilities of the PI in several emerging areas, including
biotechnology. The laser system will enhance a collaborative arrangement that
has been established with Bell Labs. The equipment will also be very useful for
the training of graduate students in the operation and applications of state-of-
the-art ultrafast laser systems, and for introducing undergraduate students to
interdisciplinary topics of research. It is also a valuable addition to the
research infrastructure at Rutgers University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;