* 0318666
* Space Weather:  Determining Electric Fields through Inversion of Charged Particle Drift Measurements from a Finite Number of Spacecraft
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Michael Henderson, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 08/31/2007
* USD 254,856.00

The existence, structure and dynamics of magnetic and electric fields in the
inner magnetosphere define the movement of charged particles throughout that
region. Knowledge of these fields is necessary to understand the particle
dynamics, regardless of the level of geomagnetic activity. In the area of
magnetic fields, there are good models which allow the field to be quickly and
easily calculated for a variety of different conditions. This cannot be said for
the electric fields in the magnetosphere. The biggest untapped resource, which
can help us improve our knowledge and description of magnetospheric electric
fields is that of numerous in-situ plasma particle measurements. This project
will develop an inversion technique which combines the use of in situ plasma
particle measurements with the framework of the UBK theory. The inversion
technique will use charged particle measurements and the UBK theory to calculate
electric fields even in the absence of direct electric field measurements. The
project will also investigate what fleet of satellites would be necessary to
invert the electric field for a known magnetic field configuration. This will
include specifying fields in the inner magnetosphere as a whole, or in sub-
regions of it (e.g. the tail only, dayside only etc.). This will determine what
results could be expected from existing constellations of spacecraft (GPS, LANL,
Geo, GOES, Cluster, POLAR, GEOTAIL, all of which are operational at the same
time). The research will be embedded into an outreach program specifically
designed to high school and college students.