* 0318700
* SBIR Phase I:     All-Optical Method to Detect and Diagnose Optical Faults in Advanced  Optical Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Paul Melman, Newton Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,720.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a breakthrough, enabling technology for monitoring of optical signal
transmission. Optical networks must be continuously supervised to ensure
reliable data delivery. Advanced networks are evolving towards denser wavelength
spacing and optical nodes. This trend obsoletes current optical signal quality
monitoring techniques. An integrated all-optical method that not only monitors
but also performs on-line diagnosis of optical faults in advanced networks will
be demonstrated. Phase I will show the feasibility of a new measurement
principle for monitoring optical noise components at the same wavelength as the
optical signal itself. This capability is designed or a real network environment
which includes the presence of polarization mode dispersion (PMD), a phenomena
which has frustrated other approaches to in-channel noise detection. The project
will include development of mathematical models of optical noise and PMD
behavior, assembly of a network testbed, and experimental data. Results will
meet commercially accepted standards of sensitivity and repeatability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This monitoring technology enables network equipment to
develop and deploy advanced networks. Advanced dense wavelength division
multiplexing (DWDM) systems, which employ higher channel density and optical
routing, are becoming available. These systems are very attractive to carriers
because they offer cost savings of greater than 50% on both initial capital
expenditure and on-going operating expense. This represents an enormous cost
savings for telecommunications carriers and ultimately all data communications
consumers&lt;br/&gt;