* 0318347
* A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation of the Returns to Legislative Oversight
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Sean Gailmard, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2005
* USD 181,525.00

Especially since Ogul (1976) and Aberbach (1990), explanations for congressional
oversight of bureaucracy have been incentive based: oversight became more common
on the record between the 1960s and 1990s because the returns to it increased.
Scholars are confident about a few broad, systemic changes in Congress as a
whole that have increased returns to oversight in general. Thanks to Aberbach
(1990) they are also confident of several traits of committee structure that are
associated with oversight (e.g., decentralization, staff, information networks).
&lt;br/&gt;Beyond this very little is known about causes of oversight, or how
oversight relates to other control strategies such as judicial review,
restricted discretion, or "deck stacking" administrative procedures. Indeed, the
returns to oversight cannot be separated from the presence and productivity of
other mechanisms for influencing agencies, and the need to exert that control in
the first place. Moreover, essentially nothing is known about what
characteristics of bureaus and bureau behavior cause them to be subject to
greater oversight. Since the activity in question is not just congressional
oversight, but congressional oversight of bureaucracy, one expects that actions
and characteristics of both institutions factor into the returns of oversight to
legislators. &lt;br/&gt;This research investigation expands our understanding of
the returns to oversight. It combines formal modeling, empirical assessment of
the implications of new and existing models, and "natural experiments" with
watershed administrative law and political changes to locate the returns to
oversight in a wider context of congressional attempts to influence agency
behavior. It has the broader social value of providing new knowledge of
variation in and causes of oversight across committees, the antecedents of
oversight within the bureaucracy itself, and the place of oversight in a larger
set of tools for congressional influence on agency behavior. &lt;br/&gt;In this
project the researchers build an explicit model of oversight, restricted
discretion, administrative procedures, and judicial review as alternative means
(with varying reliability and cost) to influence agency readings of statutes;
derive hypotheses about the effects of exogenous shocks such as court cases and
salient political developments on the returns to oversight; empirically assess
the implications of major administrative law changes on legislative control of
bureaucracy; use relative political action committee contributions to members
and nonmembers of oversight committees as a more direct measure of changes in
returns to oversight than has been used in the literature (and one less tied to
formal, on the record activities); refine existing indirect measures of changes
in the value of oversight (e.g., calendar days devoted to it by various
legislative committees) by accounting for committee attendance as a measure of
hearing &lt;br/&gt;importance; provide a theoretically-based empirical account
of the features of bureaucracies that increase legislative returns to overseeing
them (e.g., extent of discretion, preference conflict with the legislature,
major rulemaking activity, potential for fraud as measured by the GAO); and
extend research on attributes of legislatures and committees (e.g., .small
government. ideology, statutory oversight requirements) that increase the
returns of oversight to them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;