* 0318211
* Charge-Carrier Dynamics in Novel Photorefractive Inorganic:  Organic Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 515,753.00

This project aims to study basic processes associated with the photorefractive
effect in novel hybrid inorganic-nanocrystals containing polymer-dispersed-
liquid-crystal nanocomposites, where the various necessary processes take place
in different nanodomains. This provides the opportunity to combine the merits of
the two widely different classes of materials, inorganic and organic, to
optimize the various processes. Fundamental processes of photo-charge generation
and charge-carrier dynamics as well as the space charge field induced electro-
optic orientation (birefringence) of the liquid crystal nanodroplets will be
studied. The goal is to produce spectrally tunable high performance
photorefractive nanocomposites. The kinetics of grating growth and decay and the
effect of various liquid crystal parameters on the photorefractive efficiency
will be investigated. The project will expose graduate students to state-of-the
art nanocrystals synthesis and sample fabrication techniques. Also, they will
learn about different cutting-edge characterization schemes including
photoconductivity, time-of-flight mobility, degenerate four wave mixing and two
beam coupling experiments requiring the use of various types of laser sources.
%%% Photorefractive processes utilize conversion of light energy to electrical
charges and their subsequent movement. They find important applications in
optoelectronic devices that are useful for optical amplification and beam
improvement for telecommunications, as well as for correction of beam distortion
in light based radar. In order to produce the improvement in performance
necessary for these applications, significant gains in the photogeneration of
charges and their speed are needed. These improvements will also benefit the
development of highly efficient solar cells where light can be transformed more
efficiently to electricity. This proposal utilizes nanotechnology to combine the
merits of two widely different classes of materials, organic and inorganic, to
produce hybrid media and separate the various processes in different nanosize
regions. By a combination of the proposed techniques, a fundamental
understanding of these processes in this hybrid media will permit their
optimization separately. A valuable part of the proposed research will be to
provide broad based training of graduate students to enhance the skilled
workforce needed in this vital area of photonics. This research underpins
advances in a number of energy related technologies, such as solar energy, that
address important societal needs. Students trained in these areas will compete
effectively in high technology job markets.