* 0318640
* Commodity Chains and Land Use in Northern Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Lisa Gezon, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2007
* USD 50,580.00

Studies of the human dimensions of protected area management have tended to
focus on local levels of analysis, examining the causes of land use in and
around protected areas. Systematic links between localized land use patterns and
broader political and economic frameworks have not routinely been identified.
The goal of this research is to trace commodity chains of cash crops produced in
and around protected areas to their points of consumption. This will contribute
to an understanding of some of the specific ways that human-environmental
relationships extend beyond the local in patterned interactions with extra-
local (regional, national, global) political, economic, and cultural influences.
In particular, this project explores the relationship between urban demand and
protected area land use patterns, focusing on the social and cultural factors in
production for market (cash crops), distribution, and commodity consumption
around the Mt. d.Ambre protected areas of northern Madagascar. On a practical
front, this will permit an identification of non-local (dis)incentives for using
land in certain ways, which will, in turn, guide planners in designing protected
area management schemes that take these factors into consideration. The guiding
research questions are to trace the relationship between commodity production in
a protected area buffer zone and land use practices, and to analyze the
incentives for such commodity production. Hypotheses are that recent land
clearing has occurred for commodity rather than for subsistence production and
has tended to take place either near or within protected area boundaries; and
that compared with subsistence rice farming households, commodity producing
households farm more land, own more of the land they farm, and engage in a
higher level of consumption of purchased items; and that urban demand for and
consumption of the commodities at regional, national, and possibly international
levels provides an incentive for commodity production. These questions will be
pursued within the context of a multi-site analysis of commodity chains that
analyzes the flow of commodities between sites of production, distribution, and
consumption. Methods for collecting data include interview schedules targeted at
specific populations, open-ended interviews, archival and gray literature
research, and controlled comparisons of sites. It will also draw on a study of
land cover change using satellite images. Its intellectual merit includes
contributing to discussions within environmental anthropology of how to link
local sites of analysis with broader spheres not only by invoking decision-
making contexts (i.e. the political frameworks dominant in political ecology
analyses), but also the economic and livelihood dynamics of markets and
consumption. Understanding links between sites also contributes to discussions
within the literature on conservation and development on how to conceptualize,
and therefore operationalize, an approach to conservation that does not narrowly
focus on proximate drivers of degradation but seeks to place these activities in
a regional, national, or global perspective. In terms of the project's broader
significance, the findings will be disseminated to practitioners and policy-
makers, as well as to scholars, with the goal of benefiting not only the people
and physical environment of Madagascar, but also people in other areas where
resources are being managed for sustainable use. The activities covered by this
grant will also include the training of Malagasy students and conservation
workers, and the training of the research team by Malagasy professionals and
other authorities. Finally, this research will develop the infrastructure for
research and education by solidifying links between U.S. and Malagasy
educational and research facilities. Specifically, partnerships will be enhanced
with the Universite Nord of Madagascar in Antsiranana, the offices of the
Malagasy park service equivalent (ANGAP), and various international conservation
NGOs, government offices and archival facilities. This will lay the groundwork
for further research and collaboration between United States-based scholars and
Malagasy institutions, students, and professionals.

