* 0318044
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Who Gets What? The Politics of Income Inequality in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* James Stimson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 07/31/2004
* USD 8,091.00

&lt;br/&gt; Who gets what?. is a central question of political contestation in
the United States and &lt;br/&gt;around the world. Answers to this question can
come in a variety of forms. For example, the &lt;br/&gt;Civil Rights movement in
the United States was about what rights would be given to African
&lt;br/&gt;Americans, and the abortion debate concerns the values government
will authoritatively enforce. &lt;br/&gt;But at its heart, .Who gets what?. is a
question of material well-being. Essentially, the question &lt;br/&gt;is .Who
gets the money?. &lt;br/&gt; An empirical answer to this question is available
in the distribution of income, or income &lt;br/&gt;inequality. Income
inequality, then, is a key outcome of any political-economic system, and a
&lt;br/&gt;great deal of research in economics, sociology, and political science
has focused on explaining &lt;br/&gt;this outcome. Previous research has shown
that changes in labor markets, the demographic &lt;br/&gt;composition of
populations, and wage-setting institutions help to determine income inequality.
&lt;br/&gt;This project examines these factors, but goes beyond by focusing on
how government acts to &lt;br/&gt;influence inequality in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt; Research in political science has suggested that the primary
mechanism through which &lt;br/&gt;governments influence distributional outcomes
is direct redistribution . taxing the wealthy to &lt;br/&gt;provide benefits for
the middle and lower classes (Bradley et al. 2003; Hibbs and Dennis 1988;
&lt;br/&gt;Page and Simmons 2000). The first component of the analysis in this
project builds on the &lt;br/&gt;current state of knowledge by using aggregate
time series data to test the connection between the &lt;br/&gt;ideological tone
of policy and government.s redistributive effect. Previous studies have used
&lt;br/&gt;partisan control of government as a proxy for policy. In the context
of a country like the United &lt;br/&gt;States, where party discipline is
comparatively weak, partisan control is a noisy indicator of the
&lt;br/&gt;ideological content of policy. This project provides for more robust
analysis by explicitly &lt;br/&gt;examining the policies considered and enacted
by government. The findings obtained thus far &lt;br/&gt;suggest that liberal
shifts in policy cause increases in redistribution. &lt;br/&gt;The second
component of this project considers a relatively unexplored mechanism
&lt;br/&gt;through which government can influence distributional outcomes .
manipulation of economic &lt;br/&gt;opportunity. Almost every type of government
activity, from environmental or corporate &lt;br/&gt;regulation to defense
spending, enhances economic opportunities for some groups to the
&lt;br/&gt;exclusion of others. Inequality is influenced to the extent that the
rich or poor are &lt;br/&gt;disproportionately advantaged by these activities.
This project assesses the distributional &lt;br/&gt;influence of government
manipulation of economic opportunity by analyzing the connection
&lt;br/&gt;between government policy and inequality before taxes and transfers.
Initial analysis suggests &lt;br/&gt;that policy influences inequality as much
through manipulation of economic opportunity as &lt;br/&gt;through
redistribution. &lt;br/&gt; The final component of this project consists of
interviewing policy elites and requires &lt;br/&gt;additional funding for its
successful completion. More specifically, funding of this project would
&lt;br/&gt;provide the ability to reside in Washington, D.C. for approximately
four months to conduct &lt;br/&gt;interviews of political appointees, high-level
civil servants, and interest group leaders whose &lt;br/&gt;activities influence
distributional policy making and implementation. Given that the question
&lt;br/&gt;.Who gets what?. is so politically central, distributional
considerations are likely central to the &lt;br/&gt;thinking of policy elites,
and many may have sophisticated conceptions of how government
&lt;br/&gt;activity influences distributional outcomes. This part of the project
would aid in understanding &lt;br/&gt;the degree to which policy elites consider
distributional outcomes when defining policy options &lt;br/&gt;and crafting
national policy, as well as inform the empirical aspects of the project.