* 0318108
* Activation of the Mu Middle Promoter by Mor Protein - A Model System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Martha Howe, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 84,250.00

Organisms have evolved to use a wide variety of regulatory mechanisms to
maintain cellular homeostasis, respond to environmental stimuli, and carry out
the programmed changes that drive development. Regulation is often exerted at
the level of gene transcription to conserve energy, and viruses are excellent
model systems for the study of such regulatory mechanisms. The scientific goal
of this research project is to describe from a molecular, mechanistic, and
structural perspective how the Mor protein, a member of a unique family of small
transcription activator proteins, carries out its regulatory role by activating
transcription of the genes expressed during the middle phase of development of
the model transposable virus bacteriophage Mu. Experiments will be conducted (i)
to complete the three dimensional structure of the Mor protein by X-ray
crystallography, (ii) to test the predictions of that structure by isolating and
characterizing mutants altered at residues predicted to be important for Mor
structure and function, and (iii) to assay the effects of amino acid changes in
Mor and the alpha subunit-CTD of RNAP to define the specific interactions that
lead to recruitment of RNAP by Mor. The broader impact will consist of providing
the graduate students conducting these experiments, and younger students
(including K-12) who hear them described, with (i) an understanding of multiple
research technologies, (ii) training in experimental design and interpretation,
(iii) experience in critiquing and applying information from the literature to
biological research, and (iv) the excitement of making new scientific
discoveries.