* 0318091
* Estimation, Testing and Model Selection in Semiparametric Copula-based Multivariate Dynamic Models
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Xiaohong Chen, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2006
* USD 148,429.00

Because of their skewed and unusual distribution, financial time series modeling
pose challenging problems that require the analyst to model the entire
conditional distributions. This is especially true if the series is
multivariate, possibly nonlinear, time series. One set of models that mimic the
distribution of financial time series very well are copula-based models. An
important development in econometrics is the emergence of nonparametric and
semiparametric methods because they impose few restrictions on parameter space
as compared to parametric estimation. Although practitioners in finance and
insurance have long used copulas to model multivariate option pricing, portfolio
value-at-risk, correlated default and credit risk, contagion, and the time-
varying asymmetric non-linear co-movements among different series, existing
methods fail to successfully address the issues of estimation, testing, and
model selection in the semiparametric multivariate time series via copulas.

This proposal consists of several projects on the specification, estimation,
testing, and model selection of a new broad class of Semiparametric Copula-based
Multivariate Dynamic (SCOMDY) models. The model is based on the idea that all
macroeconomic data are non-linear beyond the second moment. The modeling
combines parametric and nonparametric methods to reduce the problems of
dimensionality inherent in nonparametric methods. This is an innovative and
ambitious approach to modeling the conditional distribution of multivariate time
series and the results would advance our understanding of the behavior of
financial and macroeconomic time series.

The proposal offers a flexible and practically feasible way to model the entire
multivariate conditional distributions of multiple economic and financial time
series that typically have nonlinear, asymmetric co-movements, and fat tails.
The research outputs will make significant, original contributions to the
current econometrics and statistics literature on the estimation, testing and
model selection of semiparametric copula-based multivariate models. The outputs
of this proposal will guide applied researchers and practitioners to perform
statistically reliable economic policy evaluations, financial forecasts, and
risk managements. This research makes an important contribution to the
estimation of multivariate financial and macroeconomic time series.

