* 0318378
* Gender and Competition: Do competitive environments favor men more than women?
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Uri Gneezy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 89,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;Although women have made huge strides in catching up with men in the
workplace, a gender gap persists both in wages and levels of advancement.
Commonly cited explanations for this gap range from charges of sex
discrimination to claims that women are more sensitive than men to work-family
conflicts and thus less inclined to make sacrifices for their careers. We
suggest that another factor may be at work: a deeply ingrained difference in the
way men and women react to competition that manifests itself even at an early
age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A previous study (Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini,
QJE, 2003) involved several hundred students. Groups of six students were paid
to solve simple maze problems on a computer. In some groups, subjects were paid
50 cents for each problem they solved during the experiment. In others, only the
person solving the most problems got rewarded--but at the rate of $3 for each
maze solved. Regardless of the sexual makeup of the groups, men, on average,
performed slightly better at solving mazes when students were paid for their own
performance. But when only the top student was paid, average male performance
rose sharply--by about 50%--while female performance remained the same. A
plausible explanation for this result is that because men are slightly better at
solving mazes, they have higher incentives to increase effort in the
competition. We now wish to test this explanation by investigating other tasks
that may favor women, such as solving anagrams. These new tasks will be
performed in a very similar environment to the maze study. The main research
question is does moving to the new task change (reduce) the gender gap?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main conclusion from the findings so far is that
females tend to be far less responsive to competition than males--a tendency
with important implications. If the gap is affected by the nature of the task
and the stereotypes, then the policy implications of the findings should be
refined. For example, when considering a single sex classes, should it be only
for math where the stereotype is that boys are better, or also for literature in
which the stereotype is that women are better.&lt;br/&gt;