* 0318686
* Phylogenetics and Morphological Diversity of the Grass Subfamily Pooideae (Poaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jerrold Davis, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 265,000.00

Within the grass family (Poaceae), which includes about 10,000 species, one of
the two largest of the twelve subfamilies is the Pooideae, with about 3300
species. This subfamily includes most of the grasses of temperate and boreal
regions. Among many other species, it includes wheat, barley, rye, and their
relatives of the tribe Triticeae, which has been the focus of intensive study,
in terms of its phylogenetic and genomic relationships. The common occurrence of
hybridization and polyploidy have been thoroughly documented in this group, in
part because of the economic importance of the species in this assemblage. Most
species of the subfamily (about 2200) fall within another group, which consists
of species formerly assigned to three different tribes (Aveneae, Poeae, and
Hainardieae). This group, the APH complex, includes many species of economic
importance such as oats, timothy, bentgrass, the fescues, and the bluegrasses.
Preliminary data acquired by Prof. Jerrold Davis at Cornell University indicate
that the three major tribes previously recognized within the APH complex are
intermixed phylogenetically. This suggests that the characters traditionally
used to distinguish these groups have arisen in parallel several times or that
hybridization among species from different lineages within the group has
generated new (possibly polyploid) groups that combine the features of the
various parents, as has occurred so frequently in the related Triticeae. In
comparison to the Triticeae, the APH group is much larger, and much more poorly
known. The main goal of the proposed work is to generate a phylogenetic
hypothesis for subfamily Pooideae, with specific attention to the APH complex.
To accomplish this, three data sets will be generated and analyzed separately
and in combination. The three character sets are a set of linked genes in the
plastid genome (ndhF, ndhH, and rbcL), a nuclear-encoded gene (GBSSI), and a
structural character set that includes features such as spikelet structure and
leaf anatomy. Instances of incongruence among these data sets will be examined
to identify evidence of character parallelisms and reversals, and inter-lineage
hybridization. One interesting quality of ndhF and ndhH is that they lie near
opposite ends of the short single-copy (SSC) region of the plastid genome, near
the boundaries of this region with the flanking inverted repeat (IR) regions. In
some grasses the 5' end of ndhH extends into the IR region, and thus is
duplicated in the genome, while in others the 3' end of ndhF extends into the IR
region, and thus is duplicated. In addition to the phylogenetic goals of the
work, the distribution of these attributes, the sizes of the duplicated
portions, and the dynamics of gene exchange between these regions are topics of
research. One of the broader impacts of the proposed work will be the training
of undergraduate students, who will be engaged in study of molecular and
structural characters of the target group. Also, a website will be developed
that will depict the critical structural and anatomical features of the
subfamily, and will provide taxon descriptions, data matrices, trees, images,
and a classification of the group, with problematic taxa highlighted. The APH
group includes numerous species of economic importance, yet, as indicated above,
systematic relationships within the group are poorly understood. The species of
this group, and of subfamily Pooideae as a whole, are of great interest to
investigators in a variety of areas, including genetics, ecology, agronomy,
range management, etc., and a website that describes the grasses of this group,
and that depicts characteristics of the taxa and relationships among them, will
be of interest to many scientists and other persons, and will stimulate
additional investigation. Thus, the information generated during the course of
the proposed work will be disseminated rapidly to students, professionals, and
other persons.