* 0318389
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Institutions and Inter-ethnic Relations in Bosnia-Herzegovina
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Donna Bahry, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 08/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation uncovers the effects of differing political institutions on
individual-level propensities for trust and cooperation in ethnically-divided
societies. Whereas much scholarly attention has been devoted to understanding
the institutional conditions that lead to violence in ethnically-divided
societies, very little is known about what institutions can do to improve
ethnic-relations once violence is a foregone conclusion. Bosnia-Herzegovina
represents an ideal case for evaluating theories of ethnic conflict and
cooperation and this project employs a novel method of empirical analysis for
achieving this purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research provides
an opportunity to link general theories of ethnic relations across the dividing
line of pre- and post-conflict. Empirical findings from this study will help
resolve many unanswered questions on the effectiveness of international
peacekeeping interventions and avenues for restructuring multi-ethnic states to
prevent the occurrence and reoccurrence of violent ethnic conflict in many parts
of the world. As such, the theoretical, methodological-empirical, and policy
bases of this research can be applied to post-conflict environments beyond the
Bosnian case and mark the beginnings of a research program that is truly global
in perspective. The use of combined survey and experimental methods has not been
attempted before in any post-conflict environment, and therefore, the research
design and the empirical data generated from it will serve as first steps in
what is currently an uncharted area of research.&lt;br/&gt;