* 0318749
* The Use of Vibronic Coupling to Determine In-Plane and Out-of-Plane Distortions of Metallopophyrins in Solution and in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Reinhard Schweitzer-Stenner, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2004
* USD 362,094.00

In this project, funded jointly by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, the PI will develop Resonance Raman
Spectroscopy as a tool to determine the interaction mechanisms, by which
functionally relevant asymmetric distortions of the macrocycle of
metalloporphyrins are induced. This involves intramolecular interactions with
peripheral substituents and intermolecular interactions with a protein
environment. Out-of-plane distortions will be determined by measuring the
intensity of Raman bands of out-of-plane modes, which is proportional to the
square of the displacement along the distortional coordinate. In-plane
distortions will be obtained by applying Polarized Resonance Raman Dispersion
spectroscopy, which involves the measurement and analysis of the depolarization
ratio dispersion of structure sensitive Raman lines. Well-characterized
metalloporphyrins will be utilized to correlate the vibronic coupling parameters
of out-of-plane and in-plane modes with symmetry classified distortion
parameters, so that the former can be used to determine the distortions of
porphyrins and heme groups of unknown structures. In addition to Raman
measurements, the PI will record the Circular Dichroism of the investigated
porphyrins to correlate the rotational strength to the amount of out-of-plane
heme distortions. The results of the Raman studies will be used to discriminate
between the contributions of electronic and vibronic perturbations to the
splitting of bands in the optical spectrum of heme proteins. These studies will
clarify to what extent and by which mechanism the latter are determined by a
linear Stark effect due to the internal electric field in the heme cavity. All
these investigations will be carried out with a set of natural and 'side
directed,' functionally well characterized mutants to identify the contributions
of specific amino acids to heme distortions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute in general to the structure analysis of porphyrins and heme
proteins in that the employed techniques will enable the detection of subtle but
functionally relevant structural changes of the heme group in the sub-Angstrom
range. This cannot be accomplished by X-ray crystallography. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained at the interface of chemistry,
biochemistry, and molecular biology. They will learn quantum mechanics, theory
and practice of Raman, optical absorption and CD spectroscopy, protein
biochemistry, and the different aspects of the relationship between structure
and function of proteins. Students from underrepresented groups will be involved
in the project. &lt;br/&gt;