* 0318170
* Estimating Models of Firm Entry
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Gautam Gowrisankaran, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2008
* USD 207,645.00

This study estimates models of firm entry and technology adoption for new
products, for two different, but related, industries: the automated
clearinghouse (ACH) electronic payments technology and automatic teller machines
(ATMs). The study analyzes adoption of ACH technology in order to quantify the
magnitude of network externalities in the consumer payments industry. In an age
in which computers and technology are increasingly prevalent, paper checks
remain the dominant payment instrument in the United States. One possible
explanation for the lack of usage is network externalities: it is possible that
the reason that many consumers and banks have not adopted ACH is simply that
there is not a critical mass of users who already are using it. The study will
estimate the consumer and bank costs and benefits from ACH adoption using an
equilibrium model and data on bank locations, sizes, and usage and adoption of
ACH. The study analyzes entry of ATM machines in order to understand the impact
of price regulation on firm entry and welfare in a differentiated product
environment. Until 1996, major ATM networks fixed the fees that were charged for
using an ATM through their network. This system broke down in April 1996, with
the result that both the number of ATMs and the price of ATM services increased
dramatically. The impact of this change on consumer welfare is ambiguous. ATMs
are differentiated products, with a primary characteristic being their location.
The increase in the number of ATMs implies that consumers have to travel less to
get to an ATM. This decrease in distance can compensate for the increase in
price. Using data on locations of ATMs, the study will estimate the fixed costs
of ATM operation and consumer disutility from price and distance, and use these
to evaluate the welfare impacts of surcharge bans.&lt;br/&gt; The study will
provide answers to potentially relevant policy questions, such as the costs and
benefits of subsidizing ACH adoption and of regulating fees for ATM
transactions. Of necessity, the study will answer policy questions by uncovering
structural industry parameters, such as consumer utility and bank cost
functions. In general, entry decisions by firms in a market are made in
simultaneous equilibrium, which implies that straightforward methods to uncover
structural parameters are often not valid. Thus, the study will use and extend
frontier structural econometric estimation methods. These methods are
potentially applicable to a variety of other economic problems. Although the
models are stylized descriptions of reality, the study will use transparent
sources of data variation that can reasonably attempt to mimic experimental
variation. For ACH, the study creates a quasi-experimental source of variation
by examining small markets and treating the bank-level adoption decisions by
small branches of non-local banks as exogenous to the conditions in the small
markets. For ATMs, the study uses state-level regulatory differences, stemming
from the fact that the State of Iowa banned most ATM surcharges until early
2002, while neighboring states did not. Thus, this study may also be of use in
other economic problems, in that it provides ways in which transparent sources
of data variation can be used to estimate structural models.&lt;br/&gt;