* 0318128
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Knowledge Discovery in Large Virtual Environments: Towards a New Approach for Solving Wayfinding Problem
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Mehmed Kantardzic, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 29,736.00

0318128 Kantardzic

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project between Dr.
Mehmed Kantardzic, Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky and Dr. Walaa Sheta, Mubarak City
for Scientific Research, Alexandria, Egypt. The investigators will conduct
research to address the problem of dealing with spatial information in large-
scale virtual environment using Knowledge Discovery Techniques in spatial data,
which attracted attention in recent research. Users of large or highly occluded
virtual environments (VEs) often experience difficulty in maintaining their
spatial orientation (sense of position and orientation) within the virtual
world. VEs do not in general provide the same rich set of cues for distance,
motion, and direction found in the physical environment. Also, immersive VEs
using head-mounted displays (HMDs) generally have a small field of view, further
reducing the visual cues used to maintain spatial orientation. The knowledge
extracted and new patterns discovered from mining both virtual environment
database and user navigation patterns may play an important role in
understanding spatial information, capturing intrinsic relationships between
spatial and non spatial information, reorganizing spatial information to
accommodate data semantics and achieve high performance.

Scope: Virtual environments are moving toward more realistic and complex
applications, such as walkthrough, medical and educational systems, requiring
huge scene databases. Application of knowledge discovery techniques is important
for understanding spatial data and discovering spatial relationships between
spatial and non-spatial data. Data mining or knowledge discovery in databases
(KDD) is a new research field for discovery of interesting, implicit, and
previously unknown knowledge from large databases. The PIs will produce a system
to mine a large virtual environment spatial data. The two sides have
complementary experience in virtual reality systems and knowledge discovery
methods. Sheta's research is focused on virtual environment and knowledge
discovery while Kantardzic's is focused on large virtual environment and its
object database. This project will have mutual benefit and will allow the two
sides to solve the difficult problem of dealing with wayfinding in large virtual
environment. It will involve two junior scientists in Alexandria, Egypt. This
project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities.