* 0319966
* LTREB: A Long-Term Investigation of the Interplay of Biotic vs. Abiotic Factors in a Chilean Semiarid Community
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Peter Meserve, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2009
* USD 314,280.00

The goal of this study is to continue, and to refocus, a long-term, large-scale
experiment that investigates the importance of predation, competition and
herbivory in a Chilean semi-arid community. Existing results show that the most
dramatic effect on vegetation is this area has been in response to increased
rainfall associated with a recent El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event,
rather than to herbivory or predation. This finding suggests the hypothesis that
bottom-up effects structure this community during dry years, while biotic
interactions (top-down regulation) become more important as animal numbers
increase in response to increased productivity associated with rainfall. The
specific purpose of this study is to continue our long-term experiment to
confirm this suspected pattern of events, and to extend our observations to
lizards, birds, and insects. This experiment promises, over the long-term, to
provide an instructive example of how direct and indirect effects diverge
through a community, and how their importance shifts as the physical environment
changes. In addition to addressing basic ecological questions, this study
provides important baseline data for understanding ecosystem change in the
heavily desertified north-central Chilean semi-arid zone. It continues to be a
valuable training ground for Chilean and American students and contributes
directly to the development of science in both countries.