* 0319654
* Acquisition of X-Ray Diffractometer for Polymer Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Anne Hiltner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 132,000.00

This funding action supports the acquisition of a Rigaku MSC wide angle X-ray
diffractometer for structural analysis of polymer samples at Case Western
Reserve University. This equipment is an essential in-house facility for a large
polymer research center. It is also used to instruct undergraduates and graduate
students in formal laboratory courses on polymer characterization. X-ray
analysis is the method of choice for defining structural changes in many polymer
systems that occur as a result of different processing conditions, environmental
factors, physical/mechanical history, etc. Thus the diffractometer will be the
workhorse for investigation of polymer structure, detection and identification
of crystal structures, and determination of degree of crystallinity and
crystallite size. The new equipment replaces a now obsolete diffractometer
(purchased in the mid-1980s) and will have additional capabilities that make
possible the routine rapid acquisition of X-ray data at different temperatures
(-180 C to 300 C) and various controlled environmental conditions. The software
package will automate determination of degrees of crystallinity, crystallite
size and unit cell dimensions, and will permit Rietveld refinement of structure
and X-ray data simulation. It will also have attachments that will allow the
study of thin film structure and morphology including thin film pole figures.

It is clear from research projects described in this request that this
instrument will have impact on a wide range of research. Graduate students and
undergraduate students are involved in the described research. The
interdisciplinary nature of the need for the equipment is indicated by the
interest shown by university scientists (twelve members of the Department of
Macromolecular Science, two members of the Department of Chemical Engineering,
one from the Department of Electrical Engineering and two members of the Physics
Department).

