* 0319170
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Contact/Zero-Stress Surface Polishing Process for Copper/Low Dielectric Constant Semiconductors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* E. Jennings Taylor, FARADAY TECHNOLOGY, INC
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel, non-contact/stress-free polishing method for planarization of copper
(Cu)/low-k (dielectric constant) interconnects required for the fabrication of
nanochip integrated circuits (IC). A currently used process step, chemical-
mechanical-polishing (CMP), is adequate for copper/silicon dioxide
interconnects. However, the reduced mechanical strength of the low-k dielectric
materials required for nanochips (100nm and smaller interconnects) renders CMP
incompatible with future IC interconnects. The proposed method utilizes pulsed
electrolysis to effect complete electrochemical removal of copper overplate
beginning from the center of the wafer and moving outward where electrical
contact is provided. The Phase I research issues include: 1) complete removal of
copper overplate, i.e. no copper islands remaining, and 2) no damage to the
interconnect, i.e. filled and not eroded or dished. Real-time video feed
observation and post process FIB-SEM analysis will be conducted to validate
process feasibility. Analytical work will be conducted to establish a
theoretical basis for the proposed electrochemical process.

Commercially, the non-contact/stress-free polishing method will find application
to Cu/low-k interconnects required for integrated circuits down to the 35nm
mode. Additional applications of the process include micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) and nano-electro-mechanical systems (NEMS). The industry
addressed semiconductor is an important aspect of the US commercial economy. The
result of the research will lead to a marketable manufacturing
process/manufacturing tool in the form of an electrochemical module
incorporating the non-contact/zero stress polishing process.