* 0319172
* Acquisition of a cryogenic magnetometer and demagnetization devices, with applications toward global geodynamics, long-term paleoclimate, regional tectonics, and stratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* David Evans, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 172,710.00

0319172&lt;br/&gt;Evans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the development
of a new paleomagnetic laboratory at Yale University where the primary research
goals will be: (1) to establish&lt;br/&gt;amalgamation and dispersal histories
of pre-Pangean supercontinents, (2) to&lt;br/&gt;investigate their implications
toward first-order geodynamic development of&lt;br/&gt;Earth, and (3) to
determine relationships among supercontinental tectonics, long-
term&lt;br/&gt;global climate, and biological evolution. Secondary research
goals will include paleomagnetic applications toward rotations or translations
in orogenic belts, the timing and pattern of crustal-scale fluid flow associated
with ore-forming events, interbasinal stratigraphic correlation, and long-term
variations of the Earth's magnetic dynamo. Specific equipment to be purchased
includes a 2G-Enterprises superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) equipped with
automated sample handling system, alternating field and thermal demagnetizers
and instruments for measuring bulk susceptibility and for imparting isothermal
and anhysteretic remanences. The facility will support faculty and student
research in the Department of Geology and Geophysics at Yale and will serve as a
regional facility for Precambian paleomagnetic
research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;