* 0319853
* Acquisition of a 3D Motion Analysis System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* P. Frank Pai, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2007
* USD 127,329.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposal is to
acquire a VICON 612 Motion Analysis System (MAS)&lt;br/&gt;and to 1) integrate
it into existing research setups of the PIs, 2) strengthen new
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;research among the PIs, 3) develop new measurement
techniques, 4) integrate it into selected&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate
courses in the two departments of the PIs, and 5) make the
equipment&lt;br/&gt;available to other researchers at the University. A MAS uses
high-resolution CMOS cameras to&lt;br/&gt;capture pictures of a dynamical system
when visible red digital LED strobes light up tiny retro-
reflective&lt;br/&gt;markers that are fixed on the system. Instantaneous three-
dimensional coordinates of&lt;br/&gt;each retro-reflective marker that is seen
by at least two cameras are automatically calculated&lt;br/&gt;using
photogrammetry, and displacements, velocities, and accelerations of all makers
are&lt;br/&gt;available for performing dynamic animation and further signal
processing for dynamics&lt;br/&gt;characterization, damage detection, and
control. Physically different from common point sensors&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.,
accelerometers and proximity sensors) and profile sensors (e.g, video
recorders), the MAS&lt;br/&gt;offers simultaneous, non-contact, and accurate
measurements of 3D coordinates of as many as&lt;br/&gt;100 points on a
mechanical system undergoing large motions.&lt;br/&gt;This work will solve
critical experimental issues and develop advanced&lt;br/&gt;experimental
techniques for the testing, design verification, damage detection, modeling,
and&lt;br/&gt;rapid prototyping of HFSs and other mechanical and aerospace
systems. This work will advance&lt;br/&gt;the knowledge of nonlinear statics,
dynamics, control, and design of deployable/inflatable
space&lt;br/&gt;structures and other mechanical systems. The system will
dramatically enhance&lt;br/&gt;research-intensive learning environments for
training engineering students in the areas of 1)&lt;br/&gt;vibration testing and
analysis of mechanical and aerospace systems, 2) testing
and&lt;br/&gt;characterization of deployable/inflatable space structures, 3)
motion control of mechanical&lt;br/&gt;systems, 4) design of active structures,
and 5) modeling of human movement. The potential&lt;br/&gt;impact of this work
on the design of modern space, aerospace, mechanical, and civil systems
is&lt;br/&gt;expected to be very significant and broad. &lt;br/&gt;