* 0319349
* SBIR Phase I:     Gallium Antimonide (GaSb) for High Speed Infrared Photodetectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Aaron Moy, SVT ASSOCIATES, INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,857.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
create a new, high performance photodetector operating in the near/mid-infrared
spectrum. Gallium antimonide (GaSb) will be used to create avalanche photodiodes
(APDs) sensitive to wavelengths &lt; 1.7 micron. The GaSb material is a
semiconductor with a direct energy bandgap and higher mobility than Silicon.
Thus, GaSb has greater photonic absorption and can operate at a higher speed
than Silicon. Previously issues regarding high levels of parasitic p-type doping
have prevented GaSb from being applied to APD structures. This Phase I program
aims to create GaSb layers that no longer have a high native doping level,
making APD fabrication possible. The growth techniques demonstrated in this
project will be applicable to other similar material systems, allowing practical
development of novel devices. Scientific understanding of the electrical
characteristics of actualized III-V compound semiconductors will also be
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon successful completion of the program as a
whole, photodetectors operating in the near/mid-IR spectrum (&lt; 2 microns)
will be developed that have higher speeds and greater sensitivity than current
Silicon APD solutions. High-speed photodetectors will be readily applicable to
atmospheric measurement systems, medical diagnostics, astronomical imaging and
optical communications. Moreover, modifications to the GaSb material, such as
the addition of Indium and Arsenic, can extend the operating spectrum out to
longer wavelengths. Based on the knowledge gained in this program, APDs using
InGaAsSb could be created which are sensitive photons out to 12
microns.&lt;br/&gt;