* 0319515
* Collaborative Research:  Chemical and Biological Rock Weathering in Central Norway and Arctic Finland
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2006
* John Dixon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2006
* USD 34,576.00

The scientific study of landscape development in cold regions is subject to the
same set of scientific principles as steer our modern view of all landscape
development. Nevertheless, understanding of cold region landscapes must
incorporate recognition of the importance of glaciation in many locations, as
well as embrace the importance of cold temperatures not only associated with
glaciation but also with cold environments that are not actively glaciated.
There has been a general tendency to believe that chemical processes in cold
regions are absent, or at least greatly overshadowed by mechanisms associated
with overnight or seasonal freezing. This assessment of the importance of
chemical processes is founded on relatively little information, and where modern
research has taken up the issue quantitatively, chemical processes have emerged
as important. Fieldwork in front of a small glacier in the Jotunheimen Mountains
of Norway, and on two hilltops in Arctic Finland has produced two sets of rock
samples suitable for analysis using electron micro-analytical techniques, and,
in the case of the Finnish samples, suitable for dating using cosmogenic
techniques. The analysis of these samples will provide a clear picture of the
mechanical, chemical, and biological processes responsible for breaking up the
rock in these two cold, but different, environments.

Cold regions, which cover a significant portion of the Earth's land surface, are
likely to experience significant changes under what, increasingly, appear to be
warming climatic conditions. At the same time these fragile regions are
experiencing increasing pressures from human settlement, recreation, and natural
resource extraction. The net result of these natural and/or man-induced
pressures is that cold regions are likely to undergo long-term adjustment while
simultaneously experiencing intense short-term impacts. Under such a set of
impacts the potential for substantial, if not devastating, environmental
problems is very great. However, for reasons associated with their sparse
populations and overall difficulty of access, cold, mountainous regions are
poorly understood in comparison to many other regions of the world. From both
purely scientific and also pragmatic management perspectives it is essential to
develop a stronger understanding of the fundamental mechanisms shaping these
landscapes. The present research contributes directly to knowledge of the
processes disrupting rock surfaces in both a high, alpine environment (Norway)
and a low Arctic environment (Finland). It is specifically directed at a little-
studied topic, chemical breakdown, which on the few occasions it has been
systematically studied in cold regions has emerged as much more important than
the scientific community generally recognizes.