* 0319163
* SBIR Phase I:    Novel Monolithic Ka to W Band Voltage Controlled Oscillators Using on Chip Varactor Integration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Timothy Childs, TLC Precision Wafer Technology
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,952.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop novel,
highly integrated, high performance series of high frequency (Ka to W-band) GaAs
Monolithic Voltage Controlled Oscillators (VCO) by efficient integration of
hyperabrupt varactor diode with the Pseudomorphic High Electron Mobility
Transistor (PHEMT) oscillator. This Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuit
(MMIC) will integrate the two exclusive doping profiles needed for the
hyperabrupt varactor diode and the PHEMT process. This level of integration will
simplify and improve the overall system performance and meet the cost
compatibility for reliable commercial production. To date, there is no product
in the world market, which is a fully integrated high frequency VCO. Moreover,
the MMIC VCOs available so far have very low tuning range (120 MHz) and mediocre
phase noise, which does not meet the demands of present day communication
systems (tuning range of &gt;500 GHz). This technology will integrate a patented
varactor diode with a millimeter wave VCO MMIC design to develop and deliver a
family of single chip VCOs with over 1GHz bandwidth, low phase noise of
-90dBc/Hz at 100 KHz with &gt; 16dBm output power for frequencies from 20 to 94
GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A stable, wide tuning range, low phase noise, high
power, light weight, low cost VCO MMIC is an essential component of any
commercial and military wireless communication system. This project plan is to
develop MMIC VCO at millimeter wave frequencies to enable low cost, small size
commercial communication systems with high performance. The project will address
the needs of high frequency commercial wireless communication systems world
wide, ranging from Local Multi Point Distribution Systems (LMDS) at Ka-band to
Automotive collusion avoidance communication systems at W-band. In addition,
resulting product will contribute to Homeland security systems.&lt;br/&gt;