* 0319082
* Minority Suburban Migration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* William Frey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2007
* USD 152,999.00

SES-0319082&lt;br/&gt;William Frey&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While much scholarly research has been devoted to issues of race and
space with respect to segregation and geographic distributional issues, most of
this work has dealt with static distributions of new race and ethnic groups or
changes in those static distributions. Comparatively less work has evaluated the
migration processes associated with changes in race and space within the
metropolitan area. The more careful studies that have examined the race
migration dynamic have tended to follow an old paradigm that focused primarily
on white and black suburban migration, examined on the basis of a simple two-
category city-suburb dichotomy of metropolitan space. The proposed research is a
study of minority migration within metropolitan areas that goes beyond the
black-white, city-suburb typology. It utilizes detailed Census 2000 migration
data. This study recognizes two developments. First, immigration and the recent
foreign-born population have increased significantly over the past two decades,
creating a broader mix of race and ethnic minorities. Their movement, both into
and within the metropolitan area, requires a new understanding of race-based
migration dynamics of the central city and within the suburbs. The second
development involves the increased diversity of communities that exist within
the broad category of suburbs, rendering the latter term less meaningful as a
characterization of a homogenous set of lifestyles and demographic attributes
such as race. The proliferation of suburban employment centers, inner suburbs
with characteristics similar to central cities, low density residential
settlements, and, increasing inter-suburb commuting calls for an extended
geographic framework for the analysis of city and intra-suburban race ethnic
migration. Using a comparative metropolitan framework based on the 20 largest
metropolitan areas, this research will show how race and ethnic immigrant/native
migration processes vary across classes of suburban communities and central
cities and how they are shaped by these areas and their metropolitan areas'
socio-demographic and structural features. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study
will shed new light on old issues such as race-selective flight, city and inner
suburb decline, employment-residence mismatches, and segregation across
communities. It is also relevant to current policy issues associated with
minority-majority disparities between inner and outer suburbs linked to
differential tax bases, access to resources, such as transportation and
education, and the emerging digital divide within metropolitan areas which are
seen to be exacerbated by expanding suburban sprawl and its emerging political
implications. &lt;br/&gt;