* 0319483
* SBIR Phase I:  A New High Efficiency, Low Cost Scintillator Screen for Digital Radiography
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Vivek Nagarkar, Radiation Monitoring Devices Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a new
x-ray imaging screen that offers superior properties for digital radiography
compared to current materials. Specifically, this new screen will address many
of the limitations of digital x-ray imaging by allowing fabrication of systems
that provide high spatial resolution, high signal to noise ratios, low noise
performance, and substantially better detective quantum efficiency. This new
scintillator will find wide spread use in areas of medical diagnostics, homeland
security, and many other applications of x-ray imaging. The objectives of the
project include optimizing the method of synthesizing the scintillator in powder
form with appropriate stoichiometry, particle size, and shape for enhanced
scintillation efficiency and packing density. A newly developed, cost-effective
coating method will be used to produce large-area, rugged and long-lived
scintillator screens. Superiority of the approach for digital imaging will be
demonstrated by integrating screens into existing digital readouts and
conducting detailed x-ray imaging studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
scintillator screens are specifically advantageous for homeland security
applications that are currently focused on efficient detection of illegal or
threatening materials. Additionally, x-ray detectors based on the proposed
screen will find applications in the areas of biotechnology, medical
diagnostics, and non-destructive testing systems such as baggage scanning and
building damage assessment systems. Collective market for digital x-ray imaging
is in billions of dollars; a significant fraction of this market represents
areas where the proposed technology is well suited.&lt;br/&gt;