* 0319051
* In-Situ Processing of Superconducting MgB2-Metal Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The proposal is on the processing of magnesium boride (MgB2) using reaction
synthesis involving pressure infiltration of B fibers with molten magnesium to
form a continuous MgB2 phase in an Mg matrix. A major goal is to achieve
superconducting applications at temperatures in excess of 25K. The influence of
processing temperature, volume fraction of boron, size and shape on the
resulting microstructures will be studied using various characterization
techniques including metallography, microprobe, secondary ion mass spectroscopy,
synchrotron x-ray tomography and transmission electron microscopy. The
mechanical and superconducting properties of reacted MgB2 fibers and MgB2-metal
composites will be assessed and correlated with the microstructures.
Experimental studies will be followed by modeling efforts first using
1-dimensional model to predict fracture strength and elastic modulus of boron
fibers followed by classical and three-phase self-consistent methods for
composites. The ultimate goal of the project is to generate a science-base
understanding of the synthesis of MgB2 from solid B and liquid Mg for the
fabrication of continuous lengths of superconducting metal-MgB2 composite wires.
The research emphasizes the development of a process for creating continuous,
low-cost metal-MgB2 composite superconducting wires with a critical temperature
of 39 K, through a science-based, predictive understanding of the materials
science issues involved with synthesis, structure and properties of these
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Operation of the composite superconducting
wires at 25-30 K without helium cryo-cooling will result in a significant drop
in costs as compared to current Nb3Sn-type wires cooled by liquid helium, which
is an expensive, non- renewable resource. Possible applications include
superconducting magnets for energy storage devices, levitation systems (for
trains), motors, wires for power transmission and superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) systems. The research provides opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students as well as high school teachers through
outreach programs for laboratory experience involving materials processing and
characterization techniques. Plans include creation of a website on MgB2
synthesis and collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory through the use of
Advanced Photon Source.&lt;br/&gt;