* 0319230
* Acquisition of an Ion Microprobe for Stable Isotope Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2008
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2008
* USD 2,106,641.00

EAR-0319230&lt;br/&gt;Valley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Wisconsin-
Madison will establish an Ion Microprobe Laboratory funded by NSF-MRI in
partnership with the University. This lab will be the first in the world to
dedicate multi-detector/secondary ion mass-spectrometry (SIMS) solely to Stable
Isotope Chemistry. Joint university-industry collaboration will push the limits
of high accuracy and small spot size through enhancements to the instrument and
technique development. Thus, this lab will be uniquely suited to solving
important problems. The Wisconsin Ion Microprobe Lab will synergize new
applications in Biological Sciences and Engineering, as well as Earth Sciences.
Research projects are proposed in areas where in situ ion probe analysis has
already proved important, including: petrology, paleoclimatology, meteoritics,
materials science, and environmental sciences, as well as in new frontier areas
where the potential has not yet been explored, including: plant pathology,
nutrition, biochemistry and medicine. A paradox in studies of the Earth and
Solar System is that smaller and smaller samples are often critical to answering
bigger and bigger questions. The intellectual merit of this project derives from
the dramatic reductions of sample size and the ability to put analysis spots
into spatial context. This new SIMS capability offers many exciting and
revolutionary research opportunities, including, but not limited to: the origins
of the atmosphere, oceans, and life on the earliest Earth and Mars; the
importance of microbes in biological processing vs. abiotic redox cycling; and
the long-term record of atmospheric CO2 and the feedback system between Earth
climate change and greenhouse gases. The broader impacts of this proposal
involve education at all levels. Many areas of public policy will be impacted
including studies of climate change, CO2 sequestration, food adulteration,
environmental remediation, health, and national security. The University of
Wisconsin has broad outreach programs that will be used to showcase the exciting
results from this lab to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;