* 0319716
* Systematic, Intensive Surface-Survey at Sisupalgarh: First-Millennium Urbanism and Economic in India
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2000,10/31/2003
* Monica Smith, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2003
* USD 15,935.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Monica Smith will conduct two
seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of Sisupalgarh, located in the
state of Orissa, India. Occupied during the early historic period, this city
covers 130 hectares and is enclosed by a large brick and mud rampart with eight
gateways. Buildings were constructed in both stone as well as brick and
monolithic pillars testify to the monumental architecture present. Prior work
has indicated a rich and varied artifact repertoire including metal objects
(nails, rings, projectile points, sickles) ornaments, coins, beads of ivory and
stone as well as abundant ceramics. Four distinct periods spanning the 300 BC to
350 AD period of occupation have been identified. With NSF support Dr. Smith and
her colleagues will conduct a systematic archaeological surface survey of the
site to provide data on economic, social and political activities. A detailed
topographic map will be prepared and a grid of 50 x 50 meter squares
established. This will provide the base for a systematic non-aligned random
collection. The data gathered through the two-year field season will be analyzed
using GIS to examine how different production and consumption indicators are
spatially distributed. On this basis it will be possible to determine the range
of activities, commercial and domestic, and how these were integrated into
broader economic, social and political systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to evaluate the economic and social configuration of a city under
conditions of increasing sociopolitical complexity. Unlike regions of the world
in which the emergence of cities is closely linked to broader state level
political organization, the Indian subcontinent presents an archaeological
record of cities without states. Sisupalgarh and other Indian cities thrived in
a period in which political organization was relatively weak and urban zones
appear to have been the largest consistent unit of territorial integration in
which political leaders invested any surplus in highly visible landscape
modifications such as fortifications and monumental architecture. This project
will provide insight into how these unusual entities functioned and how they
developed and changed over time. The project is also important because it will
assist the career development of a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;