* 0319639
* MRI/RUI Proposal for Acquisition of MTS 810 TestStar IIs Material Testing System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Shannon Sweeney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2004
* USD 244,595.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A TestStar IIs test system will be acquiired for
Penn State Eries School&lt;br/&gt;of Engineering and Engineering Technology
(SEET) material test lab currently used to support
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;programs in Mechanical Engineering Technology (MET),
Plastics Engineering Technology (PLET) and Mechanical&lt;br/&gt;Engineering
(ME). The equipment will create an infrastructure to enable research in the
characterization of&lt;br/&gt;monotonic and dynamic material properties of
elastomers, plastics and various metals over a range of
temperatures&lt;br/&gt;and loading conditions. It will also be used to support
the achievement of learning objectives established for&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
instruction in dynamic testing methods. Opportunities for applied research will
be derived from&lt;br/&gt;ongoing funded research conducted collaboratively with
Leigh University, by proposed research with regional&lt;br/&gt;industry
partners, and through the support given to the Plastics Technology Center (PTC)
that serves Northwest&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;Research will be applied
and focused on the advancement and understanding of the dynamic and
monotonic&lt;br/&gt;properties for elastomeric, plastic and various metal
materials over a range of temperatures. Specifically,
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;characterization of these materials, generation of monotonic
material data with emphasis on using this data to&lt;br/&gt;support non-linear
finite element analysis (FEA), and generation of data to support various fatigue
methodologies&lt;br/&gt;including fracture mechanics and strain-life approaches
will be considered.&lt;br/&gt;The activity will advance discovery and
understanding in the identified research areas while at the same
time&lt;br/&gt;creating an infrastructure promoting learning in the field of
dynamic testing. To this end, dynamic testing laboratory&lt;br/&gt;and
instruction modules have been created for courses in mechanical engineering and
in mechanical and plastics&lt;br/&gt;engineering technology. Thus, the proposed
activity will strengthen the Schools strategic initiative to
foster&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary interaction between its students and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt; The development of the facilities would benefit
the&lt;br/&gt;Plastics Technology Center (PTC) outreach efforts conducted in
partnership with the Northwest Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Resource Center (NWIRC)
and Penn State Erie. The center provides high-end product design and
development&lt;br/&gt;services to business start-ups and small manufacturers.
The equipment would provide the center with a&lt;br/&gt;convenient internal
resource for collecting plastic material data needed to support their customers
and programs.&lt;br/&gt; Further, the facilities developed by this will be used
as an additional&lt;br/&gt;resource to support Penn State Erie successful Math
Options Program (which has currently enabled a 7% female&lt;br/&gt;enrollment in
the School) to further the programs goal of helping prepare women for tomorrows
careers in science,&lt;br/&gt;engineering, math, and computer
technology.&lt;br/&gt;