* 0319041
* Collaborative/RUI Research: Stable Isotope Reconstruction of North American Terrestrial Environments during the Late Cretaceous
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Raymond Rogers, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2007
* USD 61,583.00

EAR-0319041&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Summary &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to use carbon and oxygen isotope ratios of
vertebrate fossil remains from the Late Cretaceous of North America to study
terrestrial ecology, hydrology, and climate. Preliminary isotope data from
dinosaur tooth enamel has been obtained, and carbon isotope ratios vary from
locality to locality and among dinosaur taxa. Based on what is known about
modern terrestrial vertebrates, it is hypothesized that these differences can be
used to investigate environmental change, evolution of C4 plants, and ecological
niche partitioning by dinosaurs. Oxygen isotope ratios in tooth enamel also vary
spatially, and using modern analogs again it is hypothesized that these
variations reflects hydrological and climatological differences among
localities.&lt;br/&gt;In order to test these hypotheses, additional Late
Cretaceous dinosaur teeth will be collected from four environmentally and
geographically diverse localities: (1) the coastal Judith River Formation and
its contemporaneous, upland equivalent (2) the Two Medicine Formation of
Montana, (3) the Prince Creek Formation of Alaska, and (4) the Kaiparowits
Formation of Utah. Because environmental interpretations of isotopic data can be
somewhat ambiguous in the absence of contextual information (e.g., accurate
facies associations), detailed stratigraphic and sedimentological analyses of
sampled localities will also be conducted, and is integral to this research. By
comparing new isotopic and sedimentological data with existing paleontological
and paleobotanical information, it will be possible to determine the
relationships among isotope ratios and environmental parameters over a range of
spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Paleoenvironmental research based on sedimentologically well-
constrained dinosaur fossils is a logical extension of that being conducted
using mammalian tooth enamel from younger, Cenozoic deposits. Because dinosaurs
would have had the same general sources of ingested oxygen and carbon as
mammals, it can be assumed that their carbon and oxygen isotope ratios would
also be related to environmental parameters. As a result, terrestrial
environments during the Mesozoic should now become available for study using
stable isotope ratios of vertebrate remains.&lt;br/&gt;Stable isotope data
collected for the Mesozoic also has potential to complement more traditional
paleontological and paleobotanical research. For example, our preliminary
findings indicate that carbon isotope ratios differ among herbivorous dinosaur
taxa, which is suggestive of resource partitioning. Similarly, high carbon
isotope ratios suggest that plants with C4 photosynthetic pathways may have
evolved and been abundant during the Mesozoic. In addition, isotope data can be
used to test and thus improve model simulations of biome distributions and
global climate during this time period. The intellectual ramifications of the
proposed research are extensive, and we believe that the project provides a
wonderful opportunity to gain novel insights into Late Cretaceous
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;An opportunity to
study dinosaurs is an exciting prospect to many students interested in the earth
sciences, and this proposed research will be conducted by students at Colorado
College and Macalester College as part of their undergraduate education in
geology. As such it will serve as an excellent vehicle for learning field and
laboratory techniques and interpreting data. In addition, students will hone
their communication skills by writing a senior thesis and presenting their
results at regional and national meetings. In a more general manner, research
described here will serve as a framework for introducing and discussing concepts
of sedimentology, isotope geochemistry, and paleontology in a variety of
courses.&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research will be disseminated to other
scientists via published reports in peer-reviewed journals. In addition we plan
to make a general summary of our work available to museums so it can be
incorporated into exhibits on dinosaurs and Late Cretaceous
environments.&lt;br/&gt;