* 0319790
* SBIR Phase I:     Structural Tailoring of Carbon Nanotube Composites for Field Emission
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Leandro Balzano, SOUTHWEST NANOTECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to tailor the low
cost single-walled carbon nanotube/silica composite, produced a unique cobalt-
molybdenum catalyst system (CoMoCATtm) method, for use as uniform, reliable, and
cost-effective nanotube emitters. Preliminary results have shown that composites
prepared from purified single-walled carbon nanotubes and dielectric
nanoparticles lead to better emission characteristics than plain nanotubes.
Recent collaborative studies demonstrated that the CoMoCATtm material has the
potential of being used in its "as-prepared" form, which is already a composite
of nanotubes/SiO2 (dielectric) particles. To further improve the field emission
characteristics of the CoMoCATtm composite, the structure of the catalyst
support and carbon concentration will be optimized by synthesizing mesoporous
silica materials of specific pore dimensions. At the same time, the effect of
changing the average diameter of the carbon nanotubes will be investigated,
capitalizing the flexibility of the CoMoCATtm process for tailoring single-
walled carbon nanotubes.

Commercially, an important first use of single-walled carbon nanotubes will
likely be in field emission devices (FEDs). The nanotube emitters that will be
developed in this project are important for many sub-applications in this broad
FED field, but the main focus will be in large diagonal TVs due to the
considerable market size. The target market for large area FEDs is the existing
and predicted market for CPTs (color picture tubes) and color PDPs (plasma
display panels). Even a small penetration into this market will yield a
considerable opportunity, with a projected market of $1B in the next 5 years.

