* 0319899
* MRI: Microwave Research Instrumentation Acquisition
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Brian Huggins, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2004
* USD 265,500.00

The current and future generations of wireless systems require compact,
broadband/high-speed Monolithic&lt;br/&gt;Microwave Integrated Circuits and
Antennas. Higher speed circuits need large bandwidth that can be realized
at&lt;br/&gt;higher frequencies. There are FCC bands for wireless applications
up to and beyond 67 GHz. In order to facilitate&lt;br/&gt;research in these
bands the following instruments need to be acquired: a) Network Analyzer
(67GHz), b) Spectrum&lt;br/&gt;Analyzer (50GHz), c) Signal Generator (40GHz), d)
Wafer Probe Station (67GHz), e) Printed Circuit Scriber, and
f)&lt;br/&gt;Printed Circuit Through-Hole Plating System. These are the highest
performance equipment currently available.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
proposed activity are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To enhance the capabilities of the Microwave
Engineering laboratory facilities for continued research and design&lt;br/&gt;at
high frequencies in the areas of Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuits
(MMICs), Hybrid-MICs and, printed&lt;br/&gt;Antennas, 2) To expand the scope of
collaborative efforts with industry in the design of novel MMICs for
current&lt;br/&gt;and future generation communication systems, 3) To increase
the extent of training in advanced research, design,&lt;br/&gt;tests and
measurements imparted to students, and 4) To strengthen the Universitys position
to seek research funding&lt;br/&gt;from industry and government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;Industry-sponsored collaborative research and design
activities in the areas of MMICs have been going on at&lt;br/&gt;Bradley
University for the past 12 years with Northrop-Grumman Corp. and Fujitsu
Compound Semiconductor, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;These projects have involved MMIC designs
in which students have been trained in advanced research and
design.&lt;br/&gt;The outcome was the development of novel circuits for
applications in current and future generation communication&lt;br/&gt;and radar
systems. The MMICs were designed at Bradley University, but fabrication, tests
and measurements were&lt;br/&gt;conducted at the laboratories of the industry.
The MMICs could not be measured at Bradley University because of&lt;br/&gt;the
frequency limitation (40 GHz) of the existing Network Analyzer and lack of Wafer
Probe Station. This deprived&lt;br/&gt;the students of valuable research
experience. Also, active device modeling projects from industry had to be
turned&lt;br/&gt;down due to lack of Wafer Probe Station. Therefore,
acquisitions of a 67GHz Network Analyzer and a Microwave&lt;br/&gt;Wafer Probe
Station will alleviate this deficiency. It will allow the students to do tests
and measurements and&lt;br/&gt;expand opportunities to seek more industry-
supported research projects. The fabrications of MMICs however
will&lt;br/&gt;continue to be done at industry. The Principal Investigator has
been exploring potential collaboration with TriQuint&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor. He
will also explore collaborations with the following companies: Hughes, US
Monolithics, iTerra&lt;br/&gt;Communications, TRW, TLC Precision Wafer
Technology, Motorola, Conexant, and M/A-COM where he has&lt;br/&gt;established
connections or his former students are working.&lt;br/&gt;Other research
projects included development of novel, Hybrid-MICs, sub-systems, and printed
antennas for&lt;br/&gt;wireless Communication systems. In these projects, the
existing microwave Anechoic Chamber/Antenna Data&lt;br/&gt;acquisition system,
Microwave Source (18 GHz), Spectrum Analyzer (22 GHz) and Network Analyzer (40
GHz)&lt;br/&gt;have been used. The circuits and antennas have been fabricated
using the existing printed circuit fabrication&lt;br/&gt;(chemical etching)
facility. Again, the extent of research and design activities has been limited
due to frequency&lt;br/&gt;limitation of the current Signal Source and Spectrum
Analyzer, and lack of precision printed circuit fabrication&lt;br/&gt;facility.
For example, a 24 GHz printed array antenna for Automobile Collision Avoidance
System project could not&lt;br/&gt;be undertaken. Therefore acquisition of the
instrumentation requested above will overcome this limitation,
enabling&lt;br/&gt;research and design work at higher frequencies, and enhance
the research training of students.&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical shortage of
microwave engineers in this country. Bradley University is one of the few
select&lt;br/&gt;institutions that offers advanced education and training in
this area of specialization. Graduate and senior&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
students are educated and trained through capstone thesis and design projects as
well as courses. The&lt;br/&gt;projects are intensive and involve planning,
design, fabrications, tests and measurements, documentation
and&lt;br/&gt;presentation. The projects have resulted in numerous refereed
publications. Industry has been a partner in&lt;br/&gt;microwave education and
training by supporting projects and, providing assistantships and
internships.&lt;br/&gt;The acquisitions of the requested equipment will have the
following impact: a) Enhance the capability to provide&lt;br/&gt;advanced
research and design experience in RF and Microwave Engineering, including tests
and measurements, b)&lt;br/&gt;Expand the scope of projects and partnerships
with industry, c) Strengthen the University's position to seek
research&lt;br/&gt;funding from industry and government agencies, d) Help
attract and train students in the critical area of RF and&lt;br/&gt;Microwave
Engineering, and e) Enrich the Microwave Engineering curriculum and education at
Bradley University.