* 0319846
* MRI/RUI Acquisition of Instrumentation for Integrated Structural Testing and Digital Image Correlation Laboratory
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Edmond Saliklis, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2007
* USD 243,526.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; The principal innovation of this proposal is that DIC is
envisioned as the&lt;br/&gt;primary strain measuring technique in a large-scale
structural testing facility. This non-&lt;br/&gt;contacting technique yields a
fully quantifiable strain field in two or three dimensions
by&lt;br/&gt;manipulating digital images. This emerging technology has not yet
been harnessed for the&lt;br/&gt;study of civil engineering
structures.&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of these instruments, when coupled with
current renovation of laboratory&lt;br/&gt;space within the Division of
Engineering, will provide a versatile structural testing facility that
will&lt;br/&gt;support a coordinated effort between faculty and students in
Civil and Environmental&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and
Mathematics. The diverse, yet well-linked expertise&lt;br/&gt;of the senior
personnel enables a broad range of research that includes structural steel,
timber,&lt;br/&gt;reinforced concrete, fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) materials,
corrugated paper containers, and&lt;br/&gt;the transient stresses in sport
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;The structural testing request consists of hydraulic
equipment, data acquisition&lt;br/&gt;instruments, signal conditioning devices,
shop tools, and various transducers. &lt;br/&gt;The resulting structural testing
facility will serve as a blueprint of versatile, cost effective,&lt;br/&gt;and
nimble laboratory design for other small undergraduate institutions, by building
the&lt;br/&gt;facility from industrial components.&lt;br/&gt;The pedagogical
value of the DIC technique as an aid to visual understanding
in&lt;br/&gt;science, mathematics, and engineering will be disseminated through
publication and&lt;br/&gt;conferences.&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the DIC technique
will be used in six engineering courses. As new research&lt;br/&gt;areas are
explored with the requested facilities, it is anticipated that six
additional&lt;br/&gt;engineering courses may benefit.&lt;br/&gt;The diverse
talents of the research team offer the potential to extend these
new&lt;br/&gt;techniques into disciplines outside of engineering.