* 0319461
* Acquisition of a solid-state laser, optical table and femtosecond pulse-measurement system for undergraduate research in optics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Dean Langley, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2006
* USD 138,065.00

This MRI award provides funds for the purchase of a solid-state laser, optical
table, power meter and femtosecond pulse-measurement system for implementing
undergraduate research projects in optics, including scattering, nonlinear
optics, and ultrafast lasers. The research to be commenced with the equipment
encompasses the following. (1) Scattering from spheres of nonlinear materials,
including CdS and sapphire, to characterize nonlinear mechanisms, study self-
pulsing behavior due to Kerr and photorefractive nonlinearities, and measure
intensity-dependent high-order dispersion in these materials. (2) Studies of
aberration-correction and pulse-compression using prisms and deformable mirrors
in laser cavities. (3) Tests of non-standard mode-locking cavity designs using
nonlinear materials. (4) Excitation of hollow-beam electromagnetic modes in
cavities with non-spherical mirrors matching shapes computed from complex-
source-point theory. (5) Measurements of laser emission from asymmetric,
acoustically-levitated dye droplets.

The equipment will enhance the undergraduate research program in optics at the
College of St. Benedict and St. John's University. CSB, a womens college, and
SJU, for men, share a common curriculum with joint classes and departments. The
physics department offers majors in physics and applied physics, emphasizing
advanced laboratory experience and academic-year student-faculty research.
Research in optics has been the most popular choice for majors in the past
decade, and the majority of the students go on to graduate work in physics