* 0319810
* SBIR Phase I:     A New Biotherapeutic Approach to Combating Unwanted Bacteria
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Hideki Suzuki, CONJUGON
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,657.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new
method for killing unwanted and antibiotic-resistant bacteria. The problem of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria is becoming a crisis of epic proportions. Overuse
and misuse of antibiotics is seen as a major cause of this problem. In June
2001, the American Medical Association went on record opposing the use of
antibiotics in agriculture for "non- therapeutic" use in animals. A Public
Health Action Plan, written by a federal task force, recommends that entirely
new approaches are needed to go beyond the use of traditional antibiotics to
employ novel anti-microbial agents that kill pathogens while minimizing the
ability of the target bacteria to develop horizontally transferable resistance.
The goal of this project is to develop just such a technology. The proposed
technology does not incorporate traditional chemical antibiotics, but utilizes
well-understood biological processes in a novel and proprietary fashion. It
involves engineering harmless bacteria to kill unwanted bacteria by redundant
mechanisms that will minimize the development of resistance. The commercial
applications of this project are expected to be primarily in the areas of
agriculture and veterinary medicine. Initial project efforts will be aimed at
combatting Fire Blight (Erwinia amylovora) in fruit crops and reducing
Salmonella contamination in poultry.