* 0320044
* Thematic Workshops for the 2003 Les Houches Summer School on Theoretical Neuroscience
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Carson Chow, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Chow&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and colleagues organize
thematic&lt;br/&gt;experimental workshops in conjunction with a summer school
on&lt;br/&gt;theoretical methods in neuroscience in France from July 28
-&lt;br/&gt;August 29, 2003. The course covers modern theoretical
methods&lt;br/&gt;used in systems neuroscience. It is part of the Les
Houches&lt;br/&gt;summer school series, which has a distinguished tradition
of&lt;br/&gt;covering leading edge theoretical topics. The course is
intended&lt;br/&gt;for graduate students and postdocs who have backgrounds
in&lt;br/&gt;physics, mathematics or other quantitative fields.
Neuroscience&lt;br/&gt;rapidly changes and it is essential for theorists to be
aware of&lt;br/&gt;new experimental results and techniques. Thus, the
organizers&lt;br/&gt;hold three Thematic Workshops in conjunction with the
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;program. In these workshops, experimentalists give talks
on&lt;br/&gt;physiological issues and lead discussions related to the
topics&lt;br/&gt;covered in the theoretical lectures.&lt;br/&gt; The impact of
this summer school on the students,&lt;br/&gt;theoretical lecturers and
experimentalists cannot be overstated.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the training the
students receive they also have&lt;br/&gt;the opportunity to meet and interact
with many prominent&lt;br/&gt;neuroscientists. Conversely, the senior
participants have an&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to meet the next generation of
theorists. In biology&lt;br/&gt;the relationship between theory and experiment
is still&lt;br/&gt;tentative. The workshops present topics important in
themselves,&lt;br/&gt;they fit well with and amplify and ground the theoretical
agenda,&lt;br/&gt;and they provide a remarkable opportunity to
establish&lt;br/&gt;connections between theoreticians and experimentalists in
an&lt;br/&gt;important and dynamic area of biology. All of the lecturers
are&lt;br/&gt;required to write an accompanying paper to be placed in
a&lt;br/&gt;published proceedings. These proceedings will have
sufficient&lt;br/&gt;detail to be treated like a textbook on modern methods
of&lt;br/&gt;theoretical neuroscience and will be a valuable source
of&lt;br/&gt;information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;