* 0320872
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Nanotechnology Investigations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Gilbert Pacey, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 191,388.00

EAR-0320872&lt;br/&gt;Pacey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide the
funds for the purchase of a state-of-the-art scanning electron microscope (SEM).
This instrument will allow us to image surfaces in the nanometer range. In
addition the added instrument options will be used to determine the metal
content on the surfaces and a rough molecular structure. As earth sciences joins
the nanotechnology revolution, improved methods for imaging submicron surfaces
is a necessary tool. The SEM is that tool. The work to be performed will create
new nanomaterials, improve the environment, produce new sensors, and increase
basic scientific knowledge. Dr. Rakovan's work with the apatite group minerals
promises new materials that have varied thermal, solubility, affinity and
sorption behavior. Roughly half the periodic table can be incorporated in
apatite minerals. The SEM will be used to image the materials and identify metal
constituents. An additional project includes metal identification in sediments.
Dr. Dong's work is in the field of microbiological ecology and bioremediation.
His studies will yield new approaches to environmental clean-up and controlling
potential chemical contaminations. Dr. Edelman work is in the biological fields
and in particular characterization of bacterial bio-films and organization of
bio-surfaces. Dr. Cox's and Pacey's work is in the area of nanostructured
materials that can be used in sensor technology. The opportunities in self
assembled molecular species and "smart nozzle" technology for the US Air Force
will improve environmental condition while enhancing performance of air
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;