* 0320371
* SBIR Phase I:  Frequency Agile Laser for Configurable Optical Networks (FALCON)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Eric Takeuchi, Photera Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 66,656.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project will address the
needs of future intelligent optical networks. The simultaneous satisfaction of
both enhanced technical performance and price parity as compared to fixed
wavelength devices will allow the proposed laser technology to proliferate. This
project, entitled, Frequency Agile Laser for Configurable Optical Networks.
(FALCON), will develop a rapidly tunable laser operating around 1550-nm. This
laser is based upon an innovative configuration of intra-cavity electro-optic
components that provide rapid tunability from a narrow-linewidth (&lt;5 kHz)
source. Truly innovative is the specific design to allow for sloppy, passive
alignment tolerances, thereby enabling low-cost devices to be realized. This
approach to low-cost manufacturing will also allow for this technology to
compete with current fixed wavelength lasers. It is anticipated that this laser,
will result in a self-fiber-coupled high-power (&gt;50 milliwatts), widely
tunable (&gt; 40-nm) laser, capable of random access wavelength switching to any
point in the sub-100 nanosecond regime. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Due to the demand
for voice, data, and video services, advances in optical networks, together with
the laser technologies required to support those networks, continues to be a
major focus. Development of advanced, more intelligent optical networks is
generally accepted as the path to being able to provide these services at
economically viable price points. One major step in this direction will be the
commercial availability of rapidly tunable lasers for prices that are
competitive (equal to or less than) with today's fixed wavelength devices. The
proposed technology offers to meet this demand, with its innovative approach
towards manufacturing of tunable laser sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;