* 0320327
* MRI: Development of Long Distance Microscope Velocimetry System for Bridging Macro and Microscales
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Ellen Longmire, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 324,000.00

Proposal No. CTS-0320327&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: E. Longmire,
University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is for a unique
instrumentation system to be developed for simultaneous characterization of
microscopic and macroscopic flow evolution. The system will first be used to
examine two flows, which by their nature are characterized by a wide range of
scales: turbulent and interfacial flows. The system, which will be developed in
collaboration with LaVision, Inc, will include the required illumination and
imaging optics to apply the Stereo-Particle Imaging velocimetry technique
simultaneously at two magnifications and at repetition rates high enough to
characterize the flow evolution. In addition, custom calibration targets and
software as well as custom analysis software will be developed in order to
achieve results of high accuracy in the overlapping smaller and larger fields of
view. In the smaller field of view, the system will be able to resolve velocity
vectors in areas of (100 square micrometer) or less, while the larger field of
view may cover an area of (10 square cm) or more. These aspects will allow for
observation and characterization of the evolving microscopic scales in the
context of the macroscopic behavior. After the system is developed, it will be
employed immediately in studies of turbulent boundary layers and drop
coalescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation described will provide
revolutionary advances in the understanding of both coalescence at interfaces
and the interaction of eddies in turbulent boundary layers. Also, the
availability this system will allow for novel and groundbreaking research in
additional areas of fluid dynamics including, for example, laminar/turbulent
transition, control of macroscopic flows with MEMS, liquid jet and drop break
up, three-dimensional instabilities, and turbulent separated
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system, which could become a product
supported by multiple vendors, is expected to be useful to researchers in many
areas of fluid dynamics. At the University of Minnesota, several graduate
students will be involved with the proposed system. One will design, develop,
and integrate the system hardware and software, and others will use the system
for the research projects described above. Also, undergraduate researchers and
high school physics teachers, funded by REU and RET supplements, will perform
and participate in short-term investigations during the summers. The teachers
are expected to bring their experiences with cutting edge measurement techniques
and engineering applications back to the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;