* 0320659
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Deep Silicon Etch Tool for NEMS/MEMS Fabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2008
* USD 306,000.00

This MRI Proposal involves procurement of an STS Multiplex System for Standard
Rate Advanced Silicon Etch (ASE-SR). Difficult processes that are routinely
addressed using this equipment include: deep- and through-wafer etching of
silicon, high aspect ratio feature etching, membrane release etching, and
silicon on insulator (SOI) applications. In the microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) arena, the STS etcher provides the unique capability to achieve
unconstrained geometry of the devices. This very significantly increases the
options available to the device designer. In addition, in MEMS packaging
activities (which have undoubtedly the most profound impact on the
manufacturability and the future of the MEMS field in general), it offers
additional opportunities such as achieving high-density through-wafer
interconnects, as well as a plethora of new options for MEMS encapsulation.

This piece of equipment can be used for the fabrication of extremely precise
mechanical masks (i.e., shadow masks) for metal evaporation, which in turn can
be used to anchor nanodevices such as carbon nanotubes in the desired position
on a substrate. Also, this equipment can be modified to do conventional reactive
ion etching (RIE), which would be very useful for researchers is the field of
general microelectronics.

Specific projects under way or planned for the near future include fabrication
of sophisticated microactuators used to study effects of dynamic loading on bone
cell behavior, miniature chemical synthesis microplants for the delivery of H2
to micro-fuel cells, and micro- and nano-tensile test specimens with high
dimensional accuracy.

Broader Impacts At Lehigh University, there is currently a huge new set of
thrusts in the fields of MEMS, bioengineering and nanotechnology. Educational
programs at the undergraduate level are being developed to match the research
growth in these areas. It is the plan that new laboratory courses will be
offered in the MEMS field (both in the Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department, as well as the newly emerging Bioengineering undergraduate track in
which the PI and co-PI's are participants), for which this piece of equipment
would be indispensable. Also, it will serve the surrounding community within the
Lehigh Valley, particularly the local colleges and K-12 students by providing a
vehicle for the fabrication of interesting microdevices for visually attractive
It "show and tell" demonstrations. A special effort will be made to introduce
students on all educational levels into the magical worlds of micro- and
nanotechnology.