* 0320708
* MRI:  Acquisition of the GLOW Distributed Computing System at the University of Wisconsin - Madison
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,186,405.00

This project, harnessing the power of commodity hardware and software resources
in a Grid laboratory (GLOW), aims at making Grid computing an effective tool for
scientific research in a large-scale environment with real-life users and
applications. While training a new generation of interdisciplinary scientists,
this multidisciplinary team collaborates in the development, implementation,
test, and deployment of Grid enabled capabilities. GLOW spans six domains:
Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Science, Medical Physics (including
Radiology and Human Oncology), Particle Physics and Astrophysics (each with
significant computational needs and each contributing a site to the lab). The
environment permits exploration on harnessing new computing technologies to meet
the computational needs of leading edge research in the biological and physical
sciences. Research involves:&lt;br/&gt; Optical mapping &lt;br/&gt; Neutrino
observatory: IceCube&lt;br/&gt; Software development: Higgs boson&lt;br/&gt;
Overcoming bottlenecks in molecular study of complex fluid and
materials&lt;br/&gt; Applications in intensity modulated radiation therapy,
IMRT&lt;br/&gt; Sociological nature of ownership&lt;br/&gt;The first technique
has emerged as a powerful system for the construction of high-resolution
restriction maps from a broad range of clone types and genomic DNA. The second
forms part of an international initiative utilizing the South Pole ice
instrumented at depths with optical sensors as a Cherenkov detector; the
telescope collects the light from secondary particles produced in interactions
of high-energy neutrinos near the instrumented volume. The third explores
fundamental physics at a new energy regime predicted to lead to the discovery of
Higgs boson that is responsible for providing masses to elementary particles or
new symmetries, matter forms, or interactions. Software under development will
trigger system simulation, event filter algorithms, and simulated data analysis.
In four, the Chemical Engineering group conducts computational research on
designing molecules and materials for specific application, focusing on two
areas: development of accurate, transferable force fields capable of describing
interactions between distinct atomic species in condensed media and advanced
simulation techniques for describing the structure and dynamics of complex
fluids and materials. Fifth, the Medical Physics, Radiology, and Human Oncology
groups focus on various areas; applications ranging from Monte Carlo
calculations of radiation fields produced by radiotherapy treatment units to
dose calculation within a patients. Image science uses complex, high
performance, iterative, back-projection techniques to develop 3-dimensional time
varying images for advanced diagnosis that combined with stochastic optimization
provides a new framework for clinical analysis and treatment. Lastly, social
analysts will study new ownership and cooperation relations as these emerge in
the areas of scientific exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GLOW enables the
cross-fertilization of active research pursuits providing a real-life Grid
environment for experimental work opening many training opportunities for
students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;