* 0320608
* Matter & Interactions: Models & Modern Concepts in Introductory Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Bruce Sherwood, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2005
* USD 143,019.00

We are developing educational materials to bring modern content into
introductory physics. With the aid of previous NSF funding we have created a new
calculus-based introductory textbook on mechanics and thermal physics that
addresses the following problems: 1) Many students have already studied
mechanics in high school and are bored by repeating nearly the same material in
college. 2) Students and instructors are unhappy with the lack of contemporary
science in the traditional course. 3) Students in the traditional course are not
involved in the modeling of physical systems, including making idealizations,
approximations and simplifying assumptions. 4) Thermodynamics and mechanics are
traditionally treated as completely separate topics, rather than as an
integrated science based on a small number of fundamental principles. The new
curriculum emphasizes atomic-level description and analysis, and physical
modeling including computer modeling. The material deliberately looks to the
students very different from what they had studied earlier. Thermal physics is
integrated with mechanics throughout the textbook, climaxing with an accessible
statistical mechanical treatment of the Einstein solid.

We believe that the new textbook provides a needed alternative to traditional
texts, but it is not yet pedagogically robust and transportable. It already
works well with exceptionally strong students; this is important because such
students are at special risk of boredom, and we do not want to lose them.
However, we would like to make this interesting subject matter accessible not
just to the honors student but also to the average student who has had a decent
high school physics preparation. It is also important to make the curriculum
teachable by other instructors; this requires the creation of additional kinds
of materials, including an instructor's manual and support packages for
introducing computer modeling into the course.

We propose to continue work on pedagogical aspects of the reform, with further
revisions of the textbook in response to our teaching experiences and ongoing
formative assessment activities. A key component will be a national beta test in
Fall 1999 for which we are currently recruiting participants. We believe that we
now have something well worth teaching but we need to address shortcomings in
how well we and others can teach it. We also propose to revise and extend our
earlier E&M textbook to match the new material, thus providing a coherent,
modern one-year introductory physics textbook. We propose to engage in
additional evaluation and dissemination activities.