* 0320831
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer for Nanoscale Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David Sellmyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 252,000.00

This grant is for the acquisition of a state-of-the-art multi-purpose X-Ray
diffractometer system. The instrument will be located in the Center for
Materials Research and Analysis (CMRA) X-Ray Materials Characterization
Facility. It will provide new, essential capabilities, dramatically increasing
research productivity. The new instrument will meet the needs of researchers who
require qualitative and quantitative phase analysis, crystal structure analysis,
stress measurement, static and dynamic high- and low-temperature studies in air,
vacuum or inert gas, and thin-film characterization including reflectivity and
grazing-incidence diffraction. Software will allow more advanced acquisition and
analysis of data. Features of the requested instrument include: (1) Rotating
anode high-intensity X-Ray source; (2) High- precision goniometer with automatic
alignment; (3) Sample stage for precise mounting of samples; (4) Multi-purpose
optical system including variable and fixed slits with easy conversion from
parafocusing to various parallel beam configurations; (5) High- and low-
temperature chambers; (6) Position sensitive detector to significantly reduce
data collection time; (7) Modern analytical software package; and (7) Radiation
enclosure with convenient access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMRA is a
multidisciplinary research center with over 60 faculty members in 7 departments.
Major collaborative initiatives under way are the NSF MRSEC: Quantum and Spin
Phenomena in Nanomagnetic Structures (QSPINS), the W.M. Keck Center for Mesospin
and Quantum Information Systems, and an ONR Nano-Initiative: Nanoscale
Magnetoelectronic Structures and Devices. These three programs involve 27
faculty members and the total funding over $10 million. The X-Ray Materials
Characterization Facility is one of seven CMRA research facilities available to
all NU faculty as well as companies in Nebraska and elsewhere. A full-time
Materials Research Specialist maintains equipment, trains and assists users in
safety, analysis techniques and data interpretation and presentation. The X-Ray
diffractometer system will greatly enhance materials research and education
throughout the university and especially improve the structural characterization
of many of the nanoscale materials involved in the above-mentioned group grants.
The disciplines represented by the principal investigators of this proposal
include materials science, physics, chemistry, chemical engineering, and
mechanical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;