* 0320654
* MRI:  Equipment Development: Development of Advanced Scanning Probe Techniques for Spintronics and Nanodevice Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Dongmin Chen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 384,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Scanning Probe Microscopy (STM, AFM, BEEM etc) has
revolutionized the way we visualize and manipulate individual atoms, chemical
bonds, and electron waves. A successful development of a new technique and
instrument that can enable us to visualize and manipulate magnetic states and
even a single spin would clearly be another great milestone in device and
materials research. An STM is just a two terminal device but the investigation
of spin-dependent nanoscale transport phenomenon, similar to transistor action,
requires a three terminal device arrangement. Here we propose to construct a
dual-probe scanning tunneling microscope operating in a low temperature, high
magnetic field and ultra high vacuum environment. Such an instrument not only
maintains independent scanning capability but also is capable of positioning the
two tips (electrodes) at nanoscale distances and desired locations, forming a
nano-scale three-terminal device with the specimen. Using spin polarized STM
tips, this instrument will enable us to inject, detect and manipulate both
charges and spins with the controllability down to the atomic scale. It should
enable many new experiments including but not limited to: (a) mapping local spin
polarization in a dilute magnetic semiconductor based on the Zeeman splitting of
the energy spectra of an electron in a high magnetic field; (b) investigating
spin injection from a ferromagnetic metal into a semiconductor using a dual tip
BEEM; (c) demonstrations of spin FET devices;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies
should enable deeper fundamental understanding of ferromagnetism in
semiconductors and other device materials, provide guidance for improving
materials performance such as higher Curie temperature and long mean free path
for spin coherent carriers, and enable development of novel device concepts
based on spin degrees of freedom, in addition to charge degrees of freedom. The
unique and powerful capabilities of the proposed instrument cannot be achieved
by any current conventional SPM instrument or lithographical fabrication
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;It will attract and
enable the undergraduate, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to explore
the most forefront nanoscale device and materials physics, particularly
spintronics. This proposed research involves a broad set of experimental skills
and should provide a rather special opportunity for training the next generation
of experimental physicists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;