* 0320606
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* John Henson, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 325,059.00

A grant has been awarded to Dickinson College under the direction of Dr.
&lt;br/&gt;John Henson to support the acquisition of a laser scanning confocal
light &lt;br/&gt;microscope. The ongoing renaissance in the use of light
microscopy for &lt;br/&gt;research and education in cell biology, neurobiology
and developmental &lt;br/&gt;biology has been fueled by the capabilities of
confocal microscopy &lt;br/&gt;systems. They have become the instrument of
choice due to their ability &lt;br/&gt;to "optically section" cells and tissues
and therefore allow for the 3D &lt;br/&gt;spatial resolution needed to define
structural relationships, along with the &lt;br/&gt;temporal resolution needed
to follow dynamic processes. Dickinson &lt;br/&gt;College, an undergraduate
institution with an excellent record of &lt;br/&gt;student/faculty research and
an innovative science education program, &lt;br/&gt;will use this confocal
microscope to support student/faculty research, &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
education, and community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscopy
system will be equipped with a microinjection &lt;br/&gt;set up and will support
a wide variety of student/faculty research projects. &lt;br/&gt;The mechanism of
cell motility and division will be addressed in &lt;br/&gt;experiments using sea
urchin adult cells and embryos. How the liver &lt;br/&gt;transports toxic waste
will be the focus of studies using cultures of skate &lt;br/&gt;liver cells. The
turning on and off of specific genes during embryonic &lt;br/&gt;development
will be worked on using fruit fly embryos. The neural control &lt;br/&gt;of
metamorphosis in molluscan embryos and the localization of memory
&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms in the brains of conditioned day old chicks will be
subject of &lt;br/&gt;other studies involving the use of this instrument.
Undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;research students will be integral participants in all
of these projects, &lt;br/&gt;contributing to experimental design, execution and
analysis as well as the &lt;br/&gt;presentation of results at meetings and the
publication of the results in &lt;br/&gt;scientific journals. In terms of impact
on undergraduate education, the &lt;br/&gt;instrument will be incorporated into
the teaching of courses in cell biology, &lt;br/&gt;developmental biology,
neurobiology, molecular genetics and
&lt;br/&gt;biopsychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of a confocal
microscope at Dickinson will have a number &lt;br/&gt;of significant and
pervasive broader impacts. Importantly this instrument &lt;br/&gt;will serve as
one of the underpinnings for a new interdisciplinary major in
&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscience at Dickinson that will involve coursework selected from
the &lt;br/&gt;offerings of the Biology and Psychology programs. In terms of
service to &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented student groups, women undergraduate
students &lt;br/&gt;currently make up roughly 75% of the Biology, Biochemistry
and Molecular &lt;br/&gt;Biology and Psychology majors. We also envision making
this instrument &lt;br/&gt;available to faculty and students at Gettysburg and
Franklin and Marshall &lt;br/&gt;Colleges, the two other member colleges of the
Central Pennsylvania &lt;br/&gt;Consortium, as well as using both the
Pennsylvania Academy of &lt;br/&gt;Sciences and the American Society for Cell
Biology meetings as fora for &lt;br/&gt;discussing applications of confocal
microscopy in a small college setting. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, we plan to write
up research-oriented teaching labs that &lt;br/&gt;utilize the confocal for
publication in the new on line journal Cell Biology &lt;br/&gt;Education. In
terms of community outreach, the confocal microscope will &lt;br/&gt;be used in
a Howard Hughes Medical Institute-funded program in which &lt;br/&gt;local high
school teachers attend summer workshops in cell and &lt;br/&gt;molecular biology
at Dickinson. The instrument will be used by teachers &lt;br/&gt;during these
workshops and made available for use by visiting high &lt;br/&gt;school student
groups during the academic year.