* 0320720
* Acquisition of a Scanning Probe System for Characterization of Nanostructure Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Robert Nemanich, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

This grant provides funding for the acquisition of a multipurpose ultra high
vacuum scanning tunneling microscope (UHV) STM-AFM with full spectroscopic
capabilities and a temperature range extending down to 25K. This equipment is
critical for a multitude of nanoscience studies. The system includes several
unique upgrades provided by both the manufacturer and the researchers. Included
are advanced surface preparation, nanostructure formation, and surface
characterization capabilities. The STM-AFM will be used in research to explore
quantum dot and wire electronics and nanoscale Schottky barriers, quantum
effects in molecular self-assembled nanostructures, selective reactions on
atomically tailored surfaces, tribochemistry at the nanoscale, nanocrystalline
semiconductors, piezoelectric and ferroelectric nanopatterned films, optical
emission from nitride nanostructures, and light-induced transport effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning probe systems are unique in their ability to
measure materials properties at the nanometer scale. The STM is itself based on
quantum mechanical tunneling to construct images with atomic scale resolution.
The value of STM is increased substantially when coupled with scanning tunneling
spectroscopy techniques. Images of surfaces can be constructed from the atomic
scale attractive and repulsive interactions between a sharp tip and a surface.
This technique, termed atomic force microscopy (AFM), is substantially enhanced
with electrical measurements coupled through the tip at the same time as
topographic imaging is recorded. The variable temperature scanning probe system
will be integrated with two other scanning probe systems to establish a
laboratory for the Characterization of Nanostructure Properties. This laboratory
will provide the opportunity for over thirty students and post doctoral
researchers annually to be involved with research and exploratory education
projects in nanoscience research. Moreover, results from the laboratory will be
incorporated directly into graduate and undergraduate courses now being offered
at NC State. The PIs have been active in building diversity through their
recruiting of graduate students from underrepresented groups, their involvement
in the NC State REU programs, which have a tradition of diverse student
involvement, and through collaborations with faculty of nearby North Carolina
Central University and Shaw University, both HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;