* 0320624
* MRI: Development of Tomographic Imaging Instrumentation with Terahertz Radiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 299,850.00

Development of Tomographic Imaging Instrumentation with Terahertz
Radiation&lt;br/&gt;A Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Terahertz (THz)
Research at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is seeking NSF&lt;br/&gt;support
for the development of a THz wave tomographic imaging system that will provide
the&lt;br/&gt;first-ever THz capability to produce real-time, large-scale, long-
distance, three-dimensional (3D)&lt;br/&gt;images. Like conventional X-ray CT
systems, the THz system will provide 3D mapping of&lt;br/&gt;structured objects,
but without subjecting biological tissue to harmful radiation. In addition,
it&lt;br/&gt;will offer important spectroscopic information that conventional
systems cannot supply. The&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation will provide real-time
images across an ultra-wide frequency band, extending&lt;br/&gt;from 100
gigahertz to 10 terahertz, at a variable frame rate from single-shot up to 1,000
frames&lt;br/&gt;per second, and it will be able to non-invasively image moving
objects, turbulent flows, or&lt;br/&gt;explosions.&lt;br/&gt;THz research is
central to Rensselaer's strategic plan because it is a key enabling technology
for&lt;br/&gt;both of the university's major focus areas, information technology
and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer has strongly supported the formation of
the THz Center, with Dr. Zhang as founding&lt;br/&gt;director. The university is
providing 5,000 square feet of laboratory space, substantial
financial&lt;br/&gt;support for renovation and equipment, and three new faculty
positions in the next four years,&lt;br/&gt;with a concomitant increase in
graduate and undergraduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
proposed instrumentation will be an important step forward for
THz&lt;br/&gt;science. During the last decade, Rensselaer's team has been
exploring this previously hidden&lt;br/&gt;portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum, which is located between the infrared and the&lt;br/&gt;microwave
bands. Basic THz science and technology is in its infancy, but as it improves,
it has&lt;br/&gt;the potential to trigger transformational advances that will
impact economic development and&lt;br/&gt;quality of life at every level.
Examples of interdisciplinary fields that could gain important
new&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation include homeland security, biomedical research,
communications, environmental&lt;br/&gt;monitoring, agriculture, and forensic
science.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Successful development of the equipment will
have a broad impact. In recent&lt;br/&gt;years, worldwide excitement about this
field has grown exponentially, as evidenced by an&lt;br/&gt;expanding number of
research groups that have published more than 1,400 scientific papers
on&lt;br/&gt;THz science since 1990. During the last several years, scientists
and engineers from 75&lt;br/&gt;universities, companies, and clinics have
visited Rensselaer THz-related programs, and&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer's team has
helped scientists from 18 countries learn how to use THz sensors.
This&lt;br/&gt;new instrumentation will be a key enabling technology for the THz
Center, providing new&lt;br/&gt;research capabilities for an interdisciplinary
group of Rensselaer faculty, postdoctoral associates,&lt;br/&gt;and graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as for visiting scientists and
external&lt;br/&gt;collaborators. It will be used to test numerous advanced
sensing and imaging concepts in the&lt;br/&gt;THz frequency range, with
immediate concentration on homeland security and a longer-
term&lt;br/&gt;interest in biomedical applications. Jefferson Laboratory, UC
Santa Barbara, and Rensselaer&lt;br/&gt;have proposed creation of the National
THz User Facility, and this system would be at the heart&lt;br/&gt;of one of the
user nodes. Based on past experience with Rensselaer's THz research,
the&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation is also expected to provide a model for systems
that will be developed in&lt;br/&gt;laboratories around the world.