* 0320641
* Acquisition of a High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope to Enhance Research and Training in the Nanocharacterization of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 650,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a new state-of-the-art high-
resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) at the University of
Minnesota that will be used by faculty and students in several departments
(Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Civil Engineering,
Electrical Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Geology and
Geophysics, Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics, Physics and Astronomy, and
Soil, Water and Climate). This instrument is equipped with a field-emission gun
and energy-dispersive X-ray analysis, beam-scanning, high-angle annular-dark-
field (Z-contrast) imaging, low-dose imaging, and high-resolution phase-contrast
imaging capabilities. The unifying research theme research involves
understanding how composition, structure, and chemical bonding at the nanometer
length-scale influences the processing and properties of materials. Research
areas that will benefit from this acquisition include processing and
characterization of nanoparticles and other nanomaterials, porous semiconductors
and metals, functionality of nanotubes, atmospheric particles, characterization
of interfaces between crystalline and noncrystalline phases, paleomagnetism, and
environmental geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is inherently an
interdisciplinary field, which requires both an engineering and science
approach. Many of the specific research projects that will be conducted using
the new HRTEM cross traditional discipline areas and involve collaborations
between investigators in two or more departments. Faculty from five science and
engineering departments at the University of Minnesota came together to create a
new degree-granting program entitled "Nanoparticle Science and Engineering,"
demonstrating a strong commitment to the interdisciplinary philosophy and to
training scientists and engineers in this area. More than 30 faculty, 27
postdoctorals, and 81 students will have access to this electron microscope,
greatly facilitating the education and training of students on the campus in the
capabilities, theory, and use of state-of-the-art HRTEM techniques. In addition
to this interdisciplinary and interdivisional group of on-campus users, many
industrial users have expressed interest in collaborations that would use the
proposed instrumentation for the areas of data storage, biomedical research,
nanotechnology, insulated metal substrate applications, tires and rubber, and
particle processing. The new instrument will strengthen ties between the UMN
groups and these companies and will most certainly open the door for new
collaborative research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;