* 0320792
* Acquisition of Instruments for the Establishment of a Center for Imaging and Nondestructive Chemical Analysis at the University of North Carolina at Asheville: An MRI/RUI Proposal
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Timothy Forrest, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 412,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of major instrumentation to be
used to establish a Center for Imaging and Nondestructive Chemical Analysis at
the University of North Carolina at Asheville. The Center will house an
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) and an X-ray Energy Dispersive
Spectrometer (EDX). The ESEM will be the first of this state-of-the art
instrument in the Asheville region, available for public use by qualified
individuals and groups. The ESEM will provide new capability at UNCA for
nondestructive chemical analyses and observation of non-coated and partially
hydrated specimens. This capability allows on-going observation and analysis of
the same sample, including living things, at different times during an
experiment, without the need to extract, mount, dry, or coat for examination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNCA's liberal arts focus includes the undergraduate
research program, ranked ninth in the nation by US News and World Report, and
connections with the community. The Center will be used by all science programs
at UNCA, including Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Environmental Studies (including
Earth Science), and the Mossbauer research group. Primary users of the Center
will be faculty and undergraduate students at UNCA and collaborators from nearby
universities, government agencies, and industry. The Center will be available at
no cost to members of the North Carolina Consortium of Undergraduate Research
(NCCUR), which consists of the historically black colleges and universities of
the University of North Carolina system. Primary and secondary teachers and
students will be exposed to the ESEM through summer training workshops for
teachers and school-year demonstrations for local classes. For this project in
particular, we plan to conduct technology workshops for teachers from the nearby
Cherokee Nation, partnering and networking them with teachers from counties in
the immediate Asheville region. Women, who make up 55% of the student body at
UNCA and who comprise the vast majority of teacher workshop participants will
benefit from use of the Center. Likewise, UNCA is aggressively seeking increased
participation of African-Americans and other minorities at the university and in
its sponsored programs. Instrument use will focus on research, but a variety of
science classes at UNCA and surrounding universities also will use the Center.
Examples of possible research projects that will benefit from the
&lt;br/&gt;Center include structural and magnetic properties of iron
oxyhydroxide-based nanoparticles; geochemistry of lead, steel, and other types
of shot from recreational shooting ranges and corrosion products of metal-
bearing archaeological materials; characterization and discrimination of
prehistoric pottery; petrology of the regional bedrock; mineralogy of regional
granitic pegmatites; discrimination of cryptic (insect) species; and phylogeny
of New World members of Acacia. Classroom usage of the ESEM laboratory will
involve explanation of analytical techniques and capabilities and simple
laboratory experiments. Dissemination of results and methods will be
accomplished through special sessions of UNCA's annual Undergraduate Research
Symposium, teacher workshops and school demonstrations, presentation at regional
and national meetings, and publication in professional journals. &lt;br/&gt;