* 0320676
* Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Studies of Biomolecules and Nanoscale Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 133,000.00

This grant supports a state-of-the-art scanning probe microscope (SPM). Recent
advances in scanning probe microscopy technology make possible the direct
imaging of a diverse range of nano- and micro-scale materials, including
biological macromolecules and micro-organisms in their native solution
environment. This appropriately configured AFM will allow imaging of proteins
and DNA molecules, the structure of microorganisms such as phages and live
bacteria, nanopore single molecule mechanics, the morphology of nano-composites
of superconducting and metallic granules, and magnetic domain structures.. The
AFM is capable of force measurements as diverse as inter- and intra- molecular
interactions and magnetic forces. Exploring such a broad range of applications
using a workhorse SPM platform shall enhance the research productivity of all
participant investigators, while in the meantime providing essential research
training in scanning probe microscopy to a large number of undergraduate and
graduate students at Brown. The shared and coordinated use of the
multifunctional equipment will yield significant savings for all participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a multifunctional SPM facility will
greatly enrich the training of a large number of student researchers over the
next ten years, forming a cornerstone of their training in cutting edge
materials science. Each year, NSF grants at Brown support the research of 10-12
graduate students and a comparable number of undergraduates. Many of these
students come to Brown from under-represented groups including women, African
Americans and Hispanics. In addition, the PIs have developed new biophysics and
biomechanics courses and will incorporate the SPM in their associated laboratory
portions. The PIs plan to offer training and research opportunities to local
college and high school teachers in an effort to share the excitement of a
cutting edge equipment facility with the broader community. The collaborative
access to this multifunctional instrument shall likely facilitate new
collaborations addressing a rich variety of scientific questions, and thus
foster synergistic research activities and new research directions. &lt;br/&gt;