* 0320939
* Acquisition of neurophysiological instrumentation for language and movement processes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Andrew Gordon, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 249,734.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from a National Science Foundation Major
Research Instrumentation award Dr. Andrew Gordon, Dr. Peter Gordon, and
colleagues at Teachers College, Columbia University, will establish a research
facility containing state-of-the-art instrumentation to investigate
neurophysiological mechanisms underlying language and movement and their
interactions. Particular emphasis will be placed on processes underlying
learning and development. The award will fund acquisition of a high-density
electroencephalographic (256 channel EEG) system, which provides the best
resolution available to study the structure and localization of neural activity
associated cognitive function. Researchers at Teachers College will examine how
the child and adult brain processes information during first and second language
learning. Further studies will investigate neural information processing related
to infants' perception of events in the world. These will include studies of how
infants understand basic actions and sequenced events that will later be
expressed verbally as they develop spoken language. The EEG system will also be
used to investigate changes in brain activity as people use language to express
their emotional reactions to life stressors. An eye-tracking system will also be
acquired to study the relationship between eye-hand coordination during typing
in adults, and the acquisition of reading in children and second language
learners. Finally, a movement analysis system for tracking motion in three
dimensions will be acquired to study facial and hand movements in children and
adults as they develop language-related behaviors. These studies using state-of-
the-art equipment will serve as a window into linguistic and cognitive
development, explore brain-behavior relations in early perceptual development,
identify relations between language and emotion, provide insights into the
reading strategies and abilities of emerging readers, and gain deeper insights
into the neural mechanisms underlying second language acquisition. The
groundbreaking combination of language and movement sciences within this
facility represents an exciting new approach to the study of human communicative
learning and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of these
activities include scientific discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training and learning. The instrumentation will enable the
investigators to create a well-equipped learning environment for integrating
research and education. The research projects all involve students from Teachers
College, which includes a high proportion of females and individuals from
underrepresented groups, thus broadening their participation in science and its
application to education. The instrumentation will be a centerpiece of a
recently re-established multi-disciplinary Neurosciences and Education program
that focuses on the neurological basis of learning and education. The benefits
of these activities to society include developing the capacity to generate
research that will aid our understanding of developmental and learning processes
and impact pedagogy related to spoken, written and signed language. Students at
Teachers College will become leaders of the educational establishment and will
take the knowledge gained from exposure to the instrumentation and resulting
research into the schools in their roles of leadership and practice.&lt;br/&gt;