* 0320043
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation to Modernize and Enhance an Ultrasonic Scanning System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Brent Hoffmeister, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 75,059.00

A grant has been awarded to Rhodes College under the direction of Dr. Brent
Hoffmeister to modernize and enhance an ultrasonic scanning system currently in
their possession. The system operates by mechanically scanning an ultrasonic
transducer over a specimen to rapidly perform ultrasonic measurements at
multiple sites on the specimen. The mechanical components of the present system
are in excellent condition, but the electronics (including the 486 platform
computer used to control the system) are obsolete. The grant will be used to
modernize the scanning system and to expand its acoustic frequency range from
approximately 1-7.5 MHz to 0.3-150 MHz. Major items in the budget include a new
computer to control the system, a new computer for data analysis, a new A/D
board for waveform digitization, new motion control electronics, a wider
selection of ultrasonic transducers, a new ultrasonic pulser-receiver for use
with high frequency (&gt;35 MHz) ultrasonic transducers, and a digitizing
oscilloscope capable of analyzing high frequency ultrasonic
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scanning system will be used to support
undergraduate research. It is well suited for this purpose because the basic
principles of its operation are accessible to undergraduate students. For
example, students learn the basic principles of acoustic wave propagation in
their first semester of physics. The system builds upon these fundamental
concepts to teach students about wave propagation in more complicated,
anisotropic and inhomogeneous materials. Immediate research plans for the system
will involve studies of two such materials: cancellous bone and articular
cartilage. Ultrasonic measurements will be performed to determine how the
content and organization of mineral, collagen and other tissue constituents
affect the scattering of ultrasonic waves propagated into the tissue. Students
working on these projects will be exposed to a highly interdisciplinary area of
research involving physics, biology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
improved ultrasonic scanning system will be a basic research instrument similar
to an NMR spectrometer or electron microscope in the flexibility of its possible
research applications. Specific measurements that can be performed include the
speed of sound through materials (sensitive to the elastic properties of the
material), attenuation (sensitive to the viscous properties of the material) and
scattering (sensitive to the inhomogeneous properties of the material). It
represents a powerful tool for studying the physical properties of a wide
variety of materials, and will provide researchers in the region surrounding
Rhodes College with an important research instrument that otherwise would be
unavailable. The system will impact students from several groups including
science majors at Rhodes College and surrounding institutions, students
participating in summer undergraduate research programs at these institutions,
and students enrolled in a unique B.S.-M.S. program in biomedical engineering
involving Rhodes College, the University of Memphis and the University of
Tennessee.&lt;br/&gt;