* 0320740
* Acquisition of a Focused Ion Beam Workstation for Multidisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Tresa Pollock, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a focused ion beam (FIB)
workstation for multidisciplinary materials research at the University of
Michigan. The FIB is an essential tool for the removal and addition of precisely
controlled quantities of material from or to a wide variety of structures and
devices at the micrometer and nanometer length scale. The FIB has enabled the
development of innovative applications in the studies of ceramics,
semiconductors, nano-composites, metals, catalysts, earth materials and
biological materials. The FIB will be housed in a University-wide,
centralized&lt;br/&gt;user facility and will be made available to all research
groups on campus, other university researchers and to industry. Immediate uses
for the new dual-beam FIB include: 1) novel nano-scale engineering applications,
patterning, fabrication and machining; 2) sectioning, high-resolution SEM
imaging and 3D reconstruction of microstructures, site-specific specimen
preparation for in-situ scanning and ex-situ transmission electron microscopy;
and 3) individual, device-level modifications of semiconductor devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past ten years, over 125 research groups, from the
University of Michigan, other nearby universities and industry have made use of
the University materials characterization facilities. This multidisciplinary
research has resulted in more than 3550 publications. Over 1100 graduate
students have used the facilities for a major portion of their thesis research.
Currently, 42 graduate and 16 undergraduate students are actively involved in
research that will make use of the new FIB. The FIB instrument will allow the
research community to more effectively pursue their studies of materials at the
nanoscale, while also promoting the teaching, training and learning of the
graduate and undergraduate students. Students support by the Undergraduate
Research Opportunities Program (UROP) and Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) programs are actively working on the characterization of materials. The
instrument will also be used in summer research projects for minority high
school students, high school teachers and young women. Once installed, the FIB
will be available to a number of students in the NASA Summer High School
Apprenticeship Program (SHARP) for under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;