* 0320903
* Acquisition of LA-ICPMS and SEM-EDS for an Elemental Analysis Facility at The Field Museum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Philip Janney, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 494,295.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
award, Dr. P. Ryan Williams and his colleagues will establish an Elemental
Analysis Laboratory (EAL) at The Field Museum in Chicago, Illinois. The aim of
the EAL is to integrate collections-based and original field research in the
earth, planetary, and anthropological sciences. Principal research programs
include 1) examining the archaeology of cultural production, interaction, and
exchange in South America, Mesoamerica, Africa, and Oceania, 2) advancing the
cause of material conservation of The Field Museum's world renowned natural
history collections, 3) examining the formation and evolution of asteroids and
planets through the analysis of meteorites, and 4) investigating magmatic
processes in the Earth's mantle and crust through the analysis of oceanic and
continental volcanic rocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EAL will house a
quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer with&lt;br/&gt;a laser
ablation system, which will permit the analysis of minor and trace elements of
materials with minimal destructive impact, and a large-chambered scanning
electron microscope with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer for structural
imaging, elemental mapping, and nondestructive identification of major and minor
element compositions of specimens and artifacts. This facility, available to all
museum research staff and collaborating faculty and students from nearby
universities, will make The Field Museum a leading center for natural history
materials analysis in northern Illinois. Moreover, it will allow the Museum to
much more fully exploit the chemical and structural information stored in its
anthropological, geological/ paleontological, zoological and botanical
collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects enabled by the EAL integrate
research and training of undergraduate and graduate students in anthropology and
the earth and planetary sciences, and the results of this research will educate
hundreds of thousands of school children and millions of visitors annually
through the Museum's exhibition and public education programs. These projects
incorporate scholars from a diversity of backgrounds, and the EAL will serve as
a resource to many Chicago area institutions of higher education. Dr. Williams
and his colleagues will teach classes employing the EAL through reciprocal
agreements with local universities, and the EAL will serve as a research tool
for students throughout the Chicago academic community. Finally, the results of
this research on cultural interaction and exchange, the evolution of the earth
and the life on it, and the earth's place in the wider universe, are all
extremely relevant to understanding where humankind came from and where society
is headed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;