* 0320995
* Establishment of a Microanalytical Laboratory for Research in the Earth and Materials Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* David Wark, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 573,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0320995&lt;br/&gt;Spear&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI grant will
fund a new electron microprobe (EMP) to be used for the analysis of natural and
synthetic geologic materials in the Department of Earth and Environmental
Sciences at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The new microprobe will far exceed
the capabilities of our present JEOL 733 by providing greater stability, higher
sensitivity, better analytical precision, and better software/hardware
integration. These new capabilities, and especially the higher count rates
promised by new spectrometer design and diffraction crystal size, are essential
for a number of ongoing and proposed research projects. These projects include
(1) analysis of trace element distributions in metamorphic rocks as monitors of
reaction (and tectonic) history; (2) analysis of experimental run products to
constrain diffusivities in mantle and meteoritic samples; (3) analysis of
porosity and permeability in synthetic rocks to constrain geochemical mobility
in the crust and mantle; (4) and chemical dating of monazite in rocks from
metamorphic belts to constrain timing and rates of orogeny. This instrument will
be housed in a facility that will be available to all researchers and students
at Rensselaer and other academic institutions. The proposed laboratory will
enhance the research infrastructure at Rensselaer and the upstate New York
region and will serve as an instructional facility for undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;