* 0320964
* Acquisition of a Flexible Multiphoton System for Studies of Neuronal Plasticity
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* James Tepper, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2006
* USD 275,715.00

A grant has been awarded to Rutgers University under the direction of Dr. Esther
Nimchinsky to acquire a two-photon laser scanning microscopy (2PLSM) suite,
consisting of two custom-designed microscopes operating off a single laser
source. The research projects described below represent some of the first
studies in what will undoubtedly be the next phase of synaptic physiology
research. They go to the heart of the question of how individual synapses
interact with their immediate microenvironment, and how neurons are able to
receive so many diverse inputs, respond individually to each, and maintain
precisely an appropriate level of functioning for the constantly changing
demands of the outside world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of how
neurons communicate with one another has come largely from studies where large
numbers of synapses are sampled at the same time, and inferences are drawn
regarding their individual behavior from the population averages. While this
approach has yielded a great deal of knowledge, there is no escaping the fact
that synapses are individual structures. In fact, one of their fascinating
properties is that they can be modified separately-with over 10,000 synapses on
each neuron, this is an ability that permits an exquisite degree of fine-tuning.
However, their extremely small size makes them very difficult to study. In
recent years there have been several important technological advances that
greatly improve the ability to study individual synapses and their modulation.
2PLSM is an advanced imaging technique that was developed to permit imaging of
structures deep in live tissue in vitro and in vivo for extended periods. It
thus permits very high-resolution studies at the level of individual synapses in
intact tissue, as well as time-lapse studies, which are critical for the
uncovering of time-dependent processes. At the same time genetically encoded
fluorophores have been characterized and improved, permitting the labeling of
living cells with relatively low toxicity. Dyes sensitive to changes in
intracellular calcium have also improved dramatically, and these allow the study
of functional aspects of neuronal behavior. The system proposed here would be
flexible enough to take full advantage of all these innovations. Using 2PLSM and
new fluorescent dyes, individual synapses can, for the first time, be studied
optically in intact tissue. Specifically, all these techniques will be combined
to study the interactions of astrocytes, the major non-neuronal cell type in the
brain, with synapses; the ways in which neurons balance the strengths of their
synapses across their branches; and the roles of the neurotransmitters dopamine
and serotonin in synaptic function, and their mechanisms of
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 2PLSM suite will greatly benefit projects that
have a broad relevance in neuroscience, and which will be publicized by
publication in major journals and presentation at national and international
meetings such as that of the Society for Neuroscience. The acquisition of this
flexible system will further the teaching mission of the university. Students
and postdoctoral fellows in the participating labs and beyond will learn not
only how neurons look and how synapses function, but will also acquire hands-on
experience in the fundamentals of optics and microscopy, and learn how to
optimize experimental conditions and the instruments themselves to make the most
of their preparations. In addition, the faculty themselves will learn to use and
exploit this important new technology, and perhaps also further to advance it.
Furthermore, the acquisition of this microscopy system at Rutgers University-
Newark, a campus where underrepresented minorities comprise a very sizeable
proportion (40%) of the student body, will put state-of-the-art technology and a
cutting-edge approach within reach of a large number of motivated students who
would otherwise be very unlikely to have access to them. Finally, the presence
at the campus of these microscopes would enhance the strengths of the CMBN in
the field of neuronal plasticity, and help to attract faculty and students that
are interested in this rapidly expanding field. &lt;br/&gt;