* 0320759
* Collaborative Research: Development of a  Particle Tracking System for the Qweak Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Allena Opper, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 07/31/2006
* USD 31,657.00

Ohio University will design and build two sets of trigger scintillators for the
Qweak experiment at Jefferson Lab. This important new experiment will measure
the weak charge of the proton, as a precision test of the running of the weak
mixing angle, thus providing a uniquely sensitive probe of physics beyond the
Standard Model of particle physics. The trigger scintillators are an essential
component of the Qweak particle tracking system, and will be used to start the
electronics and to veto neutral particles during the calibration and background
measurements. Each scintillator will be 225 cm x 16 cm x 1 cm and made from
BC408 or its equivalent. Non-UVT lightguides at each end will provide a
mechanically reliable optical coupling joint. UVT rods that are 5.1 cm in
diameter and 5 cm long will couple the rectangular lightguide to the
photomultiplier tubes. The long edges of the scintillators will be diamond
milled and the ends finished to a 600 grit sanded finish. Given the extreme
ratio of thickness to length, the scintillator counters must be supported by a
frame which is then mountable to the rear chamber package. To reduce radiation
damage, this package will be removed from direct view of the beam for the high
current running mode.

The assembly and testing of the detectors will be done at the Ohio University
Institute for Nuclear and Particle Physics by a graduate student and at least
one undergraduate student, under the supervision of Professor Opper. The Ohio
University group will also develop the fast triggering system which is required
for this experiment. When the detectors have been deemed ready for installation,
the students will participate in their commissioning at Jefferson Lab.