* 0320604
* MRI: Development of a Time Correlated Spectrometer for Simultaneous Bulk-Interfacial Dynamics Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Robb Winter, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 09/30/2007
* USD 233,109.00

This research will develop new instrumentation based on a time-correlated
spectrometer for simultaneous bulk-interfacial dynamics analysis. The instrument
simultaneously allows for interrogation of the interface between substrate and a
bulk phase region, and the determination of the dynamics within the bulk phase
region. This new instrument is based on principles and capabilities of inherent
in the sensitive time-resolved fluorescence technique combined with the second
order nonlinear optical (NLO) spectroscopy methods (second harmonic generation,
SHG, and the vibrational sum-frequency generation, VSFG). The latter techniques
continue to advance the understanding of interfacial phenomena; yet, remains
blind to important bulk phase dynamics. The correlation between interfacial and
bulk phase dynamics is critical to the understanding of such phenomena as
polymeric film layer curing and adhesion. This new instrument leverages optical
and detection components used with the NLO methods, with an enhanced design to
directly probe bulk phase dynamics using a very sensitive and powerful time-
resolved fluorescence technique. Using both, the SHG or the VSFG in a final
apparatus design, and fluorescence probe signal to simultaneously monitor both
interfacial and bulk phase dynamics will promote greater understanding, not only
of the interactions of the molecular functionalities at interfaces, but the
mechanism through which bulk phase dynamics influence those interactions. The
capabilities, realized with the development of this new instrument, will be
applied to address problems ranging from the science and engineering of
polymeric films to the coating analysis and characterization as applied to the
nanoparticles. The interdisciplinary research collaborations that will be
facilitated by this new instrument combine the strengths of SDSM&T in material
science, organic chemistry, environmental and atmospheric chemistry and
engineering. The new instrument design will afford participation from many
different SDSM&T departments, as well as, universities in the region; and
therefore, enhance the educational opportunities at SDSM&T. Optical train and
detection design will provide a platform for including interdisciplinary
participation from the science, electrical engineering and mechanical
engineering departments. The enhanced capabilities will give students, at SDSM&T
and universities in the region, in chemistry, biology, environmental and
material sciences programs a new tool to further advance the knowledge and
accelerate the progress in a range of science and engineering disciplines.
Opportunities for significant enhancement of participation of students from
underrepresented groups also exist.