* 0320764
* RUI:  Acquisition of Robotic Systems for Research in Cognitive Science, Biomechanics, and Computer Science
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Thomas Ellman, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2007
* USD 471,340.00

With an award from the National Science Foundation's program for Major Research
Instrumentation, a team of five investigators at Vassar College is building and
outfitting an interdisciplinary robotics research laboratory (IRRL). Combining
research and education in cognitive science, biomechanics, and computer science,
the IRRL will house 40 robots of six different kinds for a specific and shared
purpose - to simulate and test complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators will use the
facilities of the IRRL (1) to develop novel robot platforms, (2) to simulate
virtual robots with computers, (3) to test theories of animal locomotion, multi-
agent cooperation and human concept learning, and (4) to incorporate robotic
systems in computer science education. The investigators expect that important
new insights in to each discipline will result from the combination of computer
simulation and experiments with robots in a real physical world
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funds from the NSF, the investigators will
acquire robots, computers, and milling equipment for modification and
fabrication of the robotic systems. Two full-time scientific technicians, housed
next to the IRRL, will maintain and modify robots as needed. In addition, Vassar
College has established a research partnership with Nekton Technologies LLC
(Durham, North Carolina). The goal of the partnership is to modify Nekton's
DragonFlyTM aquatic robot so that it may be used as a platform to assess the
mechanical control of swimming performance in fish and fish-like robots. The
investigators will supervise the renovation of a room to create the IRRL. Funds
for the renovation are provided by Vassar College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have several important impacts on the science education of
undergraduates in a liberal arts environment. First, the investigators in the
computer science department will incorporate robots into all levels of the
curriculum, giving students tangible feedback about the workings of their
programs. Second, the group this year ran a robot competition, which drew 12
students from four different majors; the competition will be run annually and
students will use the sophisticated tools of the IRRL. Third, over the three
years of the project, the faculty members will sponsor 12 undergraduates to
become Robot Fellows in Vassar's Undergraduate Research Summer Institute, a ten-
week, full-time internship. Fourth, the faculty members are developing a new
correlate sequence (Vassar's equivalent of a minor), "Embodied Intelligent
Systems," featuring robotic systems and processes developed in the IRRL, for
majors in cognitive science, computer science, and behavior &amp; neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;