* 0320548
* MRI: Development of Fluorescence-Based Spectroscopy and Imaging Microfluidics System for Surface Chemical and Geometric Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Qiao Lin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 08/31/2004
* USD 112,400.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0320548&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: J. Schneider, Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant is to develop a fluorescence-based instrument for the visualization of
flow and adsorption in microfluidic systems. The instrument consists of an
inverted epifluorescence microscope, a solid-state laser, a high-speed CCD
camera, a low-noise DC power supply, and some smaller equipment. Measurement of
adsorption will be accomplished by total internal reflection fluorescence
(TIRF). Microfluidic devices will be constructed using standard soft lithography
methods, allowing for control of microchannel geometry and surface chemistry.
Fluid flow will be induced either by electroosmosis or a syringe pump, depending
on the application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research projects, representative
of those to be supported by this equipment, are as follows: The first is an
assessment of the contribution of lateral diffusion to the kinetics of DNA
hybridization to surface-bound probes as means to improve the performance of
biosensors. The second is the development of a microscale chromatography system
that utilizes DNA-binding surfactants to isolate target DNA from complex
mixtures. The third is the development and validation of numerical algorithms
for improved computer-aided design of lab-on-a-chip
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the instrumentation will be on many
fronts. This is perhaps the first microfluidic visualization instrument that
includes on-line TIRF, supplying surface adsorption information critical to the
above research. In addition, the many groups on campus involved with
microfluidics and MEMS would have this instrument as a shared resource. We will
also perform a series of microfluidics experiments (available as a web-based
resource) to serve as examples and problem sets for transport courses. We will
also develop hands on projects for high school students participating in the
Summer Academy for Minority Students at Carnegie Mellon University. This would
serve as an introduction to an exciting field and familiarize students with
state-of-the-art lab equipment.&lt;br/&gt;