* 0321337
* Acquisition of a Nanoindentor System for Micro/Nanosystems Research and Education Efforts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Steven George, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2004
* USD 266,427.00

This proposal to acquire a nanoindentor system from MTS corporation to support
exciting and diverse&lt;br/&gt;research and training at the intersection of nano
and microsystems technology. In its&lt;br/&gt;base configuration, the load
resolution is 50 nN and the displacement resolution is 0.01 nm. These can
be&lt;br/&gt;significantly lowered to 1 nN and 0.0002 nm, respectively with an
additional indentation head. The&lt;br/&gt;nanoindentor is typically used to
indent (push the tip into) a material while simultaneously measuring
the&lt;br/&gt;load and displacement. The concept is common to many techniques in
materials characterization, except&lt;br/&gt;that the mode of deformation is
extremely complicated. However, with suitable analysis, typically via
the&lt;br/&gt;finite element method, the measured load vs. displacement curve
can be inverted to infer a host of&lt;br/&gt;important material properties.
Because the measurement area is so small (on the order of 100s of
nms),&lt;br/&gt;the instrument is ideally suited to obtain quantitative
information regarding mechanical properties as a&lt;br/&gt;function of position
in complex material systems and structures.&lt;br/&gt;The nanoindentor will be
the heart of a unique micro/nanomechanical characterization facility at
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado (CU). It will greatly impact numerous
diverse research efforts that are currently&lt;br/&gt;supported including
applications in the characterization of advanced materials, experimental
mechanics of&lt;br/&gt;micromechanical structures and devices, studies of
biological materials/systems ranging from protein/cell&lt;br/&gt;structure up to
full arteries, and as a nanomanufacturing tool for the development of nanoscale
circuits&lt;br/&gt;using biomolecular templates. &lt;br/&gt;Initially the
nanoindentor will be used by the groups of 12 faculty members, spanning
six&lt;br/&gt;Departments and three Colleges at CU. It will be used to support
research projects and instructional&lt;br/&gt;activities at the graduate and
undergraduate levels. A number of activities are planned to increase
our&lt;br/&gt;user base and the overall level of diverse expertise with the
instrument. These include: i) the development&lt;br/&gt;of a Micro/nanosystems
Forum in which two types speakers will be solicited: those with expertise
in&lt;br/&gt;nanoindentation and related fields, and those with interesting
research activities that may be able to make&lt;br/&gt;use of the nanoindentor;
ii) the development of a website devoted to activities using the nanoindentor;
iii)&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of capabilities and results, along with the
solicitation of potential collaborative users at&lt;br/&gt;semiannual meetings
of our NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers (CAMPmode
and&lt;br/&gt;MAST); iv) a user-fee structure that requires users to disseminate
their results to our user community; and&lt;br/&gt;v) a plan to recruit new
users, particularly underrepresented groups and women pursuing
advanced&lt;br/&gt;degrees.