* 0321978
* Analysis of a Novel Mechanism of Genetic Reversion in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Susan Lolle, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2008
* USD 665,000.00

The stability and integrity of the genetic material, deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA), is dependent upon a myriad of cellular processes. Since most organisms
continue to experience cell division after achieving maturity, replication and
repair of the genome remain essential for normal growth and development
throughout the life span of that organism. A host of universal and relatively
well-understood DNA repair systems exist to ensure genomic integrity. In recent
years, ribonucleic acid (RNA) has been demonstrated to play important roles far
beyond those of messenger RNA, transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA. RNA has been
shown to play a catalytic role in various RNAse enzymes and most recently has
been shown to play a role in regulating gene expression by targeting specific
messenger RNAs for degradation. The research to be carried out will characterize
a novel mechanism of genetic reversion that may represent a case of template-
directed DNA modification where the template directing the modification is RNA.
Specifically, this project aims to understand the nature of the genetic
instability seen in a collection of mutants in the model plant, Arabidopsis
thaliana, that have genetic lesions in the HOTHEAD gene. Although the HOTHEAD
gene product itself shares only superficial homology with a class of enzymes
involved in degradation of cyanogenic compounds and does not feature any motifs
typical of DNA-associated proteins, this gene appears to be susceptible to a
novel type of genetic reversion. Single point mutations in hothead alleles
revert to the wild-type nucleotide sequence at a high frequency. Furthermore,
genotypically wild-type plants derived from heterozygous hothead parent plants
show a similar instability, but in this case involving alteration back to the
mutant allele in what appears to be an allele-specific manner. The instability
of the genetic material seen in the HOTHEAD gene may represent a general
mechanism that allows the organism to maintain additional DNA sequence variation
beyond the two alleles of each gene present in the chromosomes.

