* 0321781
* Geotechnical Reconnaissance of the January 22, 2003 Colima, Mexico Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Adrian Rodriguez-Marek, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2004
* USD 29,858.00

This action is to support a reconnaissance survey of the 22 January 2003 Mw 7.8
earthquake near the coast of central Mexico. The earthquake was about 51 km
south-southwest of Arequipa and approximately 500 km west of Mexico City, and
caused extensive damage in the region surrounding the cities of Colima and
Manzanillo. Damage also occurred at the Port of Manzanillo, and along the
highways that traverse the region. An NSF-supported geotechnical reconnaissance
team visited the area to document the geotechnical and engineering
geology/seismology features of this earthquake. Owing to the perishable nature
of the geotechnical damage, it was imperative for the reconnaissance to begin as
soon as was practically feasible. The reconnaissance team was assisted by local
researchers and practitioners with regard to local geology and local
construction practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reconnaissance of this
important seismic event is expected to yield useful information and data to
understand the effects of subduction zone earthquakes, and to apply those
findings to the mitigation of earthquake hazards that may occur along the
Aleutian-Alaskan subduction zone and in the Cascadia subduction zone in the
Pacific Northwest of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
reconnaissance will be made available in two phases. In the first phase, the
early reconnaissance reports will be posted on the Internet through the Pacific
Earthquake Engineering Research Center (PEER; http://peer.berkeley.edu). In the
second phase, a more comprehensive final report will be written and published.