* 0321952
* Enhancement and Quenching of Combustion by Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Alexander Kiselev, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 33,285.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0102554&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Enhancement
and Quenching of Combustion by Fluid
Flow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0102554
Kiselev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that in many combustion
phenomena the turbulent advection of the underlying fluid plays an important
role. Depending on the setting, it can lead to a significant speed up of
combustion or to the quenching of the flame. The main goal of this project is to
improve fundamental understanding of this important phenomenon. In particular,
this work explores analytically how the geometry, scaling, and intensity of the
velocity field determine the effect advection has on combustion. A primary goal
is to determine the optimal geometry for the fastest extinction of the flame, or
for the most effective speed up. The models to be studied include passive
reaction-diffusion equations with physically-motivated reaction terms, systems
of reaction-diffusion equations, and active scalar models with feedback of
temperature and concentration on fluid velocity. The methods of analysis include
maximum-principle-based techniques, estimates on solutions of partial
differential equations, and functional inequalities, as well as some methods of
harmonic and spectral analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of strong
fluid advection on combustion plays a crucial role in many important combustion
processes in technology and in nature. Strong fluid advection may drastically
enhance the rate of burning, leading to higher efficiency, or, in some
situations, extinguish the flame. This question has been extensively studied by
engineers, physicists, and mathematicians alike. However, until very recent work
of several research groups, there were few rigorous results on the topic.
Building on the technique developed in earlier works, the project seeks to
deepen the understanding of this phenomenon, in particular relating the
geometric characteristics of the fluid flow with the effect it has on
combustion. The potential impact of the project is an improved knowledge of
combustion processes in settings as diverse as internal combustion engines and
stars. The research may lead to direct suggestions on the most efficient ways of
flame suppression or enhancement. In addition, the techniques developed for
tackling this problem may prove useful in analyzing other partial differential
equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;