* 0321339
* Acquisition of an Isotope-Ratio Mass Spectrometer and Moving-Wire Interface for Hydrogen- and Carbon-Isotopic biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Alex Sessions, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 259,804.00

0321339&lt;br/&gt;Sessions&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
to California Institute of Technology provides funds for acquisition of an
isotope-ratio mass spectrometer, a gas chromatograph with pyrolysis interface
for deuterium/hydrogen analyses of lipids, and a moving-wire interface for 13C
analyses of involatile biopolymers such as RNA. &lt;br/&gt;The moving-wire
interface, which is not commercially available, will be built at Caltech. The
instrumentation will be used to support two areas of research in
biogeochemistry. First, the PI and his colleagues plan to address use of rRNA-
targeted probes to direct isotopic analyses of organic materials to the level of
individual species. An example would use 13C in rRNA to follow the flow of
methane-derived carbon through microbial communities that conduct anaerobic
methane oxidation. The second research focus will employ compound-specific
deuterium/hydrogen isotopic ratios of lipids to study the biogeochemistry of
anaerobic sediments. The proposed instrumentation will be used to develop new
isotopic methods and combine them with molecular biological tools, creating new
analytical techniques to address research topics in the emerging field of
'geobiology,' with related applications to fields from microbiology to organic
geochemistry. Caltech is providing cost-share towards the equipment acquisition
of 30% of the project cost from non-federal funds. This proposal is supported by
the Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF.&lt;br/&gt; ***&lt;br/&gt;