* 0321070
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Ruth Grahn, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 318,374.00

A grant has been awarded to Connecticut College under the direction of Dr. T.
Page Owen for the purchase of a digital transmission electron microscope (TEM)
to be used by the Departments of Botany, Chemistry, Psychology and Zoology. The
TEM will advance research and research training activities in cellular and
materials sciences. Along with the rest of the science and math departments at
the College, the programmatic offerings of the life sciences, chemistry and
neurobiology are dedicated to providing its majors with an outstanding
educational experience, including multidisciplinary research training and grant-
supported research opportunities. The overarching philosophy in the sciences is
that teaching and research with undergraduates is one unified
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TheTEM will fulfills tremendous need for on-site
and hands-on access to modern instrumentation as a research tool. Acquisition of
the TEM for biological and chemical samples will have an immense intellectual
impact on the productivity and quality of faculty and student experiences,
bringing together faculty from four different departments into an
interdisciplinary venture in ongoing and planned research projects, including:
(1) the assembly and activity of the Golgi apparatus in plant cells, (2) the
structure of wing muscle tissue in flightless Drosophila, (3) the control of
cell division in freshwater sponges after diapause, (4) the changes in mouse
astrocytes expressing a cyclin-dependent protein kinase, (5) the
immunolocalization of neurotransmitters in rat brains in response to predator
odor, and (6) the organization of microporous manganese oxides with layered and
tunneled structures. These research plans incorporate very meaningful
participation by undergraduates in faculty research. Additional research
projects, through student-initiated research, will also use the new TEM. With
the instrument, faculty in the different departments can also begin implementing
ultrastructural experiments in laboratories of upper division cell and
developmental biology, neuroscience, and physical, inorganic, and analytical
chemistry courses. Additionally, the&lt;br/&gt;digitally imaging capabilities of
the new TEM will make surveys of cell and tissue ultrastructure possible in
introductory courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will have a broad
impact on the botany, chemistry, psychology,&lt;br/&gt;and zoology education
programs by introducing TEM into the curriculum, where it
was&lt;br/&gt;previously present in a limited capacity. Experience gained
through the routine hands-on&lt;br/&gt;operation of modern TEM instrumentation
in beginning- to advanced-level laboratories, in addition to individual research
projects with faculty, will be invaluable for the students, and a critically
important part of the educational process of preparing students at different
levels for careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;