* 0321500
* SBIR Phase II:    Reactive Mounting of Heat Sinks
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2007
* David Van Heerden, REACTIVE NANOTECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 09/30/2007
* USD 999,319.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project introduces a
new reactive joining process for mounting heat sinks onto chips, chip packages
and substrates. The process uses reactive multi-layer foils as local heat
sources for melting solder layers, and consequently bonding the components. The
foils are a new class of nano-engineered materials, in which self-propagating
exothermic reactions can be ignited at room temperature with a spark. The work
will focus on reactive mounting of heat sinks onto server chips, an application
that is in critical need of performance improvements. Two alternatives will be
considered - the reactive mounting of a copper heat sink onto a metallized heat
spreader that surrounds the chip, and reactive mounting of the heat sink
directly onto a metallized chip. Significant improvements in heat conduction in
microelectronic devices are needed as existing approaches such as adhesives,
greases and epoxies suffer a number of limitations such as poor thermal
conductivity, low mechanical strength and/or susceptibility to degradation. With
the decrease in the size and the increase in speed of microelectronic devices,
poor heat dissipation has started to limit device performance and applications
and thus has become a critical issue. The worldwide market for thermal
management in microelectronic devices is about $3.7 billion/year and high-end
heat-sink mounting constitutes approximately 10% of this market.