* 0321202
* Acquisition of Surface Analysis Instrumentation for Research and Education at the University of Illinois at Chicago
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Christos Takoudis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 02/28/2005
* USD 280,000.00

This award will provide a combination x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)/ion
scattering spectroscopy (ISS) instrument that will permit state of the art
characterization of the surfaces of solid samples. It is the composition of
these topmost atomic surface layers of materials such as catalysts and
semiconductors that determines how the materials function, and this composition
is often quite different from the bulk. The XPS/ISS instrument, with its ability
to characterize surfaces on a global scale, is a necessary complement to the
ongoing research efforts at the University of Illinois at Chicago. The
university has developed the infrastructure to manage and maintain this service-
mode, multi-user instrumentation in its Research Resources Center.
&lt;br/&gt;About 100 students each year will be exposed to operation and data
analysis for XPS/ISS through this facility. Students' education in surface
analysis will come about not only through specific research topics, but also
through course offerings such as a chemical engineering course on catalyst
characterization, a physics course in solid-state physics, and several chemistry
courses in spectroscopy. Catalyst and other materials development and
characterization are at the heart of most new developments in the chemical
process industry, and so this area of education is extremely valuable to
advanced undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;