* 0321049
* Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer for Cell Biology Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* John Ubels, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 224,934.00

A grant has been awarded to Calvin College under the direction of Dr. David
DeHeer to purchase a flow cytometer for use in cell biology research and
undergraduate research training. A flow cytometer is a sophisticated instrument
for detecting and measuring specific molecules, including DNA, in individual
living cells. For example, researchers use the instrument to identify malignant
cells, cells that express specific genes and thereby exhibit abnormal functions.
Not only can a flow cytometer analyze thousands of cells each second, but it can
also separate them into groups with specific functions or discrete genetic
markers. These populations then can be cloned and further studied in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Calvin College the flow cytometer will
markedly enhance faculty research capabilities. Five faculty, all from Calvin's
Biology Department, will use the instrument in research areas including
immunology, lacrimal gland gene expression, bacterial invasion, DNA replication
and repair, and basic neuroscience. The flow cytometer will also significantly
enrich the research training of undergraduate students, benefiting in
particular, upper-level research-design and methods courses that emphasize cell
and molecular biology. It also will be used to teach laboratory skills and
analytical methods in cell culture, immunology, and microbiology
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument will have broader impacts
beyond its use for research. (1) Faculty using the flow cytometer model inquiry-
based learning to students and engage them in the practice of investigative
science. (2) This instrument will foster student collaborations while providing
valuable hands-on experience with advanced technology. (3) It will play a
strategic role in preparing college students for graduate education and
laboratory research, a key step in equipping young people to provide vital
contributions to the scientific and engineering community, as well as to the US
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;