* 0321573
* SBIR Phase II:   Multi-Channel Fluorescence Lifetime Measuring Instrument Using a Novel Low-Cost Digitizer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Mark Pavicic, DAKOTA TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2005
* USD 506,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will deliver a
low-cost, multi-channel digitizer that can revolutionize applications of
fluorescence sensing with its ability to accurately capture over 10,000 complete
fluorescence decay curves (waveforms) per second per channel. This novel low-
cost digitizer exploits a unique 'flash capture' approach to analog-to-digital
(A/D) conversion to achieve an exceptional combination of speed (&gt;1GS/s),
resolution (10 bits), and low power. Fluorescence sensing measurement underlies
an immense array of cutting-edge applications because it provides a sensitive
and versatile probe into nano-scale behavior and properties. The project will
develop a full-featured instrument-grade engineering prototype of the digitizer
and integrate it into a portable demonstration instrument to showcase
capabilities such as distinguishing biological or chemical agents by their
spectral and temporal signatures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This custom digitizer
will match the capabilities of laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) to deliver
accurate, cost effective, and complete data collection. The digitizer will be
the first low-cost compact digitizer suitable for the specific front-end LIF
analysis of biological agents. Among the weapons of mass destruction that
threaten people around the world, biological agents are perceived to be the main
hazard facing us today. The system's ability to capture more information, faster
and more accurately will reduce the high occurrence of false alarms suffered by
today's systems, resulting in a more reliable system with the potential to save
lives. When integrated with biomedical instrumentation, the digitizer will have
scientific and educational benefits through the use at academic institutions for
research and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;