* 0321057
* MRI: Instrument Development: High-Fidelity Magnetic Levitation Haptic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Oussama Khatib, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2009
* USD 229,458.00

This project, developing, replicating, distributing, and using a new magnetic
levitation haptic interface system, provides direct electrodynamic interaction
with a single moving part permitting high-fidelity six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF)
sensing and force/torque capability (unlike currently available haptic systems
which resemble small, back-driven robot arms with motors, encoders, pivots,
links, and transmission elements). Haptic interfaces allow computer users to
interact mechanically, as well as visually, with computed information. With the
new method, the user grasps the freely-levitated handle (manipulandum) of a
desktop-high device, maneuvering it in 6-DOFs to provide position and
force/torque information to a physically-based 3D simulated environment with
gravity, hard contact, flexible deformation, friction, and texture attributes.
The running simulation provides 6-DOF force/torque output to the manipulandum,
and consequently to the hand. Both the proprioceptive (kinesthetic) senses of
the fingers, hand, and wrist as well as the tactile senses in the skin are
involved in the interaction. The prototype magnetic levitation haptic system
provides higher bandwidths and resolutions than other existing techniques-an
important consideration for conveying subtle friction and texture information to
the user. Dramatically reducing cost, this project will greatly improve the
performance of the current prototype system, replicating eight new systems using
state-of-the-art manufacturing techniques. The developed systems will be
distributed to seven haptic researchers in the nation. The new systems provide a
basis for supporting seven new independent research efforts. Thus, eight
projects, involving six universities, form part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Hollerback, Utah: investigating and displaying
manual control dynamics, assisting in determining how humans interact to
assemble, disassemble, and manipulate CAD objects&lt;br/&gt; Hollis, CMU:
understanding two-handed manipulation and investigating whether blind persons
can benefit from haptic communication&lt;br/&gt; Howe, Harvard: cost-benefit
tradeoff for haptics as a function of frequency response, providing insights
into fundamental tactile perception and motor control mechanisms and guidelines
for cost-effective haptic interfaces&lt;br/&gt; James, CMU: new deformable
rendering algorithms for a large class of flexible models enabling technology
for computer graphics and virtual environment simulation&lt;br/&gt; Khatib,
Stanford: new control algorithms for haptic display enable new desktop haptic
applications &lt;br/&gt; Pai, Rutgers: new kinds of audio-haptic interfaces with
tightly synchronized sounds and contact forces enhancing understanding of human
perception of contact rendered using a haptic interface&lt;br/&gt; Tan, Purdue:
understanding perceptual dimensionality, texture perception, &amp; multimodal
rendering of information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the research efforts
involve undergraduate students, some from under-represented groups. High-
fidelity haptics has enormous potential for K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;