* 0321653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Electorally Sustainable International Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Duncan Snidal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

This Doctoral Dissertation addresses a central question in the study of
international cooperation and organization: How does electoral politics impact
the structure and dynamics of international agreements? This approach to
international cooperation focuses on the optimal structure of such agreements
and takes explicitly the contingency of international agreements on electoral
outcomes. More precisely, this dissertation assumes that political uncertainty
about electoral outcomes changes stochastically from one period to another in
the cooperating states. This changes the study of optimal interstate agreements
to a dynamic contracting problem which makes the structure of international
&lt;br/&gt;agreements temporally contingent on political outcomes inside the
cooperating states. To the Ph.D. student's knowledge, this is the first study
that frames the problem of optimal international agreements as a stochastic
dynamic contracting problem. &lt;br/&gt;The empirical dissertation research
supported by this grant would allow the Ph.D. student to collect, code and
analyze time-series data on the structure and dynamics of international
agreements and merge such data with existing data on domestic political
variables. Such data collection will then allow for testing of the empirical
implications of this theoretical analysis. The implications include dynamically
optimal use of escape clauses, application of renegotiation provisions, and
implications for agreement structure between different types of regimes. Testing
these claims requires statistically suitable time-series data on the on the
structure of international agreements, the use of escape clauses that would also
include domestic political variables, such as electoral results data
&lt;br/&gt;and data on regime type. &lt;br/&gt;This empirical dissertation
research has the potential for broader social value by integrating domestic and
international politics and filling a significant research gap. All the data
collected as a part of this project should be of great interest to other
researchers in the field of international cooperation, organization and law as
well as to policy makers interested in these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;