* 0321051
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of an EPR Spectrometer for Collaborative Research and Materials Science Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Julia Oxford, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 338,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art EPR spectrometer to
conduct high quality research in a variety of materials. EPR spectroscopy is an
essential experimental technique needed for the research programs of several BSU
researchers. The principal investigator and several on-campus BSU researchers
will employ the EPR spectrometer in research projects on nanoparticles, magnetic
materials, semiconductors, ultra-thin gate oxides, protein structure-function
studies, enzymes, and catalysts. EPR spectroscopy will be employed to identify
EPR active species, determine the electronic state, site symmetry, local co-
ordination and interaction of paramagnetic ions, radicals, defects and species
and to investigate micro-magnetic and structural properties. The PI is an expert
of EPR spectroscopy, and the co-PIs and several users have significant
experience and training on EPR spectroscopy.

All the PI.s and other BSU users have several graduate and undergraduate
students currently involved in their research programs. The availability of an
EPR spectrometer on the campus will facilitate effective training of these
student researchers, as well as yield important research results. It will also
become part of the research-oriented teaching adopted in the new Materials
Science and Engineering program. Women and underrepresented minorities will be
strongly encouraged to participate in the research programs. A mechanism to
allow interested researchers on campus, in local industry, and at other
universities and research institutions to use the EPR spectrometer will be
implemented. The MRAM research group of Boise-based Micron Technology and
biomedical research groups of the VA Medical Center and Mountain States Medical
Research Institute (MSMRI) have ongoing research programs in areas related to
magnetism and magnetic resonance and have expressed strong interest in
collaborating with BSU researchers on studies employing EPR spectroscopy. An EPR
spectrometer is not currently available at BSU, nor anywhere in and around
Boise. Researchers at several universities in Idaho and the surrounding region,
such as the University of Idaho, Idaho State University, Washington State
University and the University of Utah have expressed strong interest in using
EPR spectroscopy in collaboration with BSU researchers.

