* 0321099
* MRI:  High Aspect Ratio Etching System for Micro and Nanoscale Sensor and Sensor Systems Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 371,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funding for an
inductively coupled plasma etching system consisting of three process modules:
(i) advanced silicon etch module for high etch-rate, high aspect ratio etching
of silicon; (ii) oxide etch module for high aspect ratio etching of quartz,
silicon dioxide, and other ceramic materials; and (iii) a xenon difluoride vapor
phase etching module for isotropic chemical etching of silicon with high
selectivity. The instrument will be used by more than 25 research groups in 10
academic departments at Penn State University to conduct research in the areas
of microfluidics, biochemical sensors, high-speed switches and nanoscale
resonators for radio frequency applications, integration of high-performance
piezoelectric and polymeric thin films into silicon microsystems and
investigation into fundamental quantum mechanical effects at the nanoscale. It
will also be used to develop undergraduate and graduate level laboratory courses
in microfabrication techniques as part of a course curriculum in micro and
nanosystems technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed tool configuration
will allow researchers at Penn State to develop novel sensors, actuators, and
electronic systems for applications ranging from biomedical technology to
homeland security. In addition to fostering interdisciplinary research, the tool
will provide hands-on fabrication experience to students and will be
instrumental in the creation of a workforce skilled in the areas of micro and
nanoscale science and technology. The advanced etching capability with the
uniquely developed etching processes will attract new research collaborations
with industry and national laboratories to Penn State University. The etch tool
will also impact the nano-camp and chip-camp programs currently offered for K-12
students on nanoscience and nanotechnology.