* 0321388
* Acquisition of the Oregon ICONIC Grid for Integrated COgnitive Neuroscience Informatics and Computation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ray Nunnally, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,037,521.00

Future progress in cognitive neuroscience research will rely increasingly on the
application of systems for high-performance computation and high-volume data
management to address the challenges of integrated neuroimaging, multi-modality
sensor fusion, and cognitive modeling. With a Major Research Instrumentation
award from the National Science Foundation, the University of Oregon will
establish the Integrated COgnitive Neuroscience, Informatics, and Computation
(ICONIC) Grid, composed of parallel computing clusters, large-scale data
servers, workstations, and interactive visualization devices. Connected by a
high-bandwidth campus network linking the Department of Psychology, the Center
for Neuroimaging , the Neuroinformatics Center, the Department of Computer and
Information Science, and the Computational Science Institute, the ICONIC Grid
will enhance Oregon's excellence in cognitive neuroscience with needed computing
power to solve neuroimaging problems of tissue/feature segmentation, dense-array
EEG source localization, multi-modal MRI integration, and functional components
analysis. The ICONIC Grid will be organized as a distributed computing
environment to promote grid-style collaboration among cognitive neuroscience
research groups. Computer science research in high-performance parallel and
distributed computing, scientific databases, informatics, and interactive
visualization will enhance the ICONIC Grid for highly productive use as a
computational science tool.

The interchange between cognitive neuroscience and computational science is now
important at both theoretical and empirical levels. For several decades,
cognitive psychology has drawn from concepts of cybernetics and information
processing in the development of models of human mental function. However, it is
in the integration of psychological with neural evidence that the methodological
demands for computational advances have become particularly intense. Many
investigators in cognitive neuroscience now recognize the limitations of
individual brain imaging methods, such as in the temporal or spatial resolution,
or practical implementation of the technology. The result is an increasing
demand for integrated imaging and analysis, in which convergent methods are
brought to bear on a particular issue of brain mechanisms.

The University of Oregon began the decade with a bold Brain, Biology, and
Machine Initiative (BBMI) to promote interdisciplinary research between
neuroscience, cognitive science, molecular biology, genomics, and computational
science. The establishment of the Center for Neuroimaging , which houses a new
Siemans Allegra 3-Tesla fMRI machine, and the Neuroinformatics Center, were
Oregon's first steps towards integrative cognitive neuroscience. The ICONIC Grid
is the next critical piece of the puzzle providing an essential resource to
further advancements in cognitive neuroscience research, collaboration,
education, and outreach.

The broader impact of the ICONIC Grid will be important for the University's
educational goals, for minority recruitment and retention, and for extending
advances in computation to medical advances in society. With on-campus access to
both advanced imaging facilities and the computational and visualization
infrastructure that processes and presents the experimental data, students in
Psychology will be exposed to a state-of-the-art problem-solving environment for
cognitive neursocience education. New Psychology curricula are planned for
providing students training in the use of such tools. Similarly, the CIS
department's academic objectives in parallel and distributed computing,
computational science, networking, human-computer interaction, and visualization
will benefit greatly from hands-on access to parallel cluster and distributed
grid technology.