* 0321893
* Revealing Hominid Origins
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2010
* Tim White, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 06/30/2010
* USD 2,514,100.00

The origin and evolution of Hominidae (our zoological family) constitutes a
fundamental scientific problem. An unprecedented phase of discovery bearing on
this problem is underway across the world. The fossil record for hominids has
recently doubled in length, now extending into the 5 to 7 million-year period--a
time formerly identified by molecular studies as central to hominid origins. The
newly-discovered fossils and contextual data have invigorated field and
laboratory studies spanning the eastern hemisphere. Science now stands on the
threshold of revealing the paleobiology of the ancestral hominid, complete with
crucial contextual evidence. This wealth of novel and increasingly diverse
primary field-generated data has challenged the abilities of individuals and
research teams to compare, integrate, and disseminate their results.

The Revealing Hominid Origins Initiative (RHOI) is focused on the 5 to 7
million-year interval wherein recent finds bear directly and profoundly upon
scientific concepts of humanity's place in nature. This interdisciplinary and
international initiative constitutes a sustained effort to illuminate the origin
and earliest evolution of Hominidae. It is explicitly collaborative. It will
support ongoing research in 15 countries, by nearly 50 core research scientists,
and hundreds of other paleontologists, geologists, geochronologists, zoologists,
and other scientists in allied disciplines. The international RHOI collaboration
is designed to activate and accelerate research at many African and Eurasian
field sites; to facilitate analyses in the laboratories around the world; to
enhance interdisciplinary activities among earth and biological scientists; to
build infrastructure in the developing world; and to speed the dissemination of
data, thereby greatly extending human origins research in scope and in scale.
The initiative is specifically organized to support, improve, and extend field
and laboratory work, including exploration, excavation, discovery, and analysis.
The RHOI will integrate research by creating and supporting international
analytical working groups; by enhancing paleoanthropological infrastructure; and
by creating innovative and integrative informatics mechanisms for data sharing.

The broadened impact of the initiative is epitomized by the structure of
research teams and communication within and between such teams. Research results
will transcend traditional disciplinary boundaries as present and ancient
environments, biomes, and biotas are explored. The collaborative initiative is
designed to bring insights and consequences of cutting-edge research on hominid
origins promptly to the international scientific community, the lay audience,
and the classroom. Professional participants and associated field and laboratory
technical and support staff will all reflect a commitment toward enhancing the
involvement of people from many nations, ethnicities, genders, and backgrounds.
Given the prominence of human origins research, the initiative will foster
similar efforts in role-model building. It will promote and deepen education
across international boundaries and throughout the sciences. RHOI will couple
this inclusivity with the enhancement of infrastructure, the promotion of
international communication, and the furtherance of educational efforts in
specifically developing-world research settings across Africa. Correspondingly,
and in keeping with enhancements in electronic communication, the nature and
consequences of research supported by the initiative will receive wide and
prompt dissemination to a worldwide audience far beyond the
paleoanthropological, earth and biological sciences communities.