* 0321763
* SBIR  Phase II:  Automated 2D Protein Cell Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Jack Syage, SYAGEN TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 12/31/2006
* USD 413,037.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a method
for conducting high-throughput, automated analysis of the protein content of
cell lines using a novel mass analyzed two-dimensional liquid-phase separation
method. The conventional method of two-dimensional poly-acrylamide gel
electrophoresis (2D PAGE) has several limitations ; it is labor intensive, time
consuming, difficult to automate and often not readily reproducible. In
addition, quantitation, especially in differential expression experiments, is
often difficult and limited in dynamic range. The proposed technology provides
automated, faster, and more accurate 2D protein maps, and can be used to purify
specific proteins and enact protein/peptide digest and sequencing information.
These capabilities will prove valuable for studying drug-protein interactions
for detecting early signs of cancer. Studies of cancer cell lines can reveal
signatures of cancerous cells that can serve as markers for actual diagnosis.
The proposed system is based on 2D liquid-phase protein separation using
chromatofocusing (CF) in one dimension and non-porous silica, reverse-phase,
high-performance liquid chromatography (NPS-RP HPLC) in the second dimension.
The HPLC eluent is monitored in real-time by on-line electrospray ionization
(ESI) mass spectrometry (MS) to provide molecular weight and intensity
information.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of proteomics. The
proteomics market is forecasted to grow from $ 0.7 billion to $ 5.8 billion over
the next 5 years. There is a tremendous need to develop automated methods of
protein analysis and peptide analysis of cell lines to better understand global
biological function for improved drug therapy and early detection of disease,
such as cancer.