* 0321110
* Development of a Femtosecond Laser-Materials Irradiation and In-Situ Probing Facility for Nano- and Micro-Processing Applications and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Kathleen Cerqua-Richardson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 220,000.00

This grant provides support for the development of a femtosecond laser-materials
irradiation and in-situ probing facility for nano- and micro-processing
applications and student training at the University of Central Florida. The
recent use of femtosecond lasers show promise for the fabrication of micro- and
nano-scale microstructures within photo-active transparent media, particularly
glasses. This new approach to microstructure fabrication has inherent advantages
over conventional lithographic and mechanical assembly techniques for some
applications, especially the fabrication of complex three-dimensional
structures, such as micro-fluidic systems for aerospace and biological systems,
and for optical waveguide structures for advanced photonic devices. It may also
have major importance for the development of advanced micro-surgery
applications. This project will establish a uniquely constructed femtosecond
laser materials processing and in-situ optical probe diagnosis station, suitable
for a variety of advanced micro-structural fabrication applications with
concurrent assessment of material changes occurring to the written material. The
station will comprise three basic components, (i) a state-of-the-art, optimally-
configured MHz femtosecond processing laser, (ii) a high-speed, nanometer-
precision, computer-controlled, three-axis optical processing stage
incorporating advanced optical beam manipulation techniques, and (iii) a
synchronized multiple-axis multi-wavelength probe and spectroscopic diagnostic
system. The assembly of these multiple instruments into a comprehensive facility
will provide the femtosecond laser-materials interaction community with a unique
test bed for real-time studies of microstructures while under fabrication. The
intellectual merit derived from the ability to dynamically probe photo-induced
changes to understand both permanent and metastable (transient) time-dependent
processes responsible for structure modification will be realized. The detailed
knowledge of these fundamental processes will extend and accelerate the
application of femtosecond laser-materials processing techniques in many diverse
directions. The ability to diagnose materials modification changes with
nanometer and femtosecond precision during the processing cycle will help
elucidate the complex science involved, and lead to the identification of
promising industrial, medical, defense and scientific applications of laser-
written micro-structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system will be an excellent
vehicle for student training. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
employed in both the assembly and testing phase of this system, and in many of
the physical, biological and materials science-related studies that will be
performed with it. A large core group of initial users, from within UCF, other
US and foreign universities, government laboratories and private industry, have
subscribed to make use of the station once it is established. It will be located
in the Laser Development Laboratory at University of Central Florida (UCF)
School of Optics/CREOL. Once established, it will be operated as an open, cost-
neutral, fee-based facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;