* 0321190
* RUI: Acquisition of New and Upgraded Electron Microscopy Equipment for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Roni Kingsley, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 347,005.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Richmond under the direction of
Dr. Roni Kingsley to acquire new and upgraded electron microscopy (EM) equipment
for the use of students and faculty conducting independent and course-related
research in the Biology, Chemistry, and Psychology departments. The following
equipment will be acquired: a variable pressure scanning electron microscope
(SEM) with digital imaging, equipment for digital imaging for an existing
transmission electron microscope (TEM), a new ultramicrotome and diamond knives
for TEM sample sectioning, and a sputter coater to coat SEM samples. The
research to be conducted using this instrumentation is diverse, yet the common
problem to be addressed throughout all of the projects is achieving state-of-
the-art imaging for research and teaching. The images are so compelling while
generating essential information. The goal of this project is to use the
instrumentation to conduct engaging and innovative research with undergraduate
students. A key to the success of the sciences is the continued accessibility to
instrumentation to support the research done with students. Electron microscopy
is an essential element in, and connection between many disciplines. Therefore,
the EM laboratory will be a focal point of interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired EM equipment will enhance the
research programs of a number of faculty members, as well as opening up new
pedagogical opportunities. It will be used for studies across several science
disciplines and sub-disciplines including cell physiology and biochemistry
(Kingsley, Aprille, Bell), genetics (Warrick), developmental biology (Radice),
neural and behavioral biology (Kinsley), systematic botany (Hayden),
nanotechnology (Leopold), and immunology (Stenger). Digital imaging will enhance
the research programs of all EM users, plus this instrumentation will open up
new areas of collaborative research. The paperless images generated by digital
imaging may be reviewed in real time by a researcher at the electron microscope
and colleagues in a different lab, or building, or institution. Similarly,
images can be reviewed with individual student researchers or with an entire
class of students. Compared to traditional photography, this is an excellent way
to teach from imaged material: immediate feedback, less time and tedium in
developing and printing, and much less expensive in materials. The variable
pressure mode of the new SEM will allow researchers to study hydrated specimens
and specimens in their natural states. The new equipment for TEM and SEM
preparation will expedite all research programs and facilitate the training of
student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired EM upgrades and additions
will create a truly multidisciplinary research facility. It will allow for
greater collaborations and make EM far more accessible to students. The
participation of students in independent and course research fosters analytical
and critical thinking, and better prepares them for graduate and professional
schools and the high technology work force. UR is a primarily undergraduate
institution and undergraduates are involved in all phases of the projects
described in this proposal. The involvement of students in research as part of
their undergraduate education is an important part of the process of recruiting
and training bright young people for careers in science. Students from the
greater Richmond area involved in the University's ongoing outreach programs
will also use the acquired instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;