* 0321223
* MRI: Acquisition of a Micro Scanning Vibrometer System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Patrick Rousche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2004
* USD 176,500.00

The Objective of the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal
is to acquire the Polytec PI Micro Scanning Vibrometer (MSV-300)&lt;br/&gt;for
research and educational use at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC). The
Micro&lt;br/&gt;Scanning Vibrometer (MSV) is an ideal instrument for mapping the
deflections of&lt;br/&gt;Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) structures.
Employing state-of-the-art laser&lt;br/&gt;technology and a computer software
driven data acquisition system, the instrument can
measure&lt;br/&gt;acceleration, velocity and displacement of points on tiny
vibrating microstructures, and provide&lt;br/&gt;live 3-D animations of the
response mode shapes of the microstructures. The MSV includes two-
channel&lt;br/&gt;FFT data acquisition, a fiber-optic vibrometer sensor,
microscope adapter, piezo-scanning&lt;br/&gt;system, remote control functions
and specialized software.&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;Four laboratories in three engineering departments at UIC are
actively involved in sponsored&lt;br/&gt;research projects on development of a
variety of novel MEMS transducers, many of them in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with
various departments in the UIC Medical school, that correspond to
over&lt;br/&gt;$3.5M in grants (either funded or pending) from various federal
agencies including NSF.&lt;br/&gt;Examples of these novel MEMS projects include
actuators and microfluidic devices for sub-retinal&lt;br/&gt;prosthesis, medical
diagnostic vibro-acoustic sensors, multi-channel neural probes,
and&lt;br/&gt;liquid drop actuated micro-mirrors. The feature sizes of these
MEMS are on the order of a few&lt;br/&gt;micrometers and their resonant
frequencies are on the order of a few Hertz to several MHz. A&lt;br/&gt;very
important component central to all of these research projects is the
identification of system&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, which presents many difficult
challenges. Due to the micro scale of these structures,&lt;br/&gt;conventional
dynamic characterization methods are not feasible. Coarse frequency
evaluations&lt;br/&gt;may be possible in some cases using certain single-point
optical sensors; however, they are not&lt;br/&gt;practical for obtaining
detailed mode shape data of the test specimen. Additionally, they
are&lt;br/&gt;limited by bandwidth and resolution. Currently no instruments are
available at UIC or nearby&lt;br/&gt;institutions to fully characterize the
dynamic behavior of MEMS structures in these projects.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
of the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The proposed equipment will significantly
impact the quality of research and education, and&lt;br/&gt;diversity programs
at UIC, and also the advancement of local institutions and private
companies:&lt;br/&gt;Research MSV would enable UIC researchers to acquire high
quality modal data in MEMS&lt;br/&gt;structures that is not possible by any
other technique, and thus, significantly enhance the quality&lt;br/&gt;of the
ongoing and anticipated future research. It would also help catalyze new
research activity.&lt;br/&gt;Education The equipment will be used to offer
hands-on instruction in cutting-edge technology&lt;br/&gt;to supplement
classroom theory taught in many existing and new courses planned in the areas
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamics and MEMS testing at UIC; this will highly enrich the
quality of education.&lt;br/&gt;Diversity UIC offers special programs at both
the undergraduate and graduate level to attract and&lt;br/&gt;mentor members of
underrepresented groups in the sciences and engineering. The availability
of&lt;br/&gt;equipment would further enrich the education of students in these
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Industry The Microfabrication Applications Laboratory at UIC
is currently used by over 50&lt;br/&gt;external users from several local
academic institutions and companies in the greater Chicago&lt;br/&gt;area. Many
of the users have expressed interest and need for the proposed MSV. This
equipment&lt;br/&gt;will foster more partnerships with local industry, promote
innovation in MEMS/nanotechnology,&lt;br/&gt;and help local businesses to
contribute to economic development in the Midwest.