* 0321747
* SBIR Phase II:  Time-Lapse P- and S-Wave Monitoring of Fluid Flow
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* David Lumley, Fourth Wave Imaging Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 10/31/2006
* USD 750,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project concerns the use
of time-lapse seismic P-wave and S-wave data simultaneously to obtain seismic
monitoring images of fluid-flow saturation and pore pressure in subsurface
reservoirs. Time-lapse seismic using P-waves alone may not always produce
reliable discrimination between fluid-flow saturation changes and pore pressure
changes since this information is contained in the large-reflection- angle
portion of the P-wave seismic data, which can easily be contaminated by noise
and can be subject to data acquisition aperture limitations. Using S-waves in
addition to P-waves in the time-lapse analysis can provide more accurate
inversion results, thereby improving the reliability and robustness of fluid-
flow saturation and pressure estimates. The critical commercialization research
and development issues in this project are: (1) mode-equalization image
processing and pre-conditioning of the P-wave and S-wave data sets to make them
suitable for simultaneous quantitative inversion and analysis; ( 2) computation
of optimal seismic attributes and robust pressure-saturation inversion of these
attributes; (3) testing and bulletproofing these techniques on a real field data
set to overcome the inevitable practical data issues; and (4) developing the
tools in an interactive GUI-based software package to provide a workflow that
facilitates integrated numerical computation and human interpretation.

Commercial applications of proposed research will include accurate mapping of
bypassed oil, monitoring of costly injected fluids in hydrocarbon reservoirs and
global-warming CO2 sequestration projects. It will have applications in the
monitoring of ground water reserves, contaminant plumes and environmental clean-
up activities. Medical imaging is another potential market target use of elastic
waves as they could yield superior results over acoustic waves alone. Commercial
and societal benefits include extending the life of existing oil and gas fields,
thus reducing the need for exploration in environmentally sensitive areas and
improving the nation's energy security.