* 0321674
* SBIR Phase II:  Lobster-Eye X-Ray Imaging Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Paul Shnitser, PHYSICAL OPTICS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2005
* USD 499,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop an
innovative Lobster Eye X-ray Imaging Sensor (LEXIS) for the observation of x-ray
precipitation during long-term high-altitude balloon flights. The pinhole x-ray
cameras currently used in such flights have very limited spatial resolution, and
need significantly improved sensitivity. The proposed sensor will have a large-
field-of-view x-ray lens fabricated of long metal microchannels. With this lens,
the LEXIS will have significantly higher angular resolution and higher
sensitivity than pinhole cameras. Phase II efforts will culminate in fabrication
and testing of a full-scale LEXIS prototype capable of focusing on both soft and
hard x-rays. LEXIS will bring unprecedented resolution to the investigation of
boreal sources of x-rays. The proposed research will yield a new kind of x-ray
optics that overcomes the limitations and shortcomings of current instruments.
The lobster eye optics will dramatically improve the resolution of security
screening x-ray equipment. It will enhance the penetration capability of
screening equipment, more reliably detecting hazardous or illegal materials
within thick metal containers. The technology to be developed for fabricating
lobster eye optics will be applied to the fabrication of antiscatter grids for
medical x-ray detector arrays.