* 0321720
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Agricultural Intensification and the Emergence of Complex Societies on the Taraco Peninsula, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* David Browman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 6,902.00

Under the supervision of Dr. David Browman, Maria Bruno will investigate the
process of agricultural intensification and it role in the development of early
polities during the Formative Period (1500 B.C. - A.D. 500) on the Taraco
Peninsula, Bolivia. The Taraco Peninsula is located in on the southern shores of
the Lake Titicaca Basin in the Andean South America and previous archaeological
investigations here suggest that the first regional polity, the Taraco Peninsula
Polity, emerged c. 250 B.C. Clarifying the development of such early regional
polities is necessary for understanding the emergence of the basin's first
state-level society, Tiwanaku, c. A.D. 500. Several researchers suggest that
increased agricultural production played a central role in the development of
these early polities and the Tiwanaku state. It is hypothesized that emerging
elites created an economic surplus by orchestrating the increased production of
agricultural goods. Current understanding of agricultural intensification in the
Lake Titicaca Basin, however, is based only on studies of settlement patterns,
stone tool use, and paleoethnobotanical analysis of crop plants. Although these
studies document increasing agricultural production throughout the Formative,
available data sets are too coarse-grained to verify postulated links between
changes in agricultural production and concomitant socio-political developments.
Bruno proposes to resolve this issue by conducting an ethnobotanical study of
present- day agricultural practices on the Taraco Peninsula, Bolivia. This study
will aid in the analysis and interpretation of archaeological plant remains from
two Formative period sites, Kala Uyuni and Yanapata, from the same region.

Through 13 months of ethnobotanical fieldwork among Aymara communities on the
Taraco Peninsula, including interviews, participation in agricultural
activities, and farmer-guided plant collections, Bruno will create a comparative
floral collection that reflects local agricultural production. The
ethnographically derived comparative collection will not only provide data
necessary for the identification of archaeological plant taxa, but also will
furnish corollary data on human activities that create observable patterns in
plant morphology and ecology. These data will aid in the analysis of
archaeological plant remains recovered from the Taraco Archaeological Project's
excavations at Kala Uyuni and Yanapata, directed by Drs. Christine Hastorf and
Matthew Bandy. Using a combination of paleoethnobotanical analytical techniques,
Bruno will track the frequency of all plant taxa through time across different
archaeological contexts. In particular, crops and weedy plant taxa will be
analyzed to elucidate the timing and character of Formative period agricultural
intensification. AMS dating of carbonized plant remains will allow precise
comparison of agricultural change with documented climatic and socio-political
changes. This integrative approach will permit Bruno to clarify the role of
agricultural intensification in the development of the Taraco Peninsula Polity,
as well as contribute to more general anthropological theories of agricultural
intensification and the emergence of complex societies.



