* 0321209
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of an Automated DNA Sequencing, Microsatellite, AFLP Analysis System for Integrated Research and Education in Population Biology at a HSI/PUI
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* James Ferrari, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 82,899.00

A grant has been awarded to California State University San Bernardino under the
direction of Dr. Anthony Metcalf. This grant enables the acquisition of an
automated DNA sequencing system for scientific research and education at a
predominantly undergraduate, Hispanic serving university (HIS/PUI). The initial
and primary uses of the instrumentation will facilitate the integration of
education and research into population and evolutionary biology. The equipment
lowers costs, greatly increases research efficiency, stimulates new research
projects and collaborations, and allows the completion of projects that require
DNA sequence or genotype analysis. The region served by this institution is
equal or larger than nine of the States in the U.S. Yet, this critical
technological aspect of research and training had not been previously met.

With this instrument, the full arc of research and training in DNA sequencing,
and genotyping will be available to faculty, staff, and most important,
undergraduate and Master level student researchers. Current research and student
training that immediately benefit from the award focus on regional geographic
patterns of molecular genetic variation across a suite of taxa. These projects
include conservation applications with a genetic analysis of a recent range
expansion of the federally endangered Stephens' kangaroo rat, and the
conservation genetics of a local restricted plant, the endangered Lane Mountain
milk vetch. Three other student research projects that immediately benefit from
the award focus on the relationships between habitat structure and gene flow
across different taxa. These projects are:1) the role of watershed in affecting
genetic differentiation in the California treefrog; 2) the isolating effects of
recent uplift on geographically isolated populations of the zebra tailed lizard;
and 3) the population genetics of the pygmy nuthatch, a sedentary bird that
inhabits yellow pine forests on disjunct mountain tops in southern California.
Another set of student projects examines the population structure of southern
California populations of the mosquito Culex quinquefaciatus in relation to
insecticide resistance, using hypervariable regions of the genome.

A broader impact of this project is that automated DNA sequencing and genotype
instrumentation will greatly enhance current research efforts into the nature of
genetic variation in inland southern California taxa. This region has a very
high level of endemism, and coupled with explosive human population growth, and
the alteration of habitat, results in a concentration of threatened and
endangered species in a limited geographic area. This primary research focus at
this HIS/PUI institution will have broad application to the regional habitat
planning and conservation efforts currently taking place. The research projects
will allow the CSUSB faculty and community users to more fully integrate
research and education. And, most importantly, it will allow the students to
fully experience research-from the inception of a question, through the
experimental and technical work, to the presentation and publication of their
projects.