* 0321565
* Global Analysis of the Maize Genome:  Relating Genes and DNA Sequences to Chromosome Regions
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* William Sheridan, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 10/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

This Plant Genome project aims to provide "proof of concept" for constructing a
cytological physical map of the maize genome and relating this map to the
genetic and DNA physical maps being constructed by other investigators. A major
goal will be to construct 50 new B-A-A translocation stocks each year over the
three-year course of the project. These new cytogenetic stocks will utilize two
valuable resources unique to maize: a large collection of A-A reciprocal
translocations (where terminal regions of chromosome have exchanged with each
other), and a collection of simple B-A translocation stocks. These latter
translocations involve exchanges between the normal A chromosomes and the
supernumerary B chromosomes. These stocks exhibit a peculiar cell division
during pollen formation so that they can be used to locate genes along the
chromosome arms. &lt;br/&gt;By bringing these two types of translocations
together in the same plants it will be possible to obtain progeny containing
recombinants between them. The resulting new B-A-A compound translocations will
be used to subdivide selected maize chromosomes into small cytologically defined
regions. The analysis will focus on chromosome arms 1S, 5S, 6L and 10S but will
also include other regions. A high level of recovery of new B-A-A stocks
expected. In addition, molecular mapping techniques will be used to align the
cytologically defined chromosome regions to the genetic and physical maps of
maize using molecular probes already identified on these maps.&lt;br/&gt; By the
third year of the project the new B-A-A stocks will have been verified and an
estimated 60 to 80 should be deposited at the Maize Sock Center for distribution
to interested investigators.&lt;br/&gt; A Web address is being created
www.BAAtrans.und.edu where the public can get information on the project
including accessing mapping data for the new B-A-A stocks. This project will aid
the overall maize community objectives by providing a powerful set of
cytogenetic analytical tools and by proving their usefulness in both the
molecular mapping of the maize genome and in the molecular cytogenetic
localization of individual genes to narrowly defined chromosome
segments.&lt;br/&gt; This project will broaden the participation of American
Indian students in biology and it will strengthen the research infrastructure at
the University of North Dakota. By placing all results and deliverables in the
public domain this project will serve society's need for free and open
scientific communication.&lt;br/&gt;