* 0321139
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for DNA/RNA Preparation and Analysis for Research at the Cellular and Molecular Level
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Janet Kirkley, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 55,147.00

A grant has been awarded to Knox College under the direction of Dr. Janet
Kirkley to acquire a real-time thermal cycler and fluorometer. This equipment
will enable Knox College faculty and students to perform quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (QPCR). This technique has a wide variety of applications, and
access to QPCR will enhance undergraduate research, education, and training.
Because of the ease and speed of QPCR, students will be able to answer more
sophisticated questions directed at understanding how cells function at the
molecular level. This equipment will replace older, more time-intensive methods
as well as provide new research capabilities.

This equipment will be used by undergraduate student researchers and their
faculty mentors to: 1) study how temperature regulates the activation of
macrophage cells, which promote inflammation; 2) investigate the role of the
protein intersectin in the development of the frog Xenopus laevis; and, 3)
address structure-function relationships in the bacterial GrpE protein. Students
will use this equipment in the context of ongoing research projects. Other
techniques can be developed using the real-time capability of the thermal
cycler, and Knox faculty and students will be encouraged to incorporate use of
this versatile equipment in their research programs.

This equipment will substantially enhance undergraduate research and education
at Knox College. It will allow students to explore complex molecular events in
cells, leading to a greater understanding of the molecular processes necessary
to sustain life. Preparation for careers in science will also be enhanced by
students acquiring skills in QPCR, a valuable, cutting edge, widely applicable
technique.