* 0322893
* NR:  Distributed Inter-System Authentication Mechanisms for Seamless Roaming in Multi-network Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Janise McNair, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2006
* USD 297,960.00

This research addresses the problem of inter-system authentication in multi-
network environments. In such environments, allowing users to roam seamlessly
between multiple types of networks creates problems for network security. There
is currently no means to transfer the identity or trust record of a user that
roams between networks. For example, in 2G and 3G cellular systems, the
authentication of mobile users is accomplished through user registration.
However, current registration techniques assume a centralized authentication
authority, which is not suitable for the distributed, multi-network environment.
In addition, registration research traditionally focuses on location update and
paging schemes, leaving the new authentication and security issues unresolved.
This proposal addresses the problem of inter-system authentication in multi-
network environments, by following the research agenda in the design and
architectural dimensioning of an inter-system authentication agent (ISA), as
well as in the design of the so-called passport and visa mechanism to issue
permissions (or service denials) to roaming users. In addition, the project will
develop an inter-system registration protocol based on the passport/visa system
and evaluate the performance of a cost-benefit analysis for the ISA architecture
and the passport/visa system. This project will advance the field where the
authentication of unknown users is an issue. In particular, the success of this
project will have an impact on distributed computing research, such as the
buying and selling of computing resources over the Internet, shared information
grids for scientific and engi-neering applications, and the development of
techniques for secure transaction processing.