* 0322256
* Scholarships for the Education of Technology Students (SETS)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Donna Capobianco, ECPI University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2007
* USD 350,174.00

The primary objective of this project is to provide greater opportunities for up
to 68 academically talented, financially disadvantaged students to pursue and
complete an Associate of Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree in Computer Electronics
Technology orComputer and Information Science, and to improve their professional
development and job placement opportunities within the technology employment
sector. A secondary but equally important objective is to disseminate lessons
learned from this project to broaden opportunities for student success and
retention at other educational institutions that prepare students for employment
in the technology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A well conceived academic support
structure provides individualized faculty advising and mentoring, encouragement,
monitoring, and intervention to include tutoring in order to maximize student
retention through degree completion. In addition, students enrolled in this
program receive personal assistance in career advising and job placement
services upon completion. Scholarship recipients may elect to participate in
technology industry externship programs under the supervision of an industry
partner who serves as a co-principal investigator for the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: ECPI College of Technology is
a leader among technology colleges in the United States in graduating
financially needy students from technology degree programs, and in successfully
placing them into challenging and rewarding positions within the technology
industry sector. This scholarship proposal builds upon an established, tested,
and highly successful student engagement philosophy that includes recruiting,
selection, advising, mentoring, and job placement thereby eliminating the need
to develop a new untested academic support
foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Lessons learned about new
strategies for student retention and success such as the use of an electronic
journal to track student progress and motivate them to succeed, as well
continuous monitoring and early intervention by their faculty advisor are being
evaluated and the results disseminated by the PI to other institutions of higher
education through publication and presentation of papers.&lt;br/&gt;