* 0322327
* Dissertation Research: Defining the Role of Conservation Technology for Bycatch Reduction of Marine Protected Species
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Michael Orbach, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2004
* USD 9,740.00

Annually, 18 to 40 million tons of fish, some 20% of the world's total marine
harvest, are discarded as bycatch (i.e. as defined under the Magnuson-Stevens
Fishery Conservation and Management Act in addition to those non-target
organisms injured as a result of fishing activity or when applicable, taken. as
defined under the Endangered Species Act or the Marine Mammal Protection Act)
(Pascoe 1997). Conservation technology (i.e. a management method that uses
item(s) and technique(s), one or more of which have been engineered by mankind,
for the purpose of protecting organisms and/or ecological systems) is becoming a
common management tool. However, like other technologies it can be misapplied.
This Social Dimensions of Engineering, Science, and Technology Program
Dissertation Improvement Grant is motivated &lt;br/&gt;by the question: What are
the key factors in the processes of invention, diffusion, and implementation
that contribute to the effective use of marine conservation technology?
Answering this question is critical for helping researchers guide their pursuit
of technological solutions and for assisting policy-makers in identifying the
most effective and lasting resolution of bycatch issues. This project has two
main objectives: 1) Compose a general overview of and commentary on the
development and use of conservation technology in marine fishery systems of the
United States and 2) Identify key features of the invention, diffusion, and
implementation processes of each case study that contribute to the likelihood of
a conservation technology being widely adopted and effectively utilized. The co-
principal investigator will review relevant literature and government records
and construct a history of the development and implementation of marine
conservation technology in the United States. She will examine two case studies
using methodological triangulation of examining prototypes of the inventions;
analyzing research notebooks, reports, and other &lt;br/&gt;literature; and
interviewing inventors and other key informants important to the development and
implementation of conservation technology. One case study will be the use of
turtle excluder devices (TEDs) to reduce the death of sea turtles in shrimp
trawls in the U.S. Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico Shrimp fisheries. The other case
study will be the use of various conservation technologies, such as the Medina
panel, to reduce the death of dolphins by the U.S. tuna purse seine fishery in
the Eastern Tropical Pacific. Using historical and key word analysis, the co-PI
will identify key factors for successfully designing, implementing, and
diffusing conservation technology. This proposed research will characterize the
invention process for conservation technology. The co-PI will examine the roles
and relationships between actors in each of the invention networks and determine
from whom design input was accepted and who had decision-making authority. She
will describe the nature of collaborations and identify what factors were
influential to the formation and effectiveness of collaborations. In addition,
she will detail the interaction between various search spaces. Thus, this
research will enrich the existing invention theories as well as offer a
practical invention theory for conservation technologies. The co-PI anticipates
publishing the results of this dissertation research in both peer-reviewed and
popular literature. In addition, she intends to disseminate the results with
presentations at national conferences and institutional seminar series, which
are open to and attended by the general public. This research will also be
integrated with education via the co-PI.s involvement as a NSF Graduate Teaching
Fellow in K-12 Education (NSF 332-0042). As a Fellow, she will partner with a
public school teacher to educate children in coastal communities about bycatch,
conservation technology, and state and national conservation policy-making
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;