* 0322420
* Determinants of Virulence and Host Specificity in the Parasitic Angiosperm Striga Gesnerioides
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Michael Timko, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2009
* USD 550,669.00

Parasitic angiosperms are a major constraint to crop and forest productivity
world?wide. Among the most agronomically important parasites are the witchweeds
(Striga spp.) because their hosts are subsistence crops in regions of marginal
agriculture. This study examines the interaction between Striga gesnerioides
(Willd.) Vatke and its legume host plants as a model for studying parasitic
plant: host interactions. S. gesnerioides is the most widely distributed of the
"witchweeds" and isolates from various locations are distinguishable by
variations in their morphological characteristics and host specificity. In
addition, difference exists among host genotypes in their susceptibility to
different isolates of the parasite. Five races of S. gesnerioides parasitic on
cowpea [Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.] have been identified in West Africa based
on the ability of cowpea cultivars to differentially resist parasitism under
field and laboratory test conditions. These races are designated SG1 to SG5.
Inheritance studies using F2 and advanced inbred populations derived from
crosses of Striga-susceptible and -resistant cultivars showed that race-specific
resistance to S. gesnerioides is controlled by single dominant genes designated
as Rsg1, Rsg2, etc. Strains of S. gesnerioides parasitic on legume hosts other
than cowpea also exist in Africa, as well as the southeastern part of the United
States. One such strain (designated FL1) parasitizes only Indigofera hirsuta.
FL1 was presumably introduced into Central Florida, when contaminated host seeds
were inadvertently planted as part of a soil reclamation and erosion control
strategy at phosphate mining sites. Studies of population structure and genetic
diversity within and among populations of the five races of S. gesnerioides
parasitic on cowpea in West Africa indicate that the races are closely related,
but distinguishable by polymorphic molecular characteristics. Similarly, it is
possible to distinguish between populations of S. gesnerioides parasitic on
cowpea and those parasitic on other legume species, in particular, the African
and US strains of S. gesnerioides parasitic on Indogofera. The experiments
proposed here seek to determine whether specific avirulence genes exist in S.
gesnerioides that correspond to the race-specific resistance genes identified in
cowpea and if these genes and/or other heritable factors present in virulent
parasites are responsible for defining host range and specificity. Specifically,
we test whether the gene-for-gene mechanism operating in plant-pathogen
interactions is functioning in Striga-host associations. Using isolates of SG4
from different locations in Benin differing solely in their ability to
parasitize the cowpea cultivar B301, we will demonstrate that discrete
avirulence genes exist in S. gesnerioides. In addition, using parental plants
defined as representative of each race, we have carried out reciprocal pair-wise
crosses between individuals from S. gesnerioides race 1 (SG1 from Burkina Faso),
race 3 (SG3 from Nigeria) and FL1 (from Florida) in order to establish F1
hybrids and F2 and backcross populations that can be used to determine the mode
of inheritance of the race-specific avirulence genes in these individuals and/or
other loci involved in controlling host range and specificity. Using host
differential response assays on resistant and susceptible cowpea and other
legume germplasms (e.g., Indigofera) we will investigate whether hybrids of the
various races/strains have a modified host range or exhibit altered levels of
virulence. Finally, having demonstrated the existence of race-specific
avirulence genes and identified loci involved in specifying parasite host range
and virulence, studies will be undertaken to identify molecular markers linked
to these different loci. The long-term goal of this work is to identify markers
linked to the Avr gene(s) corresponding to each of the race?specific resistance
genes currently defined in cowpea. This proposed investigation constitutes one
of the first molecular genetic studies aimed at identifying heritable components
of virulence and host preference in parasitic plants and will contribute
significantly to our understanding of plant-plant pathogen interactions. These
studies also have a broader practical importance, since parasitic plant
infestations are an expanding threat to agricultural productivity worldwide. In
fact, most of the damage wrought by these parasites occurs in developing
nations, where food stability is a major concern. There are currently a limited
number of well-trained students and senior scientists involved in the study of
these unique plant-plant associations. Few young American scientists have
experience dealing with agriculture and food security issues in Africa. Our work
involves cooperation between scientists in the US and West Africa and will
provide enhanced research and training opportunities for students and post-
doctoral scientists from the US and from developing nations.