* 0322501
* US-Egypt Workshop: Advancing Theory on National IT Policy, Cairo, Egypt, March 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Karen Loch, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0322501 &lt;br/&gt;Sevcik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a US-Egypt Workshop on Advancing Theory on National IT Policy, Cairo,
Egypt, March 2004. The U.S. organizers are lead by Dr. Galen Sevcik, College of
Business at Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia. The Egyptian co-
organizer is Dr. Sherif Kamel, Institute of Management Development at the
American University of Cairo. The two-day workshop is planned to develop theory
in the area of national IT policy initiatives. The workshop will bring together
a group of experts to discuss how to formulate IT policy on the national level
and to how develop new directions for this research. The importance of
government policies in the diffusion of IT at the national level will be
assessed. The major findings of a research project funded by NSF grant
IIS-0082473 "IT Transfer in Egypt: Process Model for Developing Countries" will
be presented. International experts on IT policy will frame what is known about
the role of policy in shaping economic prosperity, and the role of effective
execution of these national efforts. The participants will try to develop a
defined research output. Groups will specify constructs and identify strong
theoretical linkages between them. Reports will be written on the key findings
with the goal of publishing these macro-level findings in highly visible venues.
The mechanisms that can help to educate stakeholders in the most relevant
features of the policies and how they need to be actualized will be discussed,
as well as any theoretical links between formulation of policy and dissemination
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Awareness of policies is a crucial
aspect of policy development and implementation. Any countrywide strategies for
disseminating IT needs to be well supported, both by the business community and
by the citizenry. But without publicizing these efforts, it is not clear how
these stakeholders can be aware of policies, let alone support them. Bringing
together international experts in this area will have the effect of
concentrating domain knowledge and inspiring innovation. The results of the two-
day activities will also be shared with the scientific community, the effect of
which should be to direct and foment new work in this vein. The attendees will
be participants in the creation of this knowledge, and will likely transfer the
knowledge to others once they return home. The impact of the effort should go
well beyond those who are attending. One result of the workshop will be the
articulation of a theoretical framework, or, possibly, several competing
frameworks. Constructs, with their own theoretical underpinnings, will be
specified and possible measurement approaches may also be enumerated. These
concepts will be written up in reports and disseminated through scientific
journals and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;