* 0322585
* US-South Asia Workshop:  Future Scientific Drilling in the Indian Ocean Submarine Fans
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Peter Clift, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2004
* USD 20,200.00

Clift&lt;br/&gt;0322585&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a workshop organized by Dr. Peter Clift, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, Woods Hole, Massachusetts, Dr. Shahidul Islam, University of
Chittagong, Bangladesh, Dr. Anil Gupta, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, India and Dr. Asif Inam, National Institute of Oceanography, Karachi,
Pakistan. The planning workshop "An IODP Workshop for Drilling of the Indian
Ocean Fan Systems, 23-25th July 2003- University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado"
is sponsored by the Joint Oceanographic Institutions (JOI) and the Indian Ocean
Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC). Specifically the award supports the travel
of eight scientists from south Asian countries to attend the workshop and help
in planning future cooperative research in that area. The participation of these
scientists is likely to lead to collaboration involving the U.S. scientists with
scientists from the four countries of Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and Sri
Lanka. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The interactions between the solid earth and
the atmosphere and oceans are presently only understood in outline and represent
a major field for scientific exploration in the 21st Century. Exploring the
relationships between mountain building and climate change has been highlighted
as a primary objective for future operations by the NSF funded Integrated Ocean
Drilling Program (IODP). In particular, the growth of the Himalayas and Tibet
and their effects on the climate of South Asia are recognized as the prime
examples of climate-tectonic interactions in the recent geologic past. Moreover,
they have been the subject of several Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) and IODP
proposals for drilling the Indus and Bengal Fans. Together these fans record
most of the Cenozoic erosion in Asia and must be accounted for if the
relationships between climate, tectonics and erosion are to be quantified.
Because of their different drainage basins each fan contains a different record
of erosion and climate change each of which must be deciphered if the behavior
of the entire system is to be understood. By bringing together a core community
of both marine and land-based earth, ocean, and atmospheric scientists and
identifying the key scientific objectives, the aim of the workshop is to develop
a coherent drilling strategy for scientific exploration in the region. This
meeting will lay the groundwork not only for the final drilling but also for
related oceanographic and geophysical work in the northern Indian Ocean prior to
drilling. The participation of South Asian scientists in the planning workshop
is important to enhance the science, and to establish new working relationships
with that community. Local collaboration is important to pre-drilling work in
the region both onshore and offshore. Moreover, because of the desire to drill
close to the coasts and within the Bay of Bengal, local scientific involvement
will be essential for drilling and other related oceanographic work. &lt;br/&gt;