* 0322751
* Scientific Computing Research Environments in the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* David Brillinger, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 02/28/2005
* USD 72,193.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: John A Rice&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
0322751&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support from this grant allows the Department
of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley to purchase a Linux
computer-server cluster of four PowerEdge dual processors, a 660 gigabyte
StorEdge rack of disk drives, and a 20 cartridge rack mount tape library. This
equipment is dedicated to the support of computationally intensive applied
statistical research. In particular, the investigators and colleagues tackle
problems in highway transportation, such as the calibration of micro models of
driving behavior using video data of spatio-temporal segments of highways, taken
from high above the roadway, a task requiring novel computer vision algorithms.
They study questions in genomics and statistical genetics using gene expression
microarray data, such as the identification of differentially expressed genes,
the classification of tumors and other cell types, and the elucidation of gene
regulatory mechanisms. They apply networks of temporal processes to
neuroscience, and extend recent machine learning prediction methods and apply
the results to cloud detection over ice and snow using multi-angle satellite
image data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this grant focuses
specifically on projects in science sharing a common need for computationally
intensive statistical methods to analyze large datasets. Such research requires
computing facilities, which match the speed and storage capacity of the devices
generating the datasets. The grant is to allow the Department to purchase
appropriate processors and data storage devices to permit conduct of this
research. The investigators and colleagues use this equipment to analyze video-
recordings of traffic flow on interstate highways, in order to compare
microscopic models of driver behavior with empirical data, the ultimate aim
being better management of highway traffic. They use past data on forest fires
to predict the likelihood of future fires as a function of location, past fire
history, meteorological variables, burning indices, and other relevant
variables. They develop statistical methods for the analysis of gene expression
data collected to improve cancer diagnosis, to understand the genetic changes
associated with disease susceptibility, and to contribute to basic research on
cellular growth and development. They use multi-angle satellite image data to
develop methods of predicting the presence of cloud over snow and ice, thereby
permitting improved weather prediction and global warming monitoring. These
examples constitute but a sample of the scientific research, which become
feasible with the equipment purchased as the result of the grant
support.&lt;br/&gt;