* 0322278
* Dissertation Research: "The State Machine: Politics, Ideology and Computation in Chile, 1964-1973"
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* David Mindell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This Science and Technology Dissertation Improvement Award, "The State Machine:
Politics, Ideology, and Computation in Chile, 1964-1973" investigates how
social, economic, and political processes shaped the adoption of computer
technology in the developing world and how these technologies furthered state
ideologies of progress, modernity, or socialism. NSF funds will support two
research trips to Chile to the archives of various government agencies, homes
and offices of interview participants, engineering professional societies,
university libraries, SONDA, and the Chilean National Library. The second trip
will be devoted to holdings of IBM Chile. This project builds an important
bridge between the disciplines of modern Latin American history and the history
of technology, a field that has traditionally focused on the U.S. and Europe and
overlooked the developing world. Moreover, the interdisciplinary nature of the
project unites themes from computer science, electrical engineering, political
science, and business history. It promises to enrich our understanding of
computer history by documenting the international expansion of U.S. computer
companies into Latin America and the creative and innovative uses of information
technology in other cultural contexts. To date, results from this project have
assisted a Chilean government initiative to teach the history of science and
technology to secondary school students. This working relationship is expected
to continue. The history of technology is a nascent field in Latin America,
furthered by conversations and collaborations with scholars in other parts of
the world. Collaborative work with members of the Chilean academic community
constitutes a vital part of this project as it facilitates the transfer of
methods for studying technology and enables the PI and Co-PI to incorporate
developing world concerns in both teaching and publications. Research from this
project will result not only in a dissertation, but also in scholarly articles
published in Spanish and English, as well as presentations in both the United
States and Latin America.

