* 0322618
* Evolution of Communication in Multi-Agent Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Linda Bushnell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This project will explore the way that communication and problem solving
interact in groups of autonomous agents, such as mobile robot teams, and to
examine methods for evolving task-specific language in these groups. The goal is
to come up with new algorithms and protocols that exploit the power of
evolutionary algorithms to combine problem solving and communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the PI will try to demonstrate that in
task environments whose constraints can be modeled as evolutionary pressures, a
group of autonomous agents may evolve a task-specific communication system and
simple language that will increase their overall effectiveness. Moreover in
environments that penalize communication efforts such as surveillance tasks or
noisy communication networks, a task-specific communication system including
only those speech acts found necessary to complete the task will minimize inter-
agent communications, yielding significant group problem-solving improvement.
This multi-faceted problem will be approached by framing it within the well-
documented Predator/Prey domain. In the realm of engineering, the predators are
seen as representative of a multi-robot group performing a task such as search
and rescue or distributed space exploration. This environment will be extended
to include the analysis of groups of generalized, heterogeneous robots with
different sensing and actuation abilities, which must coordinate efficiently to
achieve the group goal. The exact nature of the environment in such tasks may
not be known a priori. Hence, a simulation tool will be used that allows
communication abilities to evolve in order to best match the agent's abilities
to an unknown or partially known task environment. The simulation is modular and
allows for the inclusion or exclusion of various selection forces in order to
isolate the factors that enable effective communication to develop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a hardware testbed that can be used by
many students for independent research projects. This testbed will also be the
highlight of an extreme K-12 outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;