* 0322067
* Sand Hills Biocomplexity: Integrating Biogeophysical Processes across Space and Time
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* David Loope, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,794,730.00

This project addresses the interactions among sand, grass, and water over 58,000
km2 Nebraska Sand Hills, the largest sand dune area in the Western Hemisphere,
over the last few thousand years. The geologic record indicates that the Sand
Hills have gone through cycles of desertification and restoration several times
in the Holocene and most dunes are thought to be less than 9000 years old. Today
the dunes are almost entirely stabilized by native grasslands. Major droughts
destabilized significant portions of the Sand Hills as recently as 1000 years
before the present, but the dunes have maintained their grass cover and resisted
mobilization during several subsequent regional
droughts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here would initiate a
large-scale manipulative experiment to test four hypotheses regarding the effect
of devegetation on groundwater recharge. Coupled with micrometeorological
measurements of surface energy fluxes, the results will provide inputs for
mesoscale modeling scenarios of the feedbacks between the (de-)vegetated land
surface and the regional climate. The investigators will also use optically
stimulated luminescence dating to map the spatial pattern of dune field activity
during the last 2500 years, with lake sediment analyses providing a more high
resolution (decadal) record of past droughts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system
will serve as a model for how biogeophysical processes interact to yield
landscape resistance and ecological resilience. The structure of the Sand Hills
is relatively simple and the area large enough to influence boundary layer
dynamics. This will be the first project to understand the Sand Hills using such
an integrated, cross-disciplinary project. A range of scientists from such
disciplines as paleoecology, geomorphology, ecology, geospatial analysis, and
meteorological has been assembled for this task.. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms
of Broader Impacts, this project can serve as a model system for
interdisciplinary teaching about complex environmental change both at the K-12
as well as university levels. Nonlinearities and feedbacks are very real to
anyone walking through this landscape, especially after recent dune blowouts.
The project will incorporates an already successful ongoing K-12 science teacher
network, including summer internships and workshops for science educators, and a
web site with data visualization tools that puts data in the hands of students.
The project will also train over 30 graduate students and undergraduate interns,
exposing them to the breadth of contemporary environmental science.&lt;br/&gt;