* 0322967
* High-Level Local Control Strategies for the Coordination of Large Groups of Mobile Autonomous Agents
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Remarkable advances have been made in recent years in the
development&lt;br/&gt;of small, agile, relatively inexpensive mobile autonomous
vehicles, ultimately intended for a wide&lt;br/&gt;variety of purposes such as
search and rescue, exploration, environmental monitoring,
distributed&lt;br/&gt;sensing, the cleaning and maintaining of structures, etc.
The existence of such vehicles and the&lt;br/&gt;anticipated development of
still more advanced versions raises compelling questions: Can
large&lt;br/&gt;numbers of small autonomous vehicles be successfully deployed in
the form of a "swarm" or "flock"as a search team, an exploration group, or
something similar, to cooperatively carry out a pre-scribed&lt;br/&gt;task and
to respond as a group to high-level management commands? Can such a
group&lt;br/&gt;reliably function robustly, in a difficult or even uninhabitable
environment such as outer space or&lt;br/&gt;under sea, possibly without a
designated leader, with limited communications between its mem-
bers,&lt;br/&gt;and/or with the "roles"of its members not all the same and
perhaps changing with time?&lt;br/&gt;What can we learn about how to organize
these groupings from biological groupings such as insect&lt;br/&gt;swarms, bird
ocks, and fish schools? Is there a hierarchy of "compatible" models appropriate
to&lt;br/&gt;swarming/schooling/ ocking which is rich enough to explain these
behaviors at various "resolutions"&lt;br/&gt;ranging from aggregate
characterizations of emergent behavior, to "point models" for
each&lt;br/&gt;vehicle, to even more detailed descriptions which model
individual vehicle dynamics? In broad&lt;br/&gt;terms, these are the issues we
propose to address&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, we propose to study distributed
multi-vehicle motion control algorithms with&lt;br/&gt;the aim of better
understanding the concepts upon which large classes of such algorithms
might&lt;br/&gt;depend. For example, we would like to better understand the
implications of changing nearest&lt;br/&gt;neighbor sets and how this intrinsic
property can be modelled and analyzed within the context&lt;br/&gt;of switched
dynamical systems. We would also like to understand how to analyze
asynchronous&lt;br/&gt;systems, which because of coarse modelling, exhibit non-
deterministic state transitions. We also&lt;br/&gt;propose to explore, devise
and evaluate alternative data structures/models at various degrees
of&lt;br/&gt;granularity for representing large homogeneous/hetrogeneous groups
of mobile autonomous agents&lt;br/&gt;moving in a densely populated environment.
These representations are needed for a variety of&lt;br/&gt;purposes: for
overall management of a large group, for simulating the effects of various
protocols&lt;br/&gt;on group behavior, etc. Example data structures could
include "rigid point formations" and&lt;br/&gt;"Euclidean Distance Matrices" as
well as other graph-theoretic concepts and vehicle models and&lt;br/&gt;various
levels of abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,&lt;br/&gt;training and
learning in at least two different ways. First, graduate students involved
in&lt;br/&gt;the project will be expected to attend and present there results at
technical meetings. Second,&lt;br/&gt;project graduate students will contribute
to and participate in a short course on the topic which&lt;br/&gt;we envision
organizing and giving towards the end of the project. We cannot think of any
especially&lt;br/&gt;unusual way in which this project might broaden
participation of underrepresented groups,&lt;br/&gt;although we certainly would
encourage such participation. This project will enhance
infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;for research and education in at least two ways. First
we expect to continue our crossdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with our
environmental biologist colleagues with whom we've already been
working&lt;br/&gt;for several years. Second, we expect to continue to
collaborate with our experimentalist colleagues&lt;br/&gt;who have built an
underwater multi-vehicle testbed { originally conceived by this PI } for
trying&lt;br/&gt;out various control algorithms. We hope to continue to
contribute to broadening dissemination to&lt;br/&gt;enhance scientific and
technological understanding by organizing and running boni fide
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;technical gatherings like the forthcoming Block
Island Workshop on Cooperative Control&lt;br/&gt;which we've co-organized and
which will take place in June, 2003.