* 0322869
* Dynamic Evaluation of Machine Tool Process Capability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Jerard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 452,205.00

The primary objective of this research is to investigate novel techniques and
strategies for dynamically measuring the process capability of machine tools. A
secondary purpose is to investigate the use of process capability information to
accurately estimate machining costs. The research approach combines real-time
sensor data with unique cutting force process models that are both accurate and
computationally efficient. Process capability will be estimated by comparing
measured cutting forces with concurrent model simulation results. An open-
architecture machine tool controller will be used to collect and store
measurement data, run model simulations, and dynamically update the process
capability. Extensive experimental studies will focus on three parameters deemed
to be the most difficult to characterize: tool runout, tool deflection and tool
wear. Generality will be tested with an experimental matrix that includes a
variety of different cutting conditions, cutter types, and ferrous and non-
ferrous alloy materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this
research project would improve the reliability, accuracy and efficiency of
machine tools by giving them self-knowledge of their process capabilities.
Process capability information could also be used to accurately estimate
machining costs, thereby providing valuable feedback to designers about the cost
implications of their design choices. Process capabilities of a specific machine
tool could be intelligently matched with part tolerance requirements to ensure
defect free production. Part quality could be maintained over time by adjusting
cutting strategies and conditions in response to changing process capability.
This project will also support the Smart Machine Initiative of the National
Institute of Standards and Technology and is consistent with the goals of the
Integrated Manufacturing Initiative, a public/private consortium of industry,
academic, and government partners designed to strength the nation's
manufacturing community.