* 0322922
* Laser-Assisted Nanoimprinting Using Self-Assembled Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 59,957.00

The research proposes to develop a process to fabricate nanoscale hemispherical
cavity arrays on silicon (Si) substrates by laser-assisted imprinting of self-
assembled nanospheres. The technical area of the proposed project is to develop
laser-based nanomanufacturing technologies by combining topdown processing and
bottom-up synthesis approaches to nanofabrication, to achieve the best
technology and economy efficiency. The research objective of this project is to
develop a new laser-imprinting process using self-assembled nanoparticles. The
methods to be used to achieve the research objective include: (1) self assembly
of silica nanoparticles to form a monolayer, (2) embedding the nanoparticles
into a Si surface during laser irradiation, (3) removing the nanoparticles to
form hemispherical cavity arrays, (4) patterning the self-assembled
nanoparticles deposited on a quartz plate using a tightly-focused laser beam,
and (5) fabrication of pre-designed array patterns by imprinting the patterned
nanoparticles into Si substrates. There are four primary expected outcomes from
the proposed research. (1) We will further the understanding of laser-
interaction with quartz/nanoparticle/Si structures. (2) We will be able to
fabricate nanoscale hemispherical cavity arrays. (3) We will develop a novel
process by combining the advantages of self-assembly, nanoimprinting and laser
direct writing. (4) The research results will be integrated into development of
a new course on nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process to be developed
has potential applications to fabricate 1D and 2D photonic bandgap crystals. The
hemispherical arrays can also be used as templates to fabricate 3D photonic
bandgap structures. Engineered photonic crystal materials have unique
applications in infrared image control (thermal stealth), target identification,
signal recognition, optical communications, and sensors. The project activities
will be integrated into development of a new course, Introduction to
Nanotechnology, for fall semester of 2003. One graduate student will be trained
in this project. In addition, we will recruit two undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to participate in this project. Our goal is to engage a
diverse group of students as a way of encouraging underrepresented groups to
continue on for postgraduate study. We will develop an animation kit describing
basic principles involved in this project. The PI will send the animation kit to
K-12 schools. We will widely disseminate research results at conferences. The PI
has accepted an invitation to deliver an invited talk in Materials Research
Society Spring Meeting (April 2004, San Francisco). The PI will also interact
with industry partners during the Photonic West 2004 Exhibition (January 2004,
San Jose) and ICALEO 2003 (October 2003, Florida). &lt;br/&gt;