* 0322527
* Dissertation Research:  The Technology of Taste: Food Production Technology in the United States 1900-1960
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Arwen Mohun, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 8,000.00

This dissertation project concerns the role of technology, and to a lesser
degree science, in the industrial development of food in twentieth century
America. This research explains the development of industrial processes in the
food industry from the turn of the century through the 1960s. In particular, it
looks at the canning industry, the rise of industrial agriculture and the
dissemination of fresh produce, the frozen food industry, and the development of
dehydration technologies as case studies in food technologies as well as
technologies that altered the flavor of foods that were mass produced. The
project elucidates technological constraints on food processing and consumers'
responses to these industrialized foods. By analyzing the science and technology
of food production, this proposal sheds light on the relationship between
consumers and producers and how each group understood taste. In other words it
explores how producers &lt;br/&gt;and consumers established which industrialized
foods tasted good or good enough given that processed foods were fundamentally
different than foods produced at home. The broad impact of this dissertation is
that it brings together three very different historiographies to understand the
radical shift in eating habits in the first half of the twentieth century and
broadens an understanding of the relationships between technology and
technological actors. By treating producers and consumers equally in the
technological process, historian can better comprehend changes in consumer
culture and social values. Additionally, this research will reach a broad
audience including scholar, students, and the public. Presentations based on
this research are proposed for the Society for the History of Technology, the
Organization of American Historians and Association for the Study of Food and
Society. The author anticipates incorporating this material in Survey of
American History and History of Industrialization course, as well as developing
a course on Food History that uses science and technology as its central theme.
This work will also inform discussions the researcher participates in
conjunction with Delmarva Discussions, a discussion group at a local library,
which is open to the public. NSF funds will support trips to various archives,
such as the collections relating to food processing technology at the University
of California at Davis and Berkeley; the Cornell University archives on Duncan
Hines as well as material on Pillsbury and General Mills from the Minnesota
Historical Society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;