* 0322250
* Duality in Integer Programming and its Application to Integrated Airline Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Diego Klabjan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 07/31/2006
* USD 203,020.00

The strength of linear programming duality is well known and it is one of the
most acclaimed results in theory and practice. On the other hand, it is usually
taken for granted that duality is not doable for integer programs. The objective
of this proposal is to break the perception barrier by showing that indeed it is
possible to compute an analog to the linear programming dual vector for an
integer program. A new family of dual functions for integer programs is
proposed. Several properties and many results with linear programming
counterparts are given. More importantly, an algorithm is proposed that computes
such a function for an integer program and it is shown that in a reasonable
amount of time an optimal dual function can be computed. The proposed dual
functions apply only to pure integer programs and their extension to mixed
integer programs is required. In addition, the framework for an algorithm that
computes a dual function from the branch-and-cut tree is given. One of the
applications of dual functions is in decomposition algorithms. We design a novel
decomposition approach to integrated airline planning. Many decision support
systems require sensitivity analysis of the underlying optimization models. For
example, decision makers like to get estimates on the change of profitability if
a unit of a resource is changed or price of a product is modified by a small
amount. Existing tools use ad-hoc techniques to perform sensitivity analysis. In
this proposal we explore the area of more scientific and practical approaches to
sensitivity analysis. The proposed theory and algorithms also yield new
methodology for solving large-scale models deemed so far intractable.