* 0322364
* Collaborative Research:  Environmental Fluctuations during the Arctic Eocene Growing Seasons:  Stable Isotope Analysis of Plant Fossils from Axel Heiberg Island
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Leonel Sternberg, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 138,797.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Jahren&lt;br/&gt;OPP-
0323877&lt;br/&gt;Sternberg&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0322364&lt;br/&gt;Summons&lt;br/&gt;
OPP-0324276 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal by
Principal Investigators at Johns Hopkins University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, and the University of Miami. The fossil record in Arctic regions is
striking during the Eocene (57.8 - 36.6 million years ago) tropical interval,
and includes extensive deciduous conifer forests and large reptiles living at
~80 degreesN latitude. Of particular interest is the seasonality of the Arctic
with respect to fluctuations in type and amount of precipitation, relative
humidity, and temperature. Paleotemperature characterizations of the Eocene
Arctic on Axel Heiberg Island using morphological features of plant fossils have
revealed large differences between Mean Annual Temperature and Cold Month Mean
estimates (up to 15degreesC difference) suggesting extreme seasonality with
large annual changes in relative humidity and an early growing-season
contribution of snowmelt into the ecosystem. The Principal Investigators will
test this hypothesis by using Axel Heiberg Island fossil plant materials as
proxies for relative humidity and the isotopic composition of plant-available
water. This work is extension of their previous geochemical studies toward
quantifying the terrestrial paleoclimate of the middle-Eocene Arctic using
oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon stable isotopes in plant fossils. The work proposed
here consists of two complementary approaches: 1) Oxygen and hydrogen stable
isotope analyses of sub-sampled growth rings of fossilized Metasequoia wood at a
temporal resolution approaching monthly intervals; and 2) GC-IRMS analyses on
plant biomarkers extracted from fossilized resin and sediments of Axel Heiberg
Island. Using stable isotope analyses of plant-fossil cellulose and resin, the
Principal Investigators will test whether early-season water was isotopically
depleted relative to late-season water, which would be consistent with snowmelt
contributing to early-season plant-available water. These analyses will also
allow them to calculate changes in relative humidity during the Eocene Arctic
growing season; the transition between a snowy winter and a warm growing season
would carry with it an increase in relative humidity. Taxonomic analysis using
plant terpenoids will open a new window on the relative abundance of plant
groups through the many organic-bearing strata of Axel Heiberg Island; biomarker
analyses of resinites and their carbon, hydrogen and oxygen isotope compositions
will shed light on secular differences between Eocene and present pCO2 and its
?13C, as well as the isotopic signature of groundwater. The intellectual merit
of this project centers around its new account of Arctic Eocene seasonality that
can be compared to prior studies, most of which focused upon evidence for low
seasonality at middle latitudes during the Eocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts resulting from this proposed project include: 1) the involvement
of&lt;br/&gt;three graduate and three undergraduate students (identified with
help from the M.I.T.&lt;br/&gt;Minority Student Resource Office and the
Baltimore Collaborative in Environmental&lt;br/&gt;Biology Project); 2) the
dissemination of results via several NSF-funded educational centers, including
the Teachers Experiencing Antarctica and the Arctic Website; and
3)&lt;br/&gt;enhancement of the instrumentation infrastructure at the University
of Miami as a high&lt;br/&gt;pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system is
added to the permanent analytical&lt;br/&gt;facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;