* 0322983
* Dissertation Research: Scientists' Political Activism and the American Public during the Cold War Era, 1945-1980
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Jessica Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2004
* USD 8,000.00

This is a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant that will examine the
political activism of American scientists throughout the Cold War era
(1945-1980). Specifically, it will trace the efforts of scientists to educate
and mobilize the American public in support of various scientific policy issues,
including nuclear disarmament, environmental concerns, and biotechnology. The
dissertation will draw primarily on archival sources and oral histories, and
will be organized as a series of case studies. Each chapter will examine, in
roughly chronological order, a different aspect of scientists. political and
public activism during the years between 1945 and 1980. Funding of this proposal
will allow the graduate student to conduct the research necessary for the
completion of her dissertation. This research can only be conducted by traveling
from Los Angeles to archival collections located in Washington, D.C., Boston,
and Chicago. During her expected six-month sojourn in Washington, the graduate
student will examine a number of collections housed at the Smithsonian
Institution, the Library of Congress, and the National Archives. She will also
make short trips to Boston, to examine archives at MIT, and to Chicago, to
examine the archives at the University of Chicago.

