* 0322622
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Characterization and Processing of Oxide Powders and Compacts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 27,036.00

0322622 &lt;br/&gt;Carter&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports a
cooperative research between Dr. Barry Carter, Department of Chemical
Engineering and Materials Science at the University of Minnesota (UM),
Minneapolis, Minnesota and Dr. Mehmet Ali Gulgun, Department of Engineering and
Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey. They plan to study the
characterization and processing of oxide powders and compacts. The project
emphasizes two important ceramic oxides, namely ceria and alumina, with which
the two investigators are already independently working. Polycrystalline a-Al2O3
is one of the most important ceramics for industrial applications. Its strength,
toughness, corrosion and wear resistance, and creep properties, for example, are
closely related to its microstructure and interfacial chemistry. Extensive
knowledge has been gathered in the literature about the influence of various
impurities on the properties and microstructure of the ceramic. Analytical
electron microscopy investigations, especially using energy-
loss&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy, will allow the study of the incipient formation of
second phases, e.g. CA6, in highly doped alumina ceramics. The U.S. group's
interest in ceria is due primarily to its critical role in chemical/mechanical
polishing (CMP). The group in Turkey has experience in processing the same
material for use in fuel cells. The collaboration will exploit the synergy of
these two programs. Through collaboration with Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL), the U.S. group has used EELS to probe the chemistry of ceria. This
methodology will be applied to polycrystalline ceria samples, which have been
doped and processed in Turkey using methods similar to those used to process
alumina specimens. The U.S. team will provide the ceria material and, working
with ORNL and the 3M Company, prepare and characterize the powders; the Turkish
team will provide the expertise to process this material in a controlled manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project brings together a group in the USA
which has been extensively working on the structural and chemical analysis of
powders and their sintered products and a group in Turkey which is developing a
program on the preparation and processing of high-purity powders. Both groups
are including undergraduates and women in their research programs. The U.S.
group has extensive interaction with other laboratories, e.g., ORNL, thus
benefiting both the students and the other labs. Both Professors Carter and
Gulgun have worked extensively on characterization of interfaces and interphases
in alumina systems. The collaboration will involve the exchange of three
graduate students, two from U. of Minnesota and one from Sabanci
University.&lt;br/&gt;