* 0322510
* Improved Productivity of Robot Work Cells Using Automated Programming and Rapid Recalibration Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Richard Lindeke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 12/31/2004
* USD 33,000.00

This grant proposes to develop liaison activities between the University of
Minnesota, the AMTD center at Ford Werke in Cologne, Germany and the IROPROG
consortium funded by the German Government. The GOALI study will focus on
techniques for developing intelligent robot programs and system control programs
based on automated workplace structural maps. Using the Denavit-Hartenberg
approach, system maps using accurate geometric model of each workplace device
will be developed, linked, and used to build inverse kinematic models accurate
in both time and space. A designed experimental series to evaluate reliability
and accuracy of model outputs for the automated system will be conducted in the
Ford Werke manufacturing facilities in Germany. The series will include
development of efficient sensor systems and provide means to assess operator
usability. The grant will further allow IROPROG to begin development of a robust
test plan to assure PLC codes that can reuse existing solutions and provide
fault free operations for new systems. A significant educational component is
also included. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With project success, an automated
manufacturer will be able to design any required flexible manufacturing system
adaptively. Additionally, the manufacturer will be able to perform factory
upkeep tasks that result from product changes, robot structural changes or
workplace equipment damage in a timely and cost effective manner. Thus,
manufacturers will be able to accommodate change, or complete damage recovery in
minutes or hours instead of days or weeks. Additionally, successful completion
will further development of educational tools to teach the engineers role in the
global manufacturing environment.&lt;br/&gt;