* 0322957
* Collaborative Research:  Applied Electromagnetic Characterization of Wideband Multi-Array Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Robert Heath, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 157,974.00

This collaborative project (with Dandekar at Drexel, proposal 03-22795),
performing an experimental investigation of Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
(MIMO) systems, aims at designing and testing novel antenna systems for wideband
digital wireless communication systems to provide designers with new data
points. The experimental program is divided between two testbeds. The first
testbed (implemented at Drexel) focuses on the electromagnetic propagation
characteristics of the MIMO channel, while the second testbed (implemented at
UT-Austin) makes use or the electromagnetic characterization to examine the
channel impact of the higher network layers. Systems with MIMO communication
links, fueled by the increasing demand for high-speed and high-quality mobile
communication, use multiple antenna arrays, one at the transmitter and one at
the receiver, to take advantage of the spatial dimension of the propagation
channel. When properly designed, multi-array communication links can provide
multi-fold increases in link throughput in addition to reductions in channel
variation which in turn may be used to provide higher rates to single users,
lower delay links, or to allow multiple users to coexist in the spatial channel.
Because of this advantages, MIMO capability is being considered for indoor local
area networks (LAN)s, cellular multimedia data networks, and broadband wireless
access. However, without careful design, the results of electromagnetic
interaction, such as mutual coupling, may correlate the channel coefficients,
thus resulting in a loss in terms of capacity or error probability. Real
experimental propagation and experimental data are needed to correlate the
tradeoffs between different antenna designs, antenna placements, scattering
models, channel bandwidth, and transceiver algorithms. These research involves
designing and building two experimental platforms for wideband MIMO propagation
channel measurement and real-time prototyping. The prototype constructed at
Drexel will be used for the low-level electromagnetic characterization of the
MIMO propagation channel, while the UTA prototype will be used to demonstrate
the impact of this characterization on higher layers. Thus the work
involves&lt;br/&gt; Estimating and analyzing wideband MIMO propagation
channels,&lt;br/&gt; Verifying performance loss due to mutual coupling and
electromagnetic interactions, and&lt;br/&gt; Studying advanced MIMO
architectures in which the antennas are distributed throughout the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;The research plan involves a synergy of field
experimentation with prototype hardware backed by computational electromagnetic
(CEM) modeling and communication theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
are addressed in several ways: &lt;br/&gt; Introducing jointly concepts of
communications and applied electromagnetics to advanced undergraduate and
graduate courses (rather than as separate courses), &lt;br/&gt; Deploying
interdisciplinary course modules jointly taught at both universities, generating
a lab manual containing a series of experiments and a set of lecture notes,
&lt;br/&gt; Providing the data records collected that illustrate concepts
critical to design, and &lt;br/&gt;Enabling instructors at other universities to
incorporate some experimental methods into their teaching.&lt;br/&gt;