* 0322377
* U.S.-Taiwan Workshop on Soil Liquefaction: Lessons Learned from Chi-Chi Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Charng Juang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 06/30/2004
* USD 59,953.00

This action is to support a U.S.- Taiwan workshop on soil liquefaction, with an
emphasis on learning from the 1999 Chi-Chi, Taiwan earthquake (Mw = 7.6), and to
develop a web site for pre- and post-workshop information sharing and
discussions. The workshop, to be held in Taiwan, November 2003, is jointly
supported by the National Science Council (NSC) for Taiwan and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) for the U.S.

The Chi-Chi earthquake triggered extensive soil liquefaction in Central Western
Taiwan. It also raises important research questions that need to be addressed in
order to advance knowledge in geotechnical earthquake engineering. Taiwan has an
extensive seismic instrumentation system that provided 70 three-component
recordings of strong ground motion within 20 km of the main fault. Significant
issues regarding the Chi- Chi earthquake are the apparently anomalous ground
motions, and its implications regarding liquefaction. Significant data was
obtained in the extensive liquefaction of soils, particularly in silty and
gravelly soils.

Government and industrial research agencies in Taiwan and the U.S. have
supported activities to study the geotechnical earthquake engineering issues
related to the Chi-Chi earthquake. This workshop offers a forum for researchers
from Taiwan and the U.S. to discuss and share the knowledge learned from this
earthquake. The utilization of Internet resources provides an effective way for
pre- and post-workshop distribution of information and enhances the overall
theme of the integration of research and education. The workshop web site will
be of value to the workshop participants, researchers, and engineers, and to the
educators and students who are interested in geotechnical earthquake
engineering.