* 0323369
* EPNES: Pricing Transmission Congestion to Alleviate System Stability Constraints in Bulk Power Planning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Chan Park, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 07/31/2007
* USD 363,000.00

Transmission of electric power is the ability to move large volumes of energy
from where it is generated to where is needed. Even though the quantity of power
traded in the wholesale market in the United States went from almost nothing in
1994 to over 800 terrawatthours in 2000, there has been relatively little money
put into the transmission system. Consequently, the transmission infrastructure
is aged, resulting in "congested lines" such as increased instances of
constrained systems, reduced import capability, heavily loaded lines, and
stability problems. Therefore, any effort to reduce transmission congestion may
provide substantial benefits in customer choice and economic efficiency in power
operation. A popular type of congestion-management pricing is known as
locational marginal pricing (LMP). Although LMP should be an effective long-term
strategy, there has not been a concerted effort to use LMP to alleviate
stability concerns. The intellectual merit of this project lies in extending the
LMP concept to include stability-limited regions of bulk power systems. The
proposed work will focus on defining the stability constraints based on the
underlying physics of power systems, the inclusion of these constraints into
suitable optimization models, and the evaluation of the economic implications
produced by such optimizations. One of the most significant broader impacts
anticipated is the use of actual bulk-power system data provided by Southern
Company. The results based on this data will permit more realistic steady-state
and dynamic studies of large interconnected power systems, which will be a major
contribution to the power engineering research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;