* 0323921
* Tomorrow's High Tech Workforce Today
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2008
* Don Edwards, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 11/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this four-year project is to build upon and strengthen the highly
successful Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholars Program
(CSEMS) at Texas Woman's University (TWU). The overwhelming success of the
existing program demonstrates the intellectual merit of the proposed project.
The TWU CSEMS Program is designed to better support low-income, academically
talented women and minorities that wish to pursue computer science, engineering
or mathematics. This project continues support through scholarships, expanded
student-support programs, as well as industry and academic
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The clientele of TWU includes substantial
numbers of those traditionally underrepresented in these areas, which lends
itself to the broader impact of this project. Approximately 91% of TWU students
are female, while racial and ethnic minorities account for approximately 32% of
all students and over 37% of undergraduate students. The typical TWU student is
age 31, maintains a family, attends school, and works. For many, the
availability of financial support through scholarships in addition to academic
and social support through faculty and peer mentors means the difference between
graduation and dropping-out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs, along with
representatives of the Science and Math Center for Women, Information Services,
and the Financial Aid Office, will select 30 scholars. Applicants must
demonstrate academic excellence and financial need, receive a letter of
recommendation, and write a brief essay. Selected students will receive $3125
per academic year from the National Science Foundation. The most academically
talented females will receive up to $2500 in additional funds from Texas
Instruments, Inc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSEMS students participate in a wide
variety of departmental, university, and professional activities. In addition
each receives faculty, industry, and peer mentors. In order to increase the pool
of applicants, recruitment efforts are being expanded through increased
cooperation with area community college faculty and staff, faculty and staff of
universities serving as partners to the 3+2 Dual Degree Engineering Program and
the TWU admissions office. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program evaluation is based
on retention and graduation rates, growth in the number of departmental
undergraduate and graduate students, and the participation rate of students in
professional development opportunities. In addition, CSEMS participants will be
tracked for job placement and advanced degree achievement.&lt;br/&gt;