* 0323451
* Trust and Fairness in the Management of Environmental Hazards
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Timothy Earle, Western Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2006
* USD 193,185.00

A primary role of government agencies, such as those that responsible for the
management of environmental risks, is to mediate among competing private
interests, following fair, neutral procedures. To be effective, however, the
procedures used by government agencies need not only to be objectively fair
(i.e., meet accepted normative standards of fairness), they must be perceived as
fair, accepted as being fair by the competing stakeholders. Although most
government agencies invest large amounts of resources in objectively fair
procedures (e.g., by insuring that all interested parties have opportunities to
express their views on an issue), there is growing evidence that what is
presumed to be objectively fair is often perceived to be unfair. This is the
case, in particular, when members of the public believe that issues of great
moral importance are at stake. When the outcomes of decisions violate the moral
standards of stakeholders, then the procedures that produced the outcomes,
whatever their objective properties, are likely to be judged to be unfair and
illegitimate.

This project is designed to explore the effectiveness of fair procedures in
environmental risk management, an arena often characterized by the clash of
morally significant values. Our approach is based on an analysis of the
relations between trust and fairness. According to our formulation, the basis
for trust between individuals (or between a person and an agency or its
representative) is a feeling that important values are shared, that they are
joined by a common social bond. It is this common bond that legitimizes the ways
that members of the group solve problems. According to this view fairness is
socially defined within groups, as opposed to being objectively defined across
groups. In brief summation, fairness depends on the prior establishment of
trust. Experimental surveys of general populations in both the United States and
Switzerland will carried out to test our understanding of trust and fairness.
Support for our approach would provide vital insight into how stakeholder
involvement in environmental decision making-and democratic processes in
general-could be made more effective, efficient, and fair.