* 0323729
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Lightweight Materials and Constructability Techniques for Cost-Effective Housing in India and USA
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Anil Sawhney, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2007
* USD 37,860.00

Description: This award supports the US-India cooperative research project
entitled Investigation of Lightweight Materials and Construction Techniques for
Cost-effective Housing in India and the U.S. Professors Anil Sawhney, Arizona
State University (ASU), Kenneth Walsh, San Diago State University (SDSU), and
Krishnamurthy Ramamurthy, Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) will use
the "whole house approach" to investigate lightweight materials and construction
processes to build quality cost-effective homes. They will examine the potential
for autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) and other similar materials to become a
major component in housing production in the U.S. and India. While wood has been
a popular home building material in the U.S., brick and concrete are widely used
in India. The investigators believe that the energy and thermal mass properties,
durability, and cost effectiveness of AAC have advantages over both other
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaboration between ASU, SDSU, and
the IITM is expected to be mutually beneficial through the intellectual exchange
of ideas, results, and approaches to housing research. The manufacture,
construction, and implications for residential production system design, which
have been extensively studied in the US, will be integrated with the Indian
researchers' extensive experience in materials characterization of AAC. The
collaboration is expected to expand understanding of AAC use in residential
production in both settings. It will create technical linkages among the
institutions, researchers and students, and will contribute to the development
of improved graduate and undergraduate courses. The Division of Civil and
Mechanical Systems is co funding this research; and India's Department of
Science &amp; Technology (DST) supports this project under the NSF/DST joint
program.