* 0323737
* US-Ethiopia Cooperative Research:  Evolution of the Gorge of the Nile in Ethiopia from ASTER and SRTM Remote Sensing Data and Field Studies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Mohamed Abdelsalam, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 42,354.00

0323737&lt;br/&gt;Abdelsalam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gorge of the Nile in
Ethiopia is one of the most fascinating geological features in Africa. In spite
of its importance in future agricultural, irrigation, and hydro-electrical
energy development plans, the geological and geomorphological evolution of the
Gorge of the Nile is not fully understood. This two-year project will combine
remote sensing technology and field studies to study the Gorge of the Nile.
Remote sensing data that will be used include NASA's Advanced Spaceborne Thermal
Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) and Shuttle Imaging Radar (SRTM)
data, as well as RADARSAT data collected by the Canadian Space Agency (CSA).
Field studies will be carried out in collaboration with scientists from the
Ethiopian Geological Survey (EGS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
elucidating the geomorphological evolution of the Nile and rivers in general,
this project will also demonstrate the usefulness of NASA's remote sensing
technology for geological and geo-technical studies, provide an opportunity to
train a young scientist, and strengthen international scientific and technical
collaboration between a U.S. university (UTD) and an organization in Africa
(EGS). Both organizations will benefit from the project through exchange of
remote sensing data, jointly-conducted field work, and complementary training
opportunities in remote sensing technology for both the U.S. student and the
Ethiopian scientist.&lt;br/&gt;