* 0323175
* Inquiry-based Marine Biotechnology and Bioinformatics for Teachers and Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Simona Bartl, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2007
* USD 378,661.00

The goals of this information technology (IT) project include familiarizing
students and teachers with use of the technology resources, developing
standards-based STM curriculum materials that incorporate these resources,
preparing teachers to use the curriculum and exposing students to technology-
related career options.

This project will introduce teachers and students from the Monterey Bay area of
California to information technology skills through research experiences at the
Moss Landing Marine Laboratories. Working with marine biologists from
laboratory's research staff, 30 participating middle and high school teachers
will participate in 2.5-week biotechnology research investigations and learn how
the technology is used to analyze data and answer scientific questions. Teachers
will be supported with follow-up meetings and classroom visits during the school
year.

During the three-year project technology-based instructional units that include
DNA isolation and sequencing, biodiversity studies and environmental policy will
be developed, field-tested and prepared for national dissemination through an
interactive website. The technology resources needed to support these units will
be available to participating teachers, exposing over 5,000 local students, many
from currently underserved populations, to relevant experiences with information
technology.



