* 0323766
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DNA Self-Assembly -- Experimentation and Theoretical Foundations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Ashish Goel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental part of this project is
focusing on the construction of 3-dimensional DNA "crystals" where the goal is
to create large error-free crystals of predetermined shape. In particular,
control of the relative lengths of crystal facets and the angles between
adjacent facets is being attempted. This research may ultimately lead to the
construction of 3-dimensional computers, freeing us from the 2-dimensional
restriction currently imposed by silicon. Another potential application might be
3-D crystals "salted" with flourophors or quantum dots for the creation of novel
optical or quantum devices. The theoretical efforts are directed toward
generating an understanding of the fundamental processes that govern self-
assembly, and the development of new algorithms that will guide the design of
practical and experimental systems. The functionality of DNA is determined, to a
large extent, by its combinatorial structure, making algorithmic techniques
particularly well suited for a theoretical study of DNA self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, two new courses on self-
assembly are being developed, one at Stanford University and one at University
of Southern California in the area of Molecular Self-Assembly: Models and
Algorithms. The lecture notes from this sequence of courses will be made
available to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;