* 0323379
* Collaborative Research: Evolution and Ecology of Aging in Natural Populations of Long-Lived Vertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Anne Bronikowski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2008
* USD 290,138.00

Senescence is the increase in probability of death with advancing age. Commonly
referred to as "aging", this increasing mortality with age is due to the
deterioration of underlying physiological and biochemical processes. Different
species of animals are wildly divergent in their lifespans and aging rates. To
date, little is known of the evolutionary and ecological causes of such
variation. By applying field studies, laboratory assays, and mathematical models
to a well-documented natural system of snake populations that vary in aging
rate, the causes of variation in aging and consequences for lifespan and health
span will be learned. The answer to the question of how variation in aging rates
is maintained in natural populations will aid in an understanding of the
evolutionary history of aging in humans and other organisms and needs to be
studied to develop a general theory of the evolution and persistence of aging
that applies to all multicellular life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
specifically targeting high school students and undergraduates of groups
traditionally underrepresented in environmental biology, this research will
directly support diversity in environmental biology and field ecology, as well
as traditional laboratory experimentation. These studies on the mechanisms and
prevalence of aging in nature, on an abundant and long-studied system, will
yield insights into the relative importance of aging in population biology, the
impacts of aging and age-structure on the population dynamics of imperiled
species, and the aging process and changing age-structure of the human
species.&lt;br/&gt;