* 0323632
* Queueing Methods for Analysis and Scheduling of Transport Rings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Hasenbein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2007
* USD 139,161.00

This project will study stochastic transport rings, using modern multiclass
queueing network models and methods to perform analysis and scheduling of these
systems. The first part of the research involves classifying scheduling policies
which can achieve the highest possible production rate in the system. Such
policies are called throughput optimal. In the second stage, the intent is to
identify good scheduling policies which are near optimal under some performance
measure like average WIP, delay, or holding cost. In the last stage, the plan is
to work with International SEMATECH, a research consortium in Austin, Texas, to
build realistic and detailed simulation models of the automated material
handling system (AMHS) used in 300mm wafer fabs. The goal is to see if the
insights and results obtained from the queueing analysis can carry over to more
realistic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential for
broader impact in several areas. The first is in the semiconductor wafer
fabrication industry. Scheduling jobs in wafer fabs requires formulating
efficient dispatch, setup, and batching policies and addressing a host of other
issues. In the newest generation of wafer fabs, processing 300mm wafers,
material handling is completely automated. Providing insight into the design of
efficient scheduling rules for the AMHS is one major motivation for the project.
A key to broader impact is working with SEMATECH, which sets standards and
provides benchmark testing of research for a large portion of the global
semiconductor industry. Hence, if the simulation stage of the research is
successful, collaboration with SEMATECH creates an excellent opportunity to
convince currently operating wafer fabs to implement the results in AMHS
software. A second motivation arises in the design of Local Area Networks
linking computers, which can also be modeled by the systems proposed in this
study. Algorithms developed with the aid of queueing theory have been
implemented in actual internet routing software in a number of instances. This
previous success indicates that broad dissemination in the telecommunications
arena is quite feasible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;