* 0323320
* US-India Workshop:  Thermal Science Group Travel to Participate in Research Workshops and the Sixth ISHMT-ASME Heat and Mass Transfer Conference, Bangalore, India, January 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Yogendra Joshi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2004
* USD 19,500.00

Description: This award provides support for a delegation of US thermal
scientists and engineers to visit India where they will participate in two
research workshops and the biannual US-India Heat and Mass Transfer Conference,
Bangalore, India, January 2004. The Heat and Mass Transfer conference is the
premier venue for the dissemination of research findings by the Indian thermal
sciences and engineering community. The American Society of Mechanical Engineers
has cosponsored this event for nearly a decade. The delegation will participate
in novel initiatives designed to enhance mutually beneficial collaborations.
These include delivering state-of-the-art plenary and keynote lectures, building
web based educational partnerships with India's leading science and engineering
institutions, participating in two workshops, and visiting premier educational
institutions and leading companies and laboratories with strong ongoing thermal
science initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: India has several large
communities of researchers actively involved in thermal sciences and engineering
research and education at universities, government laboratories and industries.
The Indian Heat and Mass Transfer Society is the professional society
representing the field of thermal sciences in India and its members interact
closely with government agencies and industry to set the national agenda for
this field and identify research issues of importance to industry. The US
delegates include junior, postdocs, and senior researchers including some of the
most significant researchers in the field. This activity is cofunded by the
NSF's Division of Chemical and Transport Systems and by the Indian Department of
Science and Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.