* 0323472
* Physics and Architecture of Spin-Based Quantum Computing with Electrons on the Surface of Liquid Helium
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Stephen Lyon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2007
* USD 399,245.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-Based Quantum Computing Using Electrons on
the Surface of Liquid Helium: Physics and Computer
Architecture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
interdisciplinary effort to investigate the physics and the architecture of a
new implementation which uses the spin of electrons on the surface of liquid
helium as the qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two major research components are
the experimental investigation of the underlying physics of manipulating
electrons on helium, and the development of architectures and applications that
are best be able to utilize the spin-based system: scalable, but including such
constrains as maintaining the electrons well separated and avoiding magnetic
perturbations. A tight coupling between these activities guides the physics and
device experiments on the one hand, and ensures the development of realistic
models for the architecture designs on the other. Experiments are being
conducted using gates, much like those in charge-coupled imagers, to control
electrons on superfluid helium held in lithographically defined channels. Such
parallel structures are prototypical of many spin-based implementations, and a
particular focus of the architecture effort is on designs which follow from
classical gate-array based accelerators for certain
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project gives a broad training to the
graduate student and postdoctoral fellow working on it. They conduct and are
exposed to a wide range of research, including quantum physics, semiconductor
technology, low-temperature physics, algorithms and computer architecture. The
project provides a wealth of educational opportunities for undergraduates, both
within Princeton and from other schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;