* 0323037
* Characterization of Dynamic Scattering Media and Optical Fibers Using Intensity Correlations
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2009
* USD 330,000.00

0323037&lt;br/&gt;Webb&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy makes optical sensing
and imaging a powerful tool relative to other modalities. A large number of
domains of interest have significant degrees of scatter, thereby precluding
direct interpretation of optical measurements using standard holographic or
spectroscopic techniques. For instance, using light it may be possible to detect
tumors at an early stage and to determine blood chemistry using safe and
inexpensive instruments, with correct interpretation of the influence of
scatter. Environmental sensing applications include measurements of or within
aerosols, turbid water, sea ice, and snow. There has also been significant
recent interest in random media with optical gain, which may find application in
displays and for inexpensive lasers. Coherent light within all these domains
produces speckle, typically observed as random intensity variations or
graininess in a spatial image. While efforts have been made in some applications
to reduce the confounding impact of speckle, such as in optical coherence
tomography, speckle has the potential to determine important properties of the
scattering medium. Webb and Weiner have used frequency correlations&lt;br/&gt;of
laser speckle to characterize scattering material. This characterization
involved determining impulse response or scattering parameters that can be used
to form spatial images, such as with optical diffusion tomography, and to
extract quantitative spectroscopic data. Of particular note, Webb and Weiner's
group recently showed that it is possible to use third order speckle intensity
correlations in frequency to directly determine the impulse response of a
scattering medium, independent of a model, extending the famous second order
intensity interferometer concept of Hanbury-Brown and
Twiss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speckle fields for static media have received
significant attention. However, many important systems are dynamic, prime
examples being in biological and environmental sensing. There are significant
opportunities to exploit dynamic media speckle data, and a very simple
instrument will be demonstrated to allow the scattering properties to be
determined by exploiting the motion of the scatterers. Furthermore, by combining
acoustic and speckle modalities, a larger parameter space for the
characterization and imaging of scattering media will be explored. Speckle data
in the presence of an acoustic wave will yield data related to the mechanical
properties of the domain. This will provide for enhanced contrast in, for
example, soft tissue imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third order speckle
frequency correlation concept has application far beyond statistical light
transport. The PIs will demonstrate a simple and comprehensive approach to
characterize optical fiber. Speckle correlations will be used to characterize
multimode fibers, important in sensing and local area networks. Third order
correlations will also be used in a new measurement scheme to easily and
completely characterize polarization mode dispersion, a limiting factor in
modern single mode communication fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
scientific impact from this study of laser speckle in dynamic scattering media
will primarily be in the areas of biomedical imaging, environmental sensing, and
in the chemical industry. The application of correlation techniques to optical
fibers offers the opportunity for additional impact in the area of sensors and
telecommunications. Two Ph.D. students will participate in the research, thereby
receiving training in optical measurements important for a range of industrial
and research applications. Each summer, an undergraduate student will be
included in the research group.&lt;br/&gt;