* 0323539
* Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Steven Brown, Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 396,800.00

The goals of this project are to enroll and graduate more academically talented
and financially disadvantaged students who are majoring in computer science,
engineering, mathematics, and computer technology. An emphasis is placed on
recruiting and retaining underserved groups. The goal is being accomplished with
objectives focused on recruitment and retention, academic support and enhanced
educational opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;1. Objective 1 increases the number of
computer science, engineering, and mathematics (CSEM) majors with the award of
166 scholarships over a four-year period. Recruiting strategies build on a
successful NSF funded recruitment model, The IT Pathway, developed to target
females and other underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;2. Objective 2 focuses on
retention of scholars and includes a campus support team of CSEM faculty,
financial aid directors, academic and career counselors, and learning lab
instructors. Campus faculty advisors monitor student performance and progress
and develop individualized early intervention strategies, as needed.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Opportunities for students to expand the scope of their
educational experience are offered with objective 3. Students participate in
planned business/industry visits, CSEM forums with business/industry/university
professionals, engage in career exploration and attend professional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the program is the
design to increase the number of scholars pursuing CSEM fields of study and
persisting to program completion or bachelor degree completion. By networking
cohort CSEM students with business/industry/university professionals,
connections extend beyond the classroom. These interactions and participation in
professional meetings advance CSEM knowledge regionally and nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project are being realized from
the various methods of academic support planned to ensure students meet their
educational goals. The academic support system for scholars is built around
differing modes of teaching and learning, teamwork, networking, on-site
observation, field research and technology. Students and faculty explore options
to traditional methods of learning to assist students achieve. In an effort to
increase the participation of females and other underserved groups, recruitment
for scholars and the selection process has been designed to identify and attract
underrepresented groups to a CSEM field of study.&lt;br/&gt;