* 0323896
* Gender, Social Change, and Global Patterns of Cigarette Use
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Fred Pampel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2007
* USD 81,228.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decline of cigarette use in high-income, more
developed countries (MDCs) contrasts with the growth of cigarette use in middle
and low-income, less developed countries (LDCs). The contrast also involves
gender differences: Although female and male smoking have converged in MDCs,
female smoking remains low compared to male smoking in LDCs. Public health
officials decry the rising use of cigarettes among men in LDCs, but also worry
that the low rates of smoking among women means they have the potential for
large future increases. Along with public health concerns, these global patterns
of male and female smoking raise theoretical questions about the nature of
social differentiation and health behavior. This study poses the following
research questions: What are the underlying sources of converging gender
differences in smoking in MDCs? Do these underlying sources have the same
influence on gender differences in smoking in LDCs? And do they explain the
larger gender differences in LDCs compared to MDCs? A common argument answers
these questions by positing that movement toward gender equality produces
converging male and female rates of smoking in MDCs. It further suggests that
gender inequality and restrictions on female behavior account for low rates of
female smoking in LDCs, and the varied size of the gender gap in smoking in MDCs
and LDCs. In contrast, a diffusion argument suggests that variation in the gap
between male and female smoking is the byproduct of a female lag in the general
process of cigarette adoption, spread, and abatement, and has little to do with
improvements in women's status. Still other explanations suggest the need to
consider influences such as economic growth, life expectancy, trade
liberalization, trade dependency, and public health policies. Few if any studies
have evaluated these theoretical arguments with cross-national data for both
MDCs and LDCs. This project improves on existing work by examining gender
differences in tobacco use across nations that represent all regions and income
levels of the world. It will gather aggregate data on cigarette smoking of men
and women, gender equality, cigarette diffusion, and other economic and public
policy influences on cigarette use for 22 MDCs and up to 87 LDCs. The data for
the MDCs allow the over-time study of nations at middle to late stages of the
movement toward gender equality and cigarette diffusion, while data for both the
MDCs and LDCs allow the study of cross-sectional differences among nations that
span both early and late stages of the movement toward gender equality and
cigarette diffusion. With such data, the statistical models will test non-linear
and non-additive hypotheses that follow from the theoretical arguments. The
broader impacts of this research relate to the benefits of understanding the
underlying sources of a major public health problem in both modern and
developing societies - the use of cigarettes. Although many studies examine the
causes of cigarette use, they tend to focus on individual risk factors and
neglect the fundamental social forces that underlie the individual risks. The
attention here to macro-level forces of social change highlights the importance
of understanding these fundamental social forces, the spread of tobacco outside
the United States, and the experiences of LDCs at the early stages of the
epidemic. In addition, benefits to society come from the attention given by the
proposed project to women, a group often under-represented in medical research,
and deserving of special study in relation to cigarette use. &lt;br/&gt;