* 0323196
* Dissertation Research: Radio Luxembourg: International, Commercial Radio in an Age of European National Broadcasting
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Victoria De Grazia, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 09/30/2005
* USD 10,645.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant explores the
issues raised by a clash between two different European models for organizing
broadcasting technology. Although national, publicly funded monopolies like the
BBC had become the dominant organizational model for European broadcasting by
1930, the government of Luxembourg eschewed this trend by licensing a private
company to broadcast advertiser-supported radio programs not only within
Luxembourg, but also to a European market large enough to support its expenses.
Over the next few decades, Radio Luxembourg grew into a transnational media
conglomerate with investors, subsidiaries and subcontractors in several
countries and multilingual broadcasts that reached most of northern and western
Europe. Despite their national .monopolies,. neighboring public broadcasters
found themselves in the position of all public broadcasters today, forced to
compete with a rival company conceived and funded on a totally different scale,
according to different values. This grant will fund research into the economic,
social and cultural history of the conflict between Radio Luxembourg and the
British and French public broadcasters, using program schedules, memoranda and
correspondence from the broadcasting companies, supervising ministries and
diplomatic offices, which are archived in the Archives nationales of Luxembourg
and France, the BBC Written Archives, the British Public Records Office, and the
Stephen Williams Archive at the Centre for Luxembourg Studies of the University
of Sheffield. The overall objective of this research is to uncover how and why
competition with Radio Luxembourg threatened the national broadcasters. Was the
conflict largely economic, caused by the advantages and disadvantages of the
different economic models adopted by each type of system . license fees and
government appropriations on the part of the national broadcasters versus
commercial funding for Radio Luxembourg? How important were social and cultural
factors, such as differing definitions of the social role of broadcasting or the
value and purpose of different types of culture? Since in all cases the vast
majority of broadcast time was devoted to music, attention to the issues
surrounding different choices in music under each system . who determined what
would be broadcast, what meanings were attached to music, what was played and
why . will be an important aspect of this analysis. This project challenges key
assumptions within the history of technology and of Europe. While historians of
technology have become increasingly interested in the social context of
technological development, histories of broadcasting and other technological
systems have usually been approached through the comparison or analysis of
national systems, thus equating .society. roughly with .nation.. In this case,
however, the conflict between multinational and national illustrates the
limitation of this approach and raises exciting new questions about what we mean
by "society" when we speak of the social construction of technological systems.
On the other hand, within European historiography, the conflict between national
and multinational is commonly treated as an aspect of Americanization or as a
symptom of recent, post-Fordist globalization. By comparing the responses of
national broadcasters to a specific, European multinational threat dating from
the 1930s, this project reveals a much older and broader history of
globalization. The potential impact to society is significant, since publicly
funded national broadcasting systems still compete with commercialized
multinationals for the hearts, minds and pocketbooks of listeners all over the
globe. The issues of sovereignty, social responsibility and the meanings and
uses of culture raised here are therefore relevant to policy makers, listeners
and supporters of public broadcasting even today. Radio history is exciting,
however, not only because of radio's historic and current importance to people's
daily lives, but because of the potential for the history itself to reach so
many people. For many people, the history of radio evokes fond memories of the
music and programs of their youth, as evidenced by the numerous catalogues, web
sites and newsgroups devoted to the sounds and history of old time radio. This
dissertation, and the book that will ultimately be drawn from it, can therefore
bring important issues surrounding the commercialization and
internationalization of media to a wide readership through an engaging and
accessible narrative about a fascinating, and for many, nostalgic, period in
Western history.