* 0323493
* GOALI: A Truly CMOS Compliant On-Chip Optical Interconnect System for VLSI Chips
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Thomas Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 341,987.00

The research program proposed here is designed to demonstrate a purely on-chip,
multi-GHz, optical interconnect system implemented in deep submicron CMOS
technology from commercial silicon foundries. The critical governing philosophy
is to strictly limit the optical interconnect component technology wherever
possible to materials and processes found in conventional state- of-the-art
integrated circuits. In an effort to address electrical interconnect issues,
CMOS materials technology has expanded to include low-k dielectrics, new
metallurgy, and copper encapsulation films. We propose to use these very tools
to implement optical interconnects. Specifically, the optical interconnect will
be based on waveguides composed of silicon nitride and low-k dielectrics already
present as CMOS interconnect dielectric layers and Schottky barrier contacted
polysilicon photodiodes made from standard CMOS resistor polysilicon films. The
use of polysilicon photodetectors rather than crystalline photodetectors allows
us to move the photodetectors out of the noisy substrate environment that is
typical in high performance digital VLSI chips to less noisy and more well
controlled back-end layers. Preliminary work has been performed in our
laboratory on MSM photodiodes based on amorphous silicon. The increased
performance of the MOSFETs themselves will be leveraged to implement multi-GHz
receivers. The only component that cannot be implemented in CMOS is a high
speed, high power optical source for which a single edge emitting laser diode
will be used. All CMOS related wafer manufacturing will be provided by our
industrial partner, Agilent Technologies. In addition, Agilent Technologies,
with their extensive expertise in ASIC and optical IC designs, will also
collaborate with us to evaluate concepts and improve designs. This unique
relationship is a key to ensure the practicality of the proposed technology.
Therefore, the intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the method
that makes exclusive use of materials and processing steps in modern silicon
CMOS technologies to embed on-chip optical interconnect structures. This is, to
our best knowledge, the first attempt to develop, design, and demonstrate a
complete integrative system that will provide valuable data for further advances
in silicon technology.

The impact of the proposed research is threefold. Firstly, it provides necessary
impetus for technology advances along the Moore's Law well beyond the path that
is projected by ITRS. The proposed research is aimed at solutions that can
become one of the enabling technologies for the next 5-10 years. Secondly, it
provides a well-balanced forum for academic and industrial collaboration and
participation. Such close collaboration ensures practicality of potential
technologies. Furthermore, research results can be disseminated faster and more
convincingly through our industrial partners in addition to regular publication
channels. Lastly, the Rocky Mountain region has a high concentration of R&D
facilities in semiconductor and optical engineering. Cross-pollinations between
these two disciplines are crucial for incubating new technologies.

The proposed research will allow us to create cross-disciplinary curriculum and
seminar. We also propose to organize a first international workshop on fully
CMOS compliant on-chip optical interconnects to assemble researchers in this
field to further exchange ideas and discuss issues. Using our research results,
we will offer tutorials at other related conferences, such as ISCAS and ICCC.
Furthermore, we will bring a high-school science teacher into the project to
create a "Science Fair" project in a local high school. The project will be
involved with up to 4 high school students participating in debugging and
measurement wave guide materials. The students will compete in Colorado Science
Fair competition using the results from the project.