* 0323225
* Collaborative Research--Content, Structure, and Governance in an Innovation Network: An Empirical Investigation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Ravindranath Madhavan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 11/30/2006
* USD 181,436.00

What factors make an innovation network effective? As both corporations and not-
for-profit organizations increasingly embrace innovation networks, understanding
how to manage such complex entities more effectively is crucial. However, given
that the concept of an innovation network is a relatively recent phenomenon of
interest in organization theory and strategy, the day-to-day mechanics of
structuring and managing them optimally are yet to be fully explicated. The
broader literature on organizational networks has focused on three primary
elements: network structure (the pattern of interorganizational ties that
constitute the network), network content (the resources that flow through the
ties), and network governance (the set of formal and informal institutional and
contractual ties that serve to keep the network functioning as a coherent
whole). While each of these three elements is crucial to the effectiveness of an
innovation network, they have hitherto been studied mostly in isolation from
each other. In contrast, our primary research goal is to understand how network
structure, content, and governance interact to jointly influence the
effectiveness of an innovation network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that the
influence of structure, content, and governance has been rarely examined
jointly, our approach will be to develop, refine, and pilot-test a robust model
of such joint influence in an appropriate innovation network. The empirical
context for this stage of the study is Pratham, a Universal Primary Education
network in India with an established track record as an innovator in the
development and delivery of educational programs. The research effort will focus
on three key data components: a detailed mapping of the network's 23 centers,
with the goal of capturing the structure and content dimensions; a set of semi-
structured interviews with network participants to identify the network
governance; and a set of detailed analyses tracking how specific innovations
have fared in each of the structure-content-governance configurations across the
centers. &lt;br/&gt;