* 0323951
* Technology Scholarship Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Erin O'Connor, Allan Hancock College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 263,968.00

The Allan Hancock College Technology Scholarship Project provides financial
assistance to academically talented, financially disadvantaged students in order
to achieve an associate degree in computer science, electronics, engineering,
engineering technology, or mathematics and to either eventually transfer to a
four year university in one of the CSEMS disciplines or to enter the high-tech
workforce. The project targets graduating seniors from the seven local feeder
high schools. Outreach and recruitment efforts are proactive in encouraging
students to apply who are members of one or more groups that have been
historically underrepresented in the computer science, engineering, and
mathematics (CSEM) disciplines (ethnic minority, women, disabled) and/or who are
first-generation college students.

The three primary goals of the project are to 1. Increase the quantity and
quality of local high school students entering existing computer science,
electronics, engineering, engineering technology and mathematics programs at the
college. 2. Increase retention and success of students who are enrolled in
associate degree programs in computer science, electronics, engineering,
engineering technology and mathematics programs. 3. Strengthen partnerships with
local universities and high technology industry.

The three objectives of the project during each of the four years of the grant
are to 1. Provide 15 two-year scholarships for academically talented,
financially disadvantaged local high school graduating CSEMS students so that
they may achieve an associate degree in a CSEMS discipline; 2. Provide academic
support to scholarship recipients that will enable at least 70% to maintain or
exceed a 2.5 grade point average and persist until the associate degree has been
earned. 3. Provide transfer or job placement assistance to 100% of the
scholarship recipients who earn the associate degree.

An ten-member committee of AHC faculty and program directors administer the
project. The project is linked to an established Allan Hancock College student
support infrastructure. The administrative plan includes monitoring the
selection of scholarship recipients and the student support process, and
evaluation of the success of the project.