* 0323310
* Collaborative Research:  Earthscope-Acquisition, Construction, and Facility Management  (Earthscope Facility Office)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2006
* David Simpson, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2006
* USD 4,421,459.00

Simpson/0323309 (const.), 0323310 (mgmt.), 0323311
(O&amp;M)&lt;br/&gt;Prescott/0323700 (const.), 0323704
(O&amp;M)&lt;br/&gt;Zoback/0323938
(const.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;EarthScope is a scientific
infrastructure initiative for new observational facilities that will address
fundamental questions about the evolution of continents and the processes
responsible for earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The integrated observing
systems that will comprise the EarthScope facility include: USArray that maps in
3-D the earth's interior by means of seismic and magnetotelluric systems; Plate
Boundary Observatory that monitors the distortion of the earth's surface by
means of geodetic systems; and the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth
(SAFOD) that defines the conditions and physics of an active plate boundary
fault at depth. These systems capitalize on recent developments in sensor
technology and communications to provide Earth scientists with synoptic and
high-resolution data derived from a variety of geophysical sensors. All data
from the EarthScope facility will be openly available in real-time to maximize
participation from the scientific community and to provide on-going educational
outreach to students and the public. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
EarthScope is derived from the coincidence of technological opportunity and
scientific discovery. The design and implementation of the EarthScope facility
has been shaped with input from a broad sector of the academic research
community. Through a series of workshops and working groups, the research
community, along with federal and state partners, has defined the tools they
require to take the next steps in exploration of the fundamental processes that
shape the structure and influence the deformation of continents. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of EarthScope will be achieved through applications in hazard
assessment and resource management and through direct linkages with the
EarthScope education and outreach program. While EarthScope is a national
program, it will be installed and operated at a local level through interactions
with literally hundreds of universities, schools and organizations across the
nation. EarthScope will serve as a tool for communicating both scientific
understanding, and perhaps as importantly, the nature of the scientific method.
As EarthScope observatories are installed across the US, students and the public
will be introduced to scientific questions and the role that their region plays
in understanding the North American continent. Improved understanding of the
natural environment is the first step towards improved land use,
environmentally-sound development, and resiliency to natural hazards. The broad
participation that is necessary for EarthScope to operate will provide clear
pathways for underrepresented groups, especially in rural areas, to participate
directly in a national experiment. Educational portals for EarthScope data will
allow under-resourced schools to have equal access to state-of-the-art science
and scientific infrastructure. EarthScope will provide a much-needed opportunity
for students and the public to observe geological processes in real-time and to
measure geological deformation within the time frame of an academic school year.
EarthScope will provide the public with practical examples of how science
advances as they see new data being collected and watch new theories being
formulated and tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;