* 0323322
* Designing Competitive Markets for Transmission and Generation Expansion
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Wedad Elmaghraby, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 04/30/2006
* USD 134,786.00

With their Standard Market Design Notice Of Proposed Rulemaking, the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has outlined three main policy objectives:
(1) ensure efficient real-time operation of the grid, (2) monitor and mitigate
market power, and (3) promote efficient transmission and generation expansion.
FERC has directed regional trading organization to use competitive-based
location marginal (energy) prices in the day-ahead market and financial
transmission rights in an effort to achieve objectives (1) and (2). The
Commission would like to see the influence of market forces extend to their
third (and arguable most important) objective: efficient transmission and
generation expansion. It is clear that without efficient and adequate
transmission and generation expansion, the real-time energy markets will suffer
from significant transmission congestion and the exercise of generation market
power, resulting in high-energy prices. The form these markets for expansion
should take, and their relationship to centralized planning processes has yet to
be decided and is uncertain. What is certain is that in considering competitive
markets for expansion, FERC is delving into previously unexplored territory,
both in theory and in practice.

Auctions have been introduced and used in the operation of the day-ahead energy
markets. Therefore, it is natural to ask if their success can extend to the
realm of transmission and generation expansion. While the use of auctions has
been applied in an increasing variety of industries and market settings, the
research in auction theory has severely lagged behind. It is the goal of this
research proposal to close the gap between practice and theory by advancing the
state of the knowledge in the design of auction mechanisms for transmission and
generation expansion. With this project, we intend to:

o Contribute to the scarce literature in combinatorial auctions by
characterizing and studying a two-sided combinatorial auction for generation and
transmission expansion.

o Develop computer aided modeling tools to understand the impact of auction
format selection on performance (equity, efficiency, equilibrium and bid
inflation).

o Understand the trade-offs between computational complexity and auction
performance under various feedback mechanisms.

o Explore to what degree markets can efficiently replace regulatory planning
processes in the domain of generation and transmission expansion.

The broader impact of the work outlined in this proposal includes the
development of new insights and tools that, via market simulation, will aid the
regulators as they grapple with the challenges of designing expansion markets.
The intellectual merit of this project is to combine fields of study from
operations research, economics and electrical engineering to develop an
integrative approach to the design of expansion auctions. Traditionally, the
literature in operations research and electrical engineering has been rich with
models that try to capture as much operational and physical detail as possible.
In sharp contrast, economists have generally sacrificed operational details and
placed a greater emphasis on the strategic behavior of agents in a market. The
goal of our research is to fuse these two ideological approaches in the study of
energy auctions. Building on a DC power flow approximation of a grid, we will
develop simulation tools and computational algorithms to evaluate the
performance of combinatorial expansion auctions in the presence of strategic
bidder behavior under various market scenarios. While this interdisciplinary
approach presents a significant challenge, it holds the great reward of
developing a deeper understanding the challenges and potential rewards in
designing combinatorial auctions for efficient transmission and generation
expansion.