* 0323178
* Environmental Science Information Technology Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Kevin Cuff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2008
* USD 975,575.00

The "Environmental Science Information Technology Activities (ESITA)" based at
the Lawrence Hall of Science (LHS) at UC-Berkeley is a three-year, youth-based
proposal that seeks to engage 144 inner-city ninth and tenth graders in learning
experiences involving environmental science and information technology. The goal
of the project is to develop, field-test, and disseminate an effective student-
centered, project-based model for increasing understanding and interest in
information technology. Program components included an afterschool program,
summer enrichment and an internship program. An extensive partnership involving
community based agencies, environmental science organizations, a local high
school and industry support the project by serving as host sites for the
afterschool program and internship component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
participation in project-based, IT-dependent research activities related to
environmental science will occur year round. Students will research air and
water quality in their local communities and study attitudes toward -- and use
of -- information technology among their peers. The focus of the research
activities is based on the results of a students-needs assessment. Students
participate in the program over a two-year period and are expected to receive at
least 240 total contact hours. The afterschool program serves as the project's
principal mechanism for content delivery. The five-month afterschool program
consists of inquiry-based mini-courses on the following topics: Information
Technology tools and concepts, earth and physical science, data compilation and
modeling, and publication of research results. The summer enrichment component
encompasses a series of workshops at LHS; excursions to IT-related exhibits,
environmental facilities, and IT-based companies; and an annual student robotics
fair. During the second year of program participation students will complete
12-month internships to support the application of concepts and skills learned
the first year. The LHS Student Geoscience Research Opportunities program will
serve as a model host site for the program. Stipends are provided throughout the
program to encourage student participation and retention. &lt;br/&gt;