* 0323216
* US-Jordan  Cooperative Research: Unsteady DNS Modeling of Weakly Ionized Phased Plasma Actuators
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Thomas Corke, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 17,370.00

0323216 Corke

Description: This award supports a cooperative research project between Dr.
Thomas Corke, Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering at Notre Dame
University, Notre-Dame, Indiana and Dr. Osamah Haddad, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. They
plan to develop a time-dependent DNS code to model weakly ionized phased plasma
actuators as a means of enhancing their design and extending their potential for
fluid dynamic control in high-speed applications. This work builds on extensive
experimental development and numerical modeling of weakly ionized plasma
actuators for flow control applications at Notre Dame. The work will extend a
recently developed steady, incompressible, DNS code to develop a time-dependent
simulation that would examine the transient response of the flow to impulsive
actuator inputs as well as the effect of phase-shifted inputs to arrays of
actuators. The results of the simulations will be compared to those of companion
experiments at the University of Notre Dame. The objective is to further
optimize actuator designs and to determine limits on their performance in
unsteady operation.

Scope: The present applications of this research include leading-edge separation
control related to helicopter retreating-blade stall; trailing-edge separation
control on turbine blades in the low-pressure turbine stage of turbo-jet
engines; active lift enhancement on wings; control of boundary layer
instabilities at high Mach numbers; and turbulence-transition control in 3-D
boundary layers on highly swept wings. The results of the project will be used
to optimize actuator designs and determine limits on the actuator performance,
with a special interest on the unsteady flow amplitude and phase response. A
U.S. graduate student will participate in this international research project at
Notre Dame University.