* 0323346
* SGER: Membrane-Elution and Differential Display Analysis of Cyclic Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Stephen Cooper, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2006
* USD 55,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The experimental work in the project will measure gene expression
during the division cycle of eukaryotic, mammalian cells of both human and mouse
origin. The newly developed membrane elution (or baby machine) method for
producing undisturbed, synchronous cultures of eukaryotic cells will be used to
analyze the precise pattern and timing of expression of different genes during
the mammalian division cycle. This method produces unperturbed synchronized
cells that exhibit three generations of synchronized divisions with the proper
DNA contents and cell sizes observed throughout the successive cell cycles. The
hypothesis to be tested is that there are few cell-cycle-regulated genes in
eukaryotic cells, and in particular, there are no G1-phase specific patterns of
gene expression. In the membrane-elution method, exponentially growing,
unperturbed cells are bound to a membrane. The membrane is washed with warm
medium so cells grow and divide on the membrane. Only newborn cells are released
from the membrane by division. A short collection period yields a synchronized
culture. The broader impact of this work is that the entire field of cell
biology, arguably depends on a correct understanding of the nature of the cell
cycle. If the hypothesis proves correct, it could have a major impact on how we
understand the cell cycle.&lt;br/&gt;