* 0323208
* Fostering Student Success in STEM Disciplines through Engaged Learning Opportunities and Comprehensive Program Development
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Daniel Kinsey, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 02/28/2009
* USD 2,425,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is submitted by Fort Belknap College
(FBC), a tribally-controlled community college located&lt;br/&gt;on the Fort
Belknap Indian Reservation in northcentral Montana. The overall goal of the
project is to increase&lt;br/&gt;student participation and success in FBC.s STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) degree&lt;br/&gt;programs. To
accomplish this goal the project will provide STEM students with an integrated
continuum of learning opportunities in mathematics, science and technology,
while, at the same time, strengthening the institution.s STEM programs through
curriculum reform, faculty development, and infrastructure enhancement. Student-
centered activities include an active outreach and recruiting program, pre-
college summer sessions, expanded tutoring and in-class assistance in STEM
course offerings, research and internship opportunities, and a bridge program
with Montana State University-Northern. At the same time, STEM faculty and staff
will participate in a series of activities designed to improve the quality of
STEM instruction, increase faculty knowledge in both teaching methods and course
content, and enhance institutional resources needed to effectively deliver STEM
classroom, laboratory&lt;br/&gt;and field-based instruction. Through the
implementation of this comprehensive strategy, the project will achieve five
student-centered performance objectives and build the college.s capacity to
offer high quality STEM courses and degree programs. Evaluation activities will
provide project personnel with the information needed to effectively monitor the
project.s progress, improve its ongoing effectiveness, assess its success in
achieving project goals and objectives, and communicate its outcomes to a
variety of stakeholders. Ms. Mary John Taylor, dean of academic affairs at FBC,
will serve as principal investigator for the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses NSF's
review criteria of intellectual merit in several ways. Students at FBC
will&lt;br/&gt;advance their knowledge and understanding in STEM disciplines
through participation in pre-college summer&lt;br/&gt;enrichment sessions,
reformed STEM course offerings, research and/or internship opportunities, and
bridge program activities. Faculty will increase their understanding of
effective pedagogy and content knowledge through professional development
opportunities and faculty-student research projects. Data gathered through
evaluation activities will expand the body of knowledge concerning the
effectiveness of project strategies among American Indian
students.&lt;br/&gt;While the effectiveness of many of the learning/teaching
strategies and activities employed in this project&lt;br/&gt;have been
documented in the research-based literature, their modification for use in the
unique context of Fort Belknap College is both creative and original.
Recruitment and outreach efforts targeting non-traditional students, innovative
pre-college STEM enrichment programs, alternative approaches to .remediation,.
and integration of GrosVentre and Assiniboine cultures within STEM program
offerings represent highly original and creative components of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;Other factors contributing to the intellectual merit of the
project include the qualifications and experience of&lt;br/&gt;project
leadership and the project.s unrestricted access to the institution.s full range
of STEM resources. The project was conceived during a two-year planning process,
and its multiple components are clearly organized to achieve specific and
measurable student-centered goals and objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will achieve many of the broader impacts
described in NSF.s Grant Proposal Guide. Pre-&lt;br/&gt;college enrichment
sessions and reformed STEM course offerings will employ inquiry-based
instruction to energize students with a spirit of discovery that will be
reinforced through research and/or internship experiences addressing locally
relevant, .real world. issues. The project also will increase the participation
of underrepresented minorities, specifically American Indians, in STEM academic
programs and professions. To encourage the success of American Indian students
(who represent 85% of FBC.s student body), the project will employ instructional
methods and learning activities that have proven effective among minority
students, especially American Indians. The broader impacts of the project will
be felt far beyond Fort Belknap College through the project.s dissemination
activities and through the societal impacts of faculty-student research projects
and the project.s anticipated impact on the local&lt;br/&gt;work force.