* 0323384
* U.S.-South Korea Cooperative Research on Fault Management in the  Optical Internet Based on Optical Burst Switching
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Biswanath Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 08/31/2006
* USD 39,580.00

0323384&lt;br/&gt;Mukherjee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research
visits by Professor Biswanath Mukherjee, a postdoctoral fellow, and a graduate
student of the University of California at Davis, to collaborate in research on
Optical Networks with Professor Young-Chon Kim and his research group of Chonbuk
National University of Jeonbuk, Korea. The two groups bring complementary
expertise to their collaborative research. Professor Mukherjee has worked in
optical network architectures for many years, and has particular expertise in
survivable optical networks for bandwidth provisioning (i.e., circuit switching)
applications. Professor Kim has been conducting cutting-edge research on Optical
Burst Switching (OBS) networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Optical Internet
"concept is gaining rapid acceptance. Next-generation optical networks are
expected to provide users with more flexible and dynamic use of network
resources according to the variation of traffic pattern and will support the
rapid growth of Internet traffic. Optical networking is a high priority in Korea
where there is deep penetration of fiber in the network infrastructure, and
where industry, university, and government are working in unison to achieve the
collective vision of the Optical Internet. Optical Burst Switching with
Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) is a promising approach to
satisfy the bandwidth and flexibility requirements of future backbone networks.
The collaborative research proposed by Drs. Mukherjee and Kim focuses on
survivable network architectures and protocols that can combat various types of
failures in OBS networks. This topic has received little attention in the
literature so far. In addition, the joint research effort will provide tight
coupling between network architectures (Mukherjee) and device capabilities
(Kim). Without a sound knowledge of device capabilities and limitations, one can
produce architectures that may not be easily realizable; similarly, research on
new optical devices, conducted without the concept of a useful system, can lead
to sophisticated technology with limited or no usefulness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include enhanced
training and international experience for the participating graduate students.
The research program at UC Davis is one of very few that is producing PhD
graduates with expertise in optical networking (as opposed to optical
communications). The proposed US-Korea research collaboration will provide
valuable training to these graduate students, and prepare them well to handle
the challenges of the future global telecommunications in general and the
optical networking industry in particular.&lt;br/&gt;