* 0324770
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Dependable End-User Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2009
* Mary Shaw, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 388,800.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0324770&lt;br/&gt;Brad A. Myers&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie-Mellon
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been considerable work in empowering end users
to be able to write their own programs, and as a result, users are indeed doing
so. In fact, the number of end-user programmers in the United States is expected
to reach 55 million by 2005, as compared to only 2.75 million professional
programmers. The programming systems used by these end users include spreadsheet
systems, web authoring tools, and graphical languages for demonstrating the
desired behavior of educational simulations. Using such systems, end users
create software, in forms such as educational simulations, spreadsheets, and
dynamic e-business web applications. Unfortunately, however, errors are
pervasive in end-user software, and the resulting impact is sometimes enormous.
When the software end users create is not dependable, there can be serious
consequences for the people whose retirement funds, credit histories, e-business
revenues, and even health and safety rely on decisions made based on that
software.&lt;br/&gt;To address this problem, we propose a fundamental paradigm
shift to a new way of thinking about the way end users create software. Our
intent is to address the following research question:&lt;br/&gt;Is it possible
to bring the bene.ts of rigorous software engineering methodologies to end
users?&lt;br/&gt;We do not propose to transform end users into engineers.
Rather, our plan is to enable systems to create software to collaborate with
those users, in a software development paradigm that combines traditionally
separate functions - blending speci.cation, design, implementation, component
integration, debugging, testing, and maintenance into tightly integrated, highly
interactive environments. These environments will employ new, incremental,
feedback devices supported by analysis and inferential reasoning to help the
user reason about the dependability of their software as they work with it, in a
manner that respects the user's problem-solving directions to an extent
unprecedented in existing software development environments.&lt;br/&gt;