* 0324878
* ITR:     Advanced Architectures and Technologies for Chip Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* David Wood, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,110,370.00

Advanced Architectures and Technologies for Chip Multiprocessors

Abstract

We are poised on the verge of another discontinuity in computer performance as
semiconductor technology enables Chip Multiprocessors (CMPs), wherein a single
chip contains multiple processing elements connected via shared memory. These
CMPs have the potential to greatly decrease the cost and increase the
reliability of the information services that underpin society's essential
infrastructure for commerce, science, education, and government.

This research targets potential barriers to this paradigm shift with three
thrusts:

o Token coherence protocols to manage complexity. Token Coherence seeks to
rebuild coherence on a new foundation that is more verifiable by (a) separating
correctness from performance enhancements and (b) reducing correctness to a
mechanism for safety (namely, tokens) and a mechanism for liveness and
starvation freedom.

o On-chip transmission lines to reduce on-chip communication latency.
Conventional wires are limited by RC delay, which becomes a significant factor
in deep-submicron semiconductor technologies. We will investigate using on-chip
transmission lines to reduce latency and improve performance in CMPs.

o Compressed caches to reduce off-chip bandwidth. CMPs must make effective use
of limited off-chip bandwidth. We will investigate data compression techniques
to both transfer fewer bits per cache block and increase effective on-chip cache
size.

