* 0324735
* Globalization and Transnational Social Movement Mobilization, 1963-2003
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Jackie Smith, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 135,976.00

SES0-0241017&lt;br/&gt;Jackie Smith&lt;br/&gt;SUNY Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protests against the World Trade Organization in
Seattle and subsequent resistance to global trade and investment liberalization
highlight the growing centralization of economic and political power in entities
that transcend nation-states. The growing importance of global institutions
demands a greater understanding of the ways that global changes affect human
societies and the prospects for social change. This research seeks to advance
both the empirical and theoretical work on globalization processes and their
impacts on social movements and will contribute to a growing social science
research agenda on the ways that global integration and institutions affect
transnational political mobilization. The first component of the study will
examine the broad population dynamics over time using longitudinal time-series
data to assess how changes in the global political environment and in the
transnational social movement sector impact growth and change in the population
of TSMOs. The second phase will cover the same time period, but it will use data
organized at the country level to assess the relative importance of domestic and
international factors (and their interactions) for explaining varying levels of
national participation in transnational social movement organizations across
different countries. The project expands existing cross-sectional data sets into
a longitudinal data set on transnational social movement organizations including
data from theYearbook of International Associations. The broader impacts of this
study lie in its promise to identify relationships between changes in the
population of transnationally organized SMOs and the global political
environment, characterized by increasingly intertwined national and global level
polities, to uncover patterns of conflict mobilization and change in the
contemporary global political system, and to contribute to theory-building by
relating a rich literature on national social movement mobilization to the
broader sociological study of global social change. The project also will
provide important foundations for future research on how globalization affects
political mobilization (and visa versa) and the datasets produced for this study
will be made available to other researchers.