* 0324433
* Floor and Facility Vibration Mitigation Using Passive and Hybrid Nonlinear Energy Sinks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Lawrence Bergman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2008
* USD 301,467.00

Floor and Facility Vibration Mitigation Using Passive and Hybrid Nonlinear
Energy Sinks, CMS proposal 0344433&lt;br/&gt;PI: L. A. Bergman,
UIUC&lt;br/&gt;The proposal explores the use of a novel nonlinear energy sink
(NES) in a passive or hybrid isolation and control system in order to mitigate
floor and facility vibrations. Recent investigations have verified that the
presence of an essentially nonlinear oscillator weakly coupled to a linear
oscillator can induce the phenomenon of energy pumping from the linear to the
nonlinear system. More specifically, transient vibrations in the directly
excited linear system were shown, under certain conditions, to be transmitted
out of the linear system and into the nonlinear one in a one-way, irreversible
fashion. This energy pumping phenomenon was found to be robust and quite rapid,
making it an excellent candidate for an efficient vibration mitigation system.
The work proposed herein would investigate the application of this nonlinear
energy sink concept to vibration isolation and control in high-precision
technology &lt;br/&gt;situations, studying various strategies for passive and/or
hybrid vibration isolation, quantifying its performance, and exploring new
approaches for improving energy transfer. New educational prospects in
structural control would also be developed as part of this work, exposing more
students to a vital new field of structural engineering research and design.
Intellectual Merit: Major thrusts are proposed as follows: To determine the
practicality of NES for vibration isolation, a thorough investigation of the
theory of energy pumping and the design and analysis of nonlinear energy sinks
is planned. To meet these needs, we will pursue extension of nonlinear energy
sink theory, modeling and simulation of nonlinear energy sinks in high-precision
technology applications, experimental verification of NES performance, and
exploration of mechanisms for enhancing energy pumping. In addition, this
project has the overall goal of creating new educational opportunities in the
field of structural dynamics and control. This will be accomplished through the
involvement of undergraduate students in research (recruited through formal and
informal programs at each PI.s institution) and the creation of courses and
course materials for graduate student classes. Also, the needs of current
professionals will be addressed via greater access to educational material
through distance Learning, multimedia presentations, and other electronic
communication technologies. Broader Impacts: The research and educational
activities outlined in this proposal represent an examination of a fundamentally
new approach to the problem of isolating microvibrations in precision
Environments. The use of resonance capture in coupled oscillator systems to
induce energy pumping provides a simple means for transferring and eliminating
unwanted vibrations that does not rely upon large actuator forces or complex
control schemes. The proposed work will not only provide verification of the
practicality of this approach to structural control, but it will also improve
and extend our understanding of the underlying phenomena, permitting advances
towards even more efficient systems. The existence of well-established
facilities at each PI's institution will permit the construction of laboratory
and numerical simulations in active working environments, supplying sufficient
resources for the research activities. In addition, all of the institutions
participating in this proposal have highly developed recruiting programs and
instructional support centers, helping the PIs to realize their proposed
educational functions in a straightforward way. The educational components of
the proposed work will promote teaching, training, and learning through the
efforts to recruit undergraduate students as researchers and to create research-
based materials that will be incorporated into classroom lectures. In addition,
learning opportunities for graduate students will be generated through both the
traditional research participation as well as the forming of new courses in
structural control. The infrastructure for research and education will be
enhanced through the development of educational multimedia materials that will
be used to promote continuing education in the field of structural control. This
will also provide a means for broad dissemination of pertinent scientific and
technological information to practitioners who are facing retrofitting and/or
design of high-precision technology facilities.