* 0324931
* Conference on Harnessing the Science of Complexity on Behalf of Sustainable and Attainable Mobility.; Ann Arbor, Michigan; June 2003
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Carl Simon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Modern transportation systems have given the large parts of the world an
unprecedented degree of mobility, but this mobility has engendered a growing
number of unintended environmental and socioeconomic costs. One of the major
challenges facing contemporary society is to contain the growth of the
environmental and socioeconomic costs of mobility while simultaneously ensuring
that future generations have access to adequate mobility resources to meet their
own needs and aspirations. This project initiates an enterprise to harness the
emerging science of complexity to design mobility systems that serve to secure a
sustainable human future in an attainable manner. This award will help
contribute toward the conduct of a conference to explore the application of
complexity science to questions of sustainable mobility through the conduct of a
conference at the University of Michigan business school Ann Arbor in June 2003.
The conference will include (1) overviews of sustainability concerns in general
and sustainable mobility concerns in particular in the U.S. and around the
world, (2) discussions of economic, behavior, technology, and policy aspects and
options of sustainable mobility, and (3) collective generation of a large-scale
and long-term research agenda applying complexity science to sustainable and
attainable mobility. Speakers will include government, NGO, and industry leaders
and researchers on sustainability issues as well as and complex systems
researchers from industry and the academy. The conference is being organized by
the University of Michigan Center for the Study of Complex Systems, the
University of Michigan Erb Environmental Management Institute, and the Ford
Motor Company Research Laboratories. Results of the conference will be made
available through a proceedings volume as well as dissemination of video tapes
made at the conference and other forms of outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance knowledge about how more sustainable mobility might be
achieved through the application and adaptation of theories, methods, and
approaches from complexity science. The involvement of researchers and
stakeholders from academic, public, and private sectors will broaden the impact
of this conference and encourage greater interactions on topics of common
interest among individuals in the different sectors. The conference also will
provide new insights regarding approaches that can help engender more
sustainable mobility for the benefit of all parts of society.&lt;br/&gt;