* 0324348
* Next-Generation Imaging Technique for Underground Object Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Joseph Labuz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2007
* USD 272,984.00

The aim of this project is to develop an advanced computational and experimental
basis for expedient 3D imaging of subterranean objects using elastic (i.e.
seismic) waves. In contrast to existing three-dimensional seismic analyses that
require full volume discretization of the underground domain, the proposed
imaging technology revolves around an elastodynamic Boundary Integral Equation
(BIE) method so that only the outline of a hidden object is rendered. This
boundary-only sensing approach, which offers formidable computational savings,
has its origins in radar and sonar technologies, but has been largely unexplored
in the context of seismic surveys. Aimed at bridging such gap, the first stage
of this research is focused on elevating the prototype BIE imaging technique as
to increase its robustness, account for a wider class of subterranean
conditions, and deal with the detrimental effects of experimental and modeling
errors. The experimental phase of this project aims to implement the new sensing
technology into a compact testing setup that involves a vibratory seismic source
and a surface array of triaxial motion sensors. The research efforts include 1)
generalization of the recent findings in acoustics and structural shape
optimization to develop a rapid ground-probing technique and thus furnish a
reliable initial guess required for the high-fidelity BIE imaging; 2) extensions
of the method to deal with noise-polluted measurements and multi-layered
geological deposits; 3) synthesis of the computational developments for a
robust, yet expedient approach to 3D seismic sensing; 4) small-scale
implementation of the method to identify obstacles buried in a sand bin, and 5)
a field effort aimed at imaging an existing, on-campus underground facility. The
foregoing research program will be complemented with a continuing effort to
foster the growing use of non-destructive testing in civil engineering.
Potential applications of the new sensing technology include rapid detection of
underground facilities and unexploded ordnances; cost-effective mapping of
subterranean infrastructure in urban areas, and non-invasive delineation of
buried waste. The need for fast and economic 3D seismic imaging in these and
other areas is especially pronounced in situations where electromagnetic surveys
may be inadequate due to their limited resolution and depth of penetration