* 0324616
* Micro- and meso-scale strain measurements in cement-based materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 07/31/2007
* USD 253,523.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; This research initiative is to investigate the potential for
using&lt;br/&gt;synchrotron X-ray and neutron diffraction and Raman spectroscopy
to measure micro- and meso-&lt;br/&gt;scale strains in concrete materials. This
is a collaboration lead&lt;br/&gt;by Tennessee Technological University (TTU).
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and the&lt;br/&gt;National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) are partners in the collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;A
series of experiments will be conducted to explore the use of synchrotron X-ray
and neutron&lt;br/&gt;diffraction and laser Raman spectroscopy to make
measurements of micro-scale strains under&lt;br/&gt;stresses generated
mechanically in Portland cement-based materials. Stressors will be applied
by&lt;br/&gt;in situ loading and diffraction measurements made to establish the
stress states of various&lt;br/&gt;crystalline phases including calcium
hydroxide (CH), unreacted cement phases and aggregate&lt;br/&gt;phases. An
attempt will be made to make similar measurements on hydration product phases
that&lt;br/&gt;are suitably crystalline including monosulfate and those of the
hydrogrossular series (C3AH6 to&lt;br/&gt;C3AS3). Observations of the effect of
stressors on the less crystalline hydration products&lt;br/&gt;including
ettringite and calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H) will be made using Raman
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;A broad range of mechanical loads up to near failure
will be explored. Direct observation of&lt;br/&gt;mechanically induced
deformations will also be made using environmental scanning
electron&lt;br/&gt;microscopy (ESEM) and an in situ load frame.&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed development and demonstration of synchrotron-&lt;br/&gt;and neutron-
based techniques to quantify meso- and micro-scale stress and strain behavior
in&lt;br/&gt;concrete has broad reaching application-based implications. The
results will be useful to study the impact that chemical modification of the
cement&lt;br/&gt;has on alkali-silica interaction induced stresses, prediction
of cracking, durability&lt;br/&gt;and performance as they relate to interactions
such as sulfate, alkali-silica, freeze-thaw and other&lt;br/&gt;environmental
stressors.&lt;br/&gt;