* 0324567
* Interdisciplinary Investigations of the Plio-Pleistocene Occupations at the Dmanisi Site, Republic of Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Martha Tappen, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 134,999.00

Located at the nexus of three continents in the Caucasus Mountains, the Dmanisi
Site preserves a remarkable record of humans, their lifeways and their
environments at the beginning of the Pleistocene, about 1.8 million years ago.
This NSF grant will fund excavations at the site in the summers of 2003 and
2004, with an international scientific team representing diverse specialties
including human paleontology, archaeology, geology, vertebrate paleontology,
soil chemistry, pollen and plant fossil analysis. The excavation crews are an
international mix of graduate students. These future professionals are doing and
learning paleoanthropology together, building relationships that will define the
next generation of scholars of human history. Thus far, five human skulls and
many post cranial bones have been recovered by excavation of only a small part
of the Dmanisi site. These fossils represent the earliest members of our genus,
and are yielding unprecedented insights into the first peoples to inhabit
Eurasia. Numerous stone artifacts, in association with the fossils, and similar
to the oldest finds in Africa, are being studied to reconstruct the activities
and movements of the occupants and even more numerous animal fossils provide
evidence of the ecology and the age of the site. Several geologists are also
dating the site, using evidence provided by the buried lavas and ashes. Other
specialists will acquire data on snails, volcanic ashes, chemical and physical
evidence of the humans' diet. The investigations at Dmanisi will be guided by
several key research questions: When did the first humans inhabit southern
Eurasia? What was their biological and cultural relationship to their older
African ancestors? Were these populations significantly different, behaviorally
and/or genetically, from their African relatives because of the temperate region
they occupied? Does the physical variation in the Dmanisi fossils signify
different sexes, different species, or a pattern of variation previously
unrecognized? This grant also supports our determined efforts to attain wide
distribution of the results of these investigations. Websites will offer popular
tours, children's activities and hard scientific data for students and
professionals. Accurate and affordable casts of human fossils and artifacts will
be made available for schools and museums, and a variety of visual media will be
produced in the hopes that this project will send a very interesting story to
the lay public, as well as exciting encouragement to many young and future
scientists.