* 0324331
* Study of Load Effects on Structures Induced by Gust-Fronts
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Ahsan Kareem, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2007
* USD 283,656.00

The built environment experiences forces of nature generated by a host of
damaging atmospheric events, including gust-fronts induced by downdrafts
associated with thunderstorms. An accurate prediction of load effects that
result from the interaction of structures with these extreme events is a
critical part of designing and constructing the built environment and protecting
its occupants. The primary goal of this project is to better understand and
quantify wind loads and their effects on buildings under transient wind events,
e.g., gust-fronts. To accomplish this goal, a systematic approach is proposed
that focuses on capturing salient characteristics of transient flows associated
with gust-fronts and attendant load effects on geometrically-scaled models of
generic building shapes in a transient flow field simulator. The significance of
transient wind events and their load effects can be readily surmised from an
analysis of thunderstorm databases both in the U.S. and around the world, which
suggest that these winds represent the design wind speed for many locations. As
a result, these wind speeds become the input to codified design procedures
validated in traditional boundary layer wind tunnels. However, the mechanics of
gusts associated with convective gust-fronts differ significantly from
conventional turbulence both in its kinematics and dynamics, e.g. their
contrasting velocity profile and their transient nature. Accordingly, one should
question the appropriateness of using design based on conventional analysis
frameworks in codes and standards, which generically treat these fundamentally
different phenomena in the same manner. Further, extreme loads on structures are
potentially sensitive to the influence of transient flows, i.e., the load
coefficients may be enhanced based on the gust form and the resulting localized,
rapid changes in the surrounding flow. In addition, the characteristics of these
flow structures suggest that the resultant load effects are likely to be
correlated over larger areas than in conventional flows. These aerodynamic
consequences clearly point at the prospect of higher loads on structures than
would be predicted by the present codes and standards, calling for a careful
examination of these procedures. The issues highlighted above serve as the
primary motivation to study gust-fronts in this proposal. These investigations
will initiate by gleaning information from surface wind data available during
thunderstorm outflows to complement the existing knowledge base. The identified
salient features of transient flow fields, e.g., uniformly accelerating flows,
will then be simulated in a transient flow simulator comprised of individually
controlled fan banks. The analysis of experimental data garnered from scaled
building models exposed to these flows will enhance understanding and facilitate
quantification of the resulting aerodynamic modifications. Upon combining
numerically simulated structural load effects with the time-frequency analysis
and modeling of gust-fronts and the measurements of pressure distributions and
loads, the study will be capable of examining the efficacy of widely used design
codes and standards, highlighting the possible need for modifications. Further,
the collaboration with two distinguished aerodynamic/wind engineering centers in
Japan will make available an impressive array of experience and provide access
to unique experimental facilities to validate flow simulations and attendant
loads resulting from this study.

Gust-fronts associated with downbursts and tornadoes in the U.S. result in
estimated 80 deaths, 1500 injuries, and property damage in the neighborhood of a
billion dollars each year . a statistic that is rapidly escalating. Improved
codes that are based on better understanding of the impact of gust-fronts on
structures certainly promise to mitigate this hazard, thus benefiting society at
large. Therefore, the broader impacts of this work will be measured in the
reduction of these losses, both in property and, more importantly, in lives.
Concurrently other major initiatives of this project, i.e., professional
development, educational initiatives, etc., promise to have lasting impacts in
raising public awareness and understanding of a phenomenon commonly experienced
in the daily lives of Americans throughout this country. The flow simulator will
be an attractive demonstration tool for public education in this regard.
Further, the students involved in the proposed research will continue to embody
the ethnically and gender diversified profile of the past research teams,
enthusiastically maintaining the established traditions of pre-college outreach
programs, targeted at primary and secondary level students, and involving
underrepresented groups. Ultimately, the proposed study promises to provide a
strong intellectual foundation, supported by well-trained students at graduate,
undergraduate and pre-college levels for wind resistant design of buildings and
civil infrastructure.