* 0324957
* Collaborative Research ITR/NGS:    An Integrated Simulation Environment for High-Resolution Computational Methods in Electromagnetics with Biomedical Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Rosemary Renaut, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2007
* USD 280,001.00

Current technologies for radiationbased treatment of cancerous tumors rely
almost exclusively on diagnostic&lt;br/&gt;images such as MRI and PET scans to
enable a careful targeting of multiple high-intensity beams.&lt;br/&gt;However,
the very complex nature of the penetration of radiation energy into the
biological tissue makes such targeting difficult and error-prone, possibly even
prohibiting radiative treatment due to the risk of damaging essential tissue in
close proximity to the cancerous areas. Such issues are naturally of particular
concern in relation to treatment of brain cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct research on the development of a simulation environment
which eventually will provide a virtual patient-specific model of the area of
interest and an ability to accurately and efficiently model wave-propagation
within such an environment, with the potential to ultimately provide the
radiation specialist with an online tool for fine tuning the targeting of
radiation energy and, at a future stage, perhaps even model the impact of the
energy deposition and heat release on the tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop an environment comprising of (a) the cleaning and
segmentation of MRI data, including data with noise sensitivity, (b) extraction
of material data and construction of a patient-specific volume model of the
target of interest, (c) the generation of high-order, curvilinear, finite
elements grids, (d) full as well as reduced order modeling of the
penetration/refraction of electromagnetic energy into the volume model, and (e)
visualization and extraction of physiological data of interest. These different
elements will be integrated into a flexible, stand-alone environment and will,
as part of the development, be tested extensively on phantom data as well as
real MRI data, possibly with added artificial noise to explore
robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key developments will include new image
segmentation and cleaning algorithms, improved material models, the development
of efficient high-order accurate computational schemes for wave-propagation,
efficient methods for domain truncation, and tools for visualization and data
extraction. These are all problems of generic importance with potential for
impact well beyond the particular application being
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;