* 0324329
* A Generalized Absolute Stability Approach to Dealing with Saturation Nonlinearities: Analysis, Design and Applications to Magnetic Bearing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Tingshu Hu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

Saturation nonlinearities are ubiquitous in engineering systems. In control
&lt;br/&gt;systems, every physical actuator is subject to maximum and minimum
saturation &lt;br/&gt;limits. In between these maximum and minimum limits, the
input-output &lt;br/&gt;characteristic of a physical actuator is often neither
precisely linear nor &lt;br/&gt;exactly known. Thus, in the analysis and design
of many high performance &lt;br/&gt;control systems, it is inadequate to model
the actuator characteristic by a &lt;br/&gt;standard saturation function. A
straightforward approach to accounting for &lt;br/&gt;the nonlinearities and
uncertainties in the actuator characteristic is to &lt;br/&gt;formulate the
analysis and control design problem as the classical absolute
&lt;br/&gt;stability problem, where the actuator characteristic is assumed to be
within &lt;br/&gt;a linear sector. Such an approach to dealing with actuator
nonlinearities &lt;br/&gt;leads to severe conservativeness as the two straight
lines, the boundaries of&lt;br/&gt;a linear sector, cannot tightly bound the
actuator characteristic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop
a generalized absolute stability approach &lt;br/&gt;to the analysis and control
design of linear systems in the presence of &lt;br/&gt;actuator nonlinearities.
In comparison with the classical absolute stability &lt;br/&gt;theory, the main
innovation of this proposed approach is that it allows the &lt;br/&gt;actuator
nonlinearities to reside in between two nonlinear curves, rather &lt;br/&gt;than
two straight lines. The initial investigation by the PIs has shown that
&lt;br/&gt;the proposed approach drastically improves the results that can be
obtained &lt;br/&gt;by the classical absolute stability theory. The proposed
research is expected &lt;br/&gt;to lead to a set of powerful tools for various
aspects of analysis and control &lt;br/&gt;design, including the assessment of
closed-loop performance under a given &lt;br/&gt;feedback law and the design of
feedback laws for stabilization, disturbance &lt;br/&gt;rejection and output
regulation. An integrated part of the project is to &lt;br/&gt;experimentally
verify the obtained theoretical results on some magnetic
&lt;br/&gt;bearing/suspension systems in our laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have a strong societal impact
by advancing &lt;br/&gt;magnetically suspended flywheel energy storage
technology and by providing &lt;br/&gt;efficient control design for magnetically
suspended artificial heart pumps. &lt;br/&gt;Other broader impacts of this
research include the development of closer&lt;br/&gt;interaction among the
control theory, the magnetic bearings, and the medical&lt;br/&gt;science
research communities and curriculum enhancement at the graduate and
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;