* 0324956
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transnational Activism  Oil Politics and Environmental Justice in Ecuador
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Phil Brown, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

This research project examines how grassroots activist groups and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) in Ecuador mobilize transnational networks to
pressure the state and the oil industry. This project compares the supportive
and contentious alliances, demands, and tactics of four communities in Ecuador
as they respond to the construction of the oil pipeline Oleoducto de Crudos
Pesados (OCP:Lago Agrio, Mindo, Esmeraldas, and Quito. The project seeks to
understand how these diverse communities at different locations in the
petrochemical process transcend national borders to press international
institutions for support and assistance in demanding local and national -level
claims. The project compares also the extent to which the activities of local
activist organizations may advance a greater, unintened goal: Increased and
substantial community-level participation and assesses the consequences of
increased transnational interconnectedness and international regulatory regimes,
such as the World Bank, and international on local participation. This
ethnographic research investigates how civil society pushes to become the agent
that defines justice, development, and democracy and that demonstrates its
decision-making capacities and role in self-governance. The project focuses on
the following questions: 1) What are the identities, adversaries, goals, and
demands of the community groups, NGOs and INGOs in Ecuador? How do they
collaborate or marginalize each other? 2) How do stakeholders frame issues of
environmental and social impacts and development to appeal to a local base
groups, multinational support networks, and international institutions? 3) On
what local, regional, and international actors are the organizations making
claims and/or demanding a greater role in community and natural resource
decision-making? This project's broader impacts include the utility of research
findings to inform international institutions, such as the World Bank and IMF as
well as multinational financiers of large-scale projects about the impact of
their policies on local communities. Research results also will inform
researchers and policymakers about the consequences for political participation
of environmental justice and social-political development will be presented at
community workshops and published in popular print media, as well as academic
journals and multidisciplinary professional conferences.