* 0324694
* Collaborative Research+RUI:  The Effects of Water Movement and Zooplankton Escape Behavior on Planktivory by Coral Reef Fishes in Different Microhabitats
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Christopher Finelli, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 81,243.00

This study will investigate the effects of water movement on the capture of
zooplankton by small fish that live embedded in coral skeletons and are subject
to boundary layer effects. The particular focus is on how water movement differs
in the microhabitats occupied by two species of blenny (family Chaenopsidae) and
the extent to which it affects microhabitat choice by those species. The problem
will be approached from two perspectives: (1) the role of water movement in
delivering prey to the fish and (2) the role of water movement in determining
prey vulnerability to attacks by fish. Water movement will be measured at
different scales on reefs where the fish live and, in the laboratory, prey
capture will be studied under the patterns and rates of water movement observed
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two fish species have already been shown
to live in different microhabitats in the same reef zones, have different
metabolic rates, attack prey at different speeds, and have different diets.
Their prey capture success varies with degree of water movement and the
influence of water movement is different in direction and magnitude for
different prey types. Most strikingly, certain calanoid copepods that have
exceptionally fast response times to predator signals become more vulnerable
with increasing water turbulence. This is believed to be the key to feeding
success in blennies and determines where they are located on the
reef.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water movement will be measured on a coral reef to
determine general conditions in the zones where the blennies are found and to
characterize water movement within the feeding volumes of each species. Vertical
profiles will also be determined for water movement above the reef surface to
correlate with the different vertical distributions of the two fishes. A flow
tank will be built with the capacity to generate oscillating water movement of
the magnitudes and periodicities observed where the blennies live. Blennies will
be fed a range of prey under varying water movement regimes and their feeding
volumes and capture success will be measured with the aid of standard speed
videography. With high?speed videography, patterns of feeding strikes and escape
responses of prey will be determined. In addition, high?speed videography, in
conjunction with standard small?scale hydrodynamic disturbances, will be used to
test the escape responses of calanoid copepods in the presence of increasing
levels of turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the unique melding of
field and laboratory work and the precise recording of predator and prey
responses under various hydrodynamic conditions, this study will be a
significant contribution to our understanding of how copepods avoid their
predators, how fish capture their prey, and how this affects habitat choice by
fish. This information will give us insight into some unforeseen consequences of
coral reef degradation. This project also has important educational impacts.
Four to six undergraduate students will experience hands?on laboratory and field
research and a small humanities and arts?oriented liberal arts college will
collaborate with two research institutes in a way that will enhance the
visibility of the sciences at the college. This is expected to add to the
ongoing effort to increase the role of science in the educational offerings of
the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;