* 0324352
* Collaborative research: Investigation of a phytoplankton DMSP-based chemical defense system active against protist grazers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 417,370.00

Chemical defenses ? chemicals used by individuals to reduce or eliminate agents
of mortality are diverse, widespread, and important for species interactions.
Less studied in planktonic organisms than in terrestrial and marine benthic
species, chemical defenses are nonetheless thought to play a role in structuring
planktonic communities. They may be particularly important in promoting the
formation and persistence of algal blooms. In recent NSF?supported research, we
showed that the coccolithophorid Emiliania huxleyi is chemically defended
against most tested protist grazer species. At least two aspects of E. huxleyi
sulfur chemistry were shown to reduce rates of protist grazing: high DMSP lyase
activity (DLA), and exogenous DMSP (dimethylsulfoniopropionate) itself. As both
high phytoplankton DLA and dissolved DMSP are present in the sea, we propose
that this defense system is important in allowing E. huxleyi blooms to form and
persist. Furthermore, as many bloom?forming dinoflagellate and prymnesiophyte
species have high intracellular DMSP concentrations and at least some have high
DLA, this chemical defense system may be of widespread importance for
phytoplankton bloom dynamics. Numerous experiments on this DMSP "defense system"
indicated that DMSP is not toxic to protists. Rather, this sublethal defense
system might be based on intercellular chemical communication among grazer and
prey species. The present proposal constitutes an investigation into the source,
mechanism(s) of action, and significance of this defense system.

To accomplish this goal, a multi?level investigation will be conducted. Addition
of high lyase E. huxleyi cells and defense chemicals to natural water samples
and mixed laboratory assemblages will allow testing of community?level defense
effects, including possible reductions in microzooplankton grazing, transfer of
grazing to other prey types, and allelopathic effects on other phytoplankton
species. Population?level studies will reveal whether protist sensitivity to
defenses is related to protist taxon, feeding mode, or size. On the individual
and molecular levels, a spectrum of possibilities for the mechanism of
DMSP?induced feeding inhibition is presented. The effects of chemical cues (DMSP
cleavage and oxidation products, algal osmolytes) on protist feeding rates and
individual behavior will be studied as a means of testing these possibilities.

BROADERIMPACTS

The proposed study will include numerous graduate student and undergraduate
participants, including students in Shannon Point Marine Center's Minorities in
Marine Science Undergraduate Program. Other outreach activities will include
incorporation of concepts, techniques and findings into teaching activities, and
preparation of web and print materials aimed at a general audience.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT

Developing an increased understanding of sublethal chemical defenses as they
involve cell signaling and, ultimately, phytoplankton bloom formation is an
exciting area for oceanography, biological sciences, and education. By
contributing to our ability to compare chemical defense theory among
terrestrial, marine benthic, and planktonic ecosystems, such understanding could
yield insights into ecological and evolutionary principles that govern
biological interactions across these seemingly diverse ecosystems.