* 0324592
* Use of Carbon Fiber Materials to Provide Alternate Load Paths in RC Structures Vulnerable to Progressive Collapse
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* James Jirsa, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 07/31/2009
* USD 320,767.00

Use of Carbon Fiber Materials to Provide Alternate Load Paths in RC Structures
Vulnerable to Progressive Collapse, CMS proposal
0324592&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jirsa, University of
Texas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of this proposal is to develop
techniques for using Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) sheets to provide
alternate load paths in structures vulnerable to failure by progressive collapse
under extreme loads. Recent events have demonstrated the vulnerability of many
structures to both natural phenomena and terrorist acts. The failure of
buildings in earthquakes or by bombing has shown the profession the importance
of confinement, continuity, and capacity. The high strength to weight ratio of
carbon fiber materials make them ideal candidates for modifying the performance
of reinforced concrete members or structures with inadequate shear, flexure, or
tension capacity, poor confinement, or poor detailing of reinforcement. The
purpose of this proposal is to demonstrate the efficacy of using CFRP materials
to develop alternate load paths to (1) carry forces in the event that critical
elements of a structure are severely damaged or removed, or (2) augment the
capacity of a structure by providing independent additional load paths. The
development of techniques based on the use of CFRP materials for modifying the
performance of existing structures under extreme loadings will provide
structural engineers with an option for .hardening. those structures that has
heretofore not been available. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;The project will create knowledge in an area that is new to the
profession and essential to understanding the performance of structures
vulnerable to progressive collapse. There is very little experimental evidence
available to guide the research and design community in evaluating and
rehabilitating systems where such vulnerabilities exist. The manner in which a
structure survives the damage that occurs as a result of terrorist attacks or
other extreme loading events has not been extensively studied. Although there is
considerable information regarding seismic assessment and rehabilitation of
structures, The damage produced by terrorist attacks or other extreme loading is
quite different and is likely to affect only a relatively small portion of the
structure but may imperil the entire system if progressive collapse occurs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;o By involving practicing
engineers in the project, the data will be transferred to practice rapidly. The
emphasis will be to transfer information to groups working on homeland security
issues and groups developing progressive collapse evaluation and mitigation
guidelines and policy.FEMA, NIST, GSA, Structural Engineering Associations in
various states. &lt;br/&gt;o In selecting graduate and undergraduate students
for the research team, special efforts will be made to secure students from
underrepresented groups and from area high-schools. The graduate and
undergraduate student bodies in Civil Engineering at the University of Texas
have large fractions of women and Hispanic students available to participate in
the project. &lt;br/&gt;o The findings from the research will be utilized in a
graduate course on evaluation and rehabilitation of existing reinforced concrete
structures under extreme loadings. It will include consideration of structures
for vulnerable to progressive collapse. &lt;br/&gt;