* 0324416
* Surface analysis and surface nanoengineering of Nanoelectromechanical Systems at the atomic scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kamil Ekinci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 228,690.00

NSF 0324416: Surface analysis and surface nanoengineering of
Nanoelectromechanical Systems at the atomic scale

The objective of the proposed research is to investigate and engineer the
surface properties of Nano-electro-mechanical Systems (NEMS) at the atomic
scale. In nanoscale devices, in particular in NEMS, a significant fraction of
the atoms are surface or near-surface atoms. These unusually large surface-to-
volume ratios in NEMS can give rise to novel behavior-significantly different
from those of bulk solids. The approach herein will rely on scanning probe
microscopy (SPM) techniques to gain a physical understanding of surface
phenomena in NEMS. NEMS device properties-such as mechanical quality (Q) factor-
will then be correlated to the surface properties. In complementary experiments,
NEMS surfaces will be modified using well established techniques-such as
annealing and sputtering-to create optimized devices. Educationally, the results
of the proposed research will be disseminated in a graduate course at Boston
University that covers aspects of SPM, nanomechanics and nanoelectronics.
Moreover, the project represents a significant opportunity in the training of
students in nanotechnology: the graduate students working on aspects of these
experiments will not only master cutting edge technologies-such as SPM, nano-
fabrication and ultra-fast electronics-but also develop a sound understanding of
some of the fundamental concepts in surface science and physics.

