* 0324559
* Collaborative Research:    Testing and Analyses of Nonrectangular Walls Under Multi-Directional Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Sri Sritharan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2008
* USD 271,997.00

Collaborative Research: Testing and Analyses of Nonrectangular Walls Under
Multi- Directional Loads -- CMS 0324504&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cathy French,
University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a
collaborative analytical, experimental and educational effort to investigate the
&lt;br/&gt;behavior of nonrectangular structural walls subjected to the effects
of multidirectional loading. &lt;br/&gt;Nonrectangular structural walls are
often used to resist lateral loads and limit deformations in structural
&lt;br/&gt;systems located in regions of moderate and high seismicity. Although
such wall systems are intended to &lt;br/&gt;resist the lateral forces along the
orthogonal axes of the building, past research has been limited to
&lt;br/&gt;unidirectional studies of these systems due to limitations in
experimental capabilities, as such the &lt;br/&gt;numerical models developed to
describe their behavior have been calibrated to this limited data. The
&lt;br/&gt;proposed project employs one of the first applications of an NSF
George E. Brown, Jr., Network for &lt;br/&gt;Earthquake Engineering Simulation
(NEES) large-scale testing facility, the Multi-Axial Subassemblage
&lt;br/&gt;Testing (MAST) System at the University of Minnesota, to achieve the
multidirectional testing &lt;br/&gt;requirements. This facility is ideal for the
investigation as it is capable of six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF)
&lt;br/&gt;control including the ability to specify moment to shear profiles
about each orthogonal axis to simulate &lt;br/&gt;the distribution of lateral
forces applied to the wall system. It is anticipated that multidirectional loads
will &lt;br/&gt;have a significant impact on the behavior of these
nonrectangular wall systems as they are intended to &lt;br/&gt;resist lateral
forces and limit deformations along the orthogonal axes of the building. The
collaborative &lt;br/&gt;team of researchers from the University of Minnesota,
Iowa State University, University of Puerto Rico at &lt;br/&gt;Mayaguez and The
Nakaki Bashaw Group, Inc., a consulting firm in Irvine, California, bring
combined &lt;br/&gt;strengths and resources in experimentation, analysis, design
practice and education, all of which are &lt;br/&gt;essential components of the
proposed investigation. All collaborative researchers will remotely participate
&lt;br/&gt;in the experimentation including the operation of the test which will
reside with Iowa State University. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This project builds on the combined strengths of the collaborative research team
and &lt;br/&gt;newly available experimental capabilities to investigate a
critical structural element for seismic regions, &lt;br/&gt;nonrectangular
structural walls. The analytical and experimental studies developed in this
project are &lt;br/&gt;expected to lead to improved understanding of the
behavior, analysis techniques, and design of &lt;br/&gt;nonrectangular wall
systems. The project will also recommend appropriate modifications to the design
&lt;br/&gt;and detailing of nonrectangular wall elements suggested in the
current building codes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project has a
significant educational component through plans to incorporate the
&lt;br/&gt;testing and simulation into the curriculum at the three collaborative
universities including the &lt;br/&gt;participation of underrepresented groups.
The involvement of the practicing engineer from the beginning &lt;br/&gt;of the
project, who along with the Principal Investigator is involved in the
development of the American &lt;br/&gt;Concrete Institute Building Code, ensures
that the appropriate research findings may be translated directly
&lt;br/&gt;into practice with improved detailing recommendations for
nonrectangular structural walls. As such, this &lt;br/&gt;project will improve
the nation's infrastructure in seismic regions. It is also anticipated that the
results of &lt;br/&gt;this project will lead to valuable information for future
remote users of the MAST system. This &lt;br/&gt;information will include
documentation of any observed deformations of the reaction wall and crosshead,
&lt;br/&gt;as well as the ability of the system to function under mixed mode
control with large applied forces. The &lt;br/&gt;performance and userability
evaluations of the remote participant capabilities within the MAST are
&lt;br/&gt;intended to lead to an improved system for remote participation. The
Co-PIs have a vested interest within &lt;br/&gt;this project to actively
evaluate these capabilities as they are essential to their participation in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;It is intended that the research data be made available to
the research community through the NSF, &lt;br/&gt;George E. Brown Jr., NEES
National Data Repository. Any hardware or instrumentation purchased at the
&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota through this project will be available to
future users of the MAST facility. &lt;br/&gt;