* 0324345
* Higher-Order Finite Element-Moment Method Modeling Techniques for Conformal Antenna Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Branislav Notaros, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2006
* USD 249,417.00

0324345&lt;br/&gt;Notaros&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the proposed
research is the development of a new, highly efficient and accurate, hybrid
higher-order computational electromagnetics (CEM) method for modeling, analysis,
and design of conformal antennas. Conformal antennas have many advantages over
traditional protruding antennas because of their low weight, low drag, low cost,
unobtrusive nature, and great flexibility. A new higher-order finite element
method (FEM) and a new higher-order method of moments (MoM) will be developed,
and the two methods will be hybridized into a higher-order FEM-MoM method of
great capabilities. The modeling techniques will use generalized hexahedral
finite elements and generalized quadrilateral boundary elements of higher
geometrical orders in conjunction with higher-order hierarchical field/current
basis functions. The new MoM will employ the surface integral equation
formulation using Green's functions for free-space or unbounded homogeneous
media, thus avoiding use of the dyadic Green's function (for canonical
geometries). The new FEM-MoM method will enable modeling of cavity-backed
conformal antennas with arbitrary material complexities that are conformal to
platforms of arbitrary (canonical and noncanonical) shapes and with possible
material overlays. In the final stage of the project, FEM-MoM will be hybridized
with the physical optics (PO) method, which will enable efficient modeling of
conformal antennas on very large platforms. Finally, conformal patch and slot
cavity-backed antennas on vehicles will be analyzed by the new FEM-MoM-PO
method. Experimental validation of the new simulation techniques will be carried
out in the newly established Telecommunications (Antenna) Laboratory within the
new Advanced Technology and Manufacturing Center (ATMC) at the University of
Massachusetts Dartmouth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All educational aspects of this
proposal are fully integrated with the proposed research. Two Ph.D. graduate
students will work on the project as research assistants supported by this
proposed grant for three years. A number of other graduate and undergraduate
students will be engaged in the project periodically, thorough course projects
and seminars. The results of this proposed CEM research will be disseminated
broadly, at all stages of the project. The application to modeling and
characterization of conformal antennas is also of a broad interest, because of
their great practical importance to modern wireless systems. It is likely that
findings of this research will be useful to other researchers in their own
endeavors in CEM, as well as in other computational disciplines of science and
engineering, in both FEM and MoM (or boundary element method) applications.
Every possible effort will be made to broaden the participation from
underrepresented groups in the proposed activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;