* 0324640
* An Equipment Proposal: Volcanic Conduit Dynamics Observed Through Forward Looking Infrared Radiometry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Jonathan Dehn, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 35,670.00

0324640&lt;br/&gt;Dehn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arguably the most important variable
in the modeling of volcanic processes is temperature. The variability of
temperature in real volcanic systems exceeds 1000 degrees, crossing the vapor,
liquid and solidus phases of the host and volcanic materials. Thus, large
changes in temperature affect changes in the dynamics of volcanic systems. It is
exceedingly difficult to scale such temperature changes in the laboratory, and
thus many volcanologists take to the field as their lab to understand the
processes that control eruptions. Until recently, for accurate temperature
measurements, researchers were limited to thermocouples, optical pyrometry, or
simple spot radiometers, delivering the temperature of a single target. The
forward looking infrared radiometer (FLIR) provides a complete image, with
accurate temperatures at every pixel. This provides a spatial dimension to the
data which has been previously unavailable. This new dimension in the FLIR data
provides a framework to link diverse geophysical data sets. This grant support
the acquisition of two handheld FLIR systems by the Geophysical Institute at the
University of Alaska. These systems will be used to study heat transfer
processes from recent lavas flows at volcanoes worldwide but will primarily be
focused on study of numerous active Aleutian arc volcanoes and the Kilauea hot
spot volcano in Hawaii. The systems will support basic research on radiative
transfer and lava dynamics and eruption types, volcanic hazard assessment and
graduate student education in volcanology. The availability of the two FLIR
systems, where collaborative efforts allow, can be linked to provide stereo
imagery useful to measure erupted gas and lava volumes not possible with a
single unit.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;