* 0325921
* ITR:    An Infrastructure for Veterinary Telemedicine - Proactive Herd Health Management for Disease Prevention from Farm to Market
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Daniel Andresen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2009
* USD 923,996.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to research and develop a
prototype,&lt;br/&gt;technology-rich infrastructure to support economical
continuous monitoring&lt;br/&gt;of cattle state of health via remote and
wearable devices that interact&lt;br/&gt;with a veterinary health information
network. Wireless stations,&lt;br/&gt;distributed databases, and physiological
assessment algorithms will play a&lt;br/&gt;key role in this environment. These
systems are improving the ability of&lt;br/&gt;the livestock industry to react
to and predict disease onset and its&lt;br/&gt;epidemiological spread, whether
from natural or terrorist events. Trend&lt;br/&gt;analysis and health prediction
lessons learned from this effort have&lt;br/&gt;application to human state-of-
health prediction and disease spread in&lt;br/&gt;human
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are placing Bluetooth-
compliant monitoring stations near&lt;br/&gt;cattle congregation points, such as
feed bunks and watering troughs. These&lt;br/&gt;stations upload data from
environmental sensors, Bluetooth-enabled devices&lt;br/&gt;with global
positioning capability worn by the animals, and&lt;br/&gt;wearable/remote
biomedical sensors. Local algorithms perform rapid data&lt;br/&gt;analysis prior
to uploading ranch summary data to regional databases,&lt;br/&gt;where the data
is correlated with information provided by nearby&lt;br/&gt;producers.
Significant findings are then immediately broadcast to
regional&lt;br/&gt;veterinarians, producers, and authorities. In order to
accomplish this, the research addresses a number of important information
technology issues, including scheduling algorithms that adaptively determine
where data analysis should occur and which areas require more in-depth analysis;
prioritization algorithms for multiple wireless data streams with near-real-time
constraints; and area-appropriate data mining techniques to find problem
indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary project is addressing a
critical need within the agricultural&lt;br/&gt;and national communities:
applied research that allows the animal&lt;br/&gt;sciences industry to react to
and predict disease onset in cattle and its&lt;br/&gt;epidemiological spread.
Through the development of a distributed software&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure, a
comprehensive physiological monitoring toolset, and new&lt;br/&gt;processing
algorithms (e.g., for data storage, fusion, and&lt;br/&gt;interpretation), we
are helping to improve the financial stability of the&lt;br/&gt;livestock
industry while simultaneously raising our level of preparedness&lt;br/&gt;for
epidemiological disasters, whether from natural or terrorist events.&lt;br/&gt;