* 0325571
* Collaborative ITR/CSE:  Modular Strategies for Internetwork Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Alfred Hero, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,925,530.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0325571&lt;br/&gt;Alfred Hero&lt;br/&gt;U of MIchigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the longstanding and difficult
problem of detecting and classifying spatially distributed network anomalies
from multiple monitoring sites. To characterize baseline vs. anomalous behavior
of the Internet requires deployment of collaborative data collection, anomaly
detection and pattern recognition for complex large scale systems. The project
combines the forces of leading researchers in three complementary disciplines:
(i) networking and data collection; (ii) statistical data analysis and signal
processing; (iii) decentralized decision-making. The research goes well beyond
the state-of-the art anomaly detection for centrally administered networks. In
particular tools and practical data sharing algorithms are being developed for
detecting coordinated intrusions, distributed denial of service attacks, and
quality-of-service degradations in decentralized networks such as the Internet.
The project also includes activities with broader impact including: creation of
a public network anomaly database, K-12 educational outreach, and university-
industry collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is based on a modular
and distributed monitoring paradigm that is organized into a three level
hierarchy: local level measurement of data from servers, routers and switches;
intermediate level data analysis and processing of end-to-end traffic
measurements, summary statistics and alarms transmitted from the local level;
and upper level decision-making and processing of information transmitted from
the intermediate level. This modular structure is scalable to large networks of
monitoring sites. However, this structure also imposes constraints on data
analysis which requires development of new&lt;br/&gt;&gt; approaches. Three
approaches are being pursued: distributed spatio-temporal data analysis using
wavelets over graphs; event detection and classification using distributed
pattern analysis and learning; and multi-site event correlation using discrete
event dynamical systems and decentralized stochastic systems.&lt;br/&gt;