* 0325739
* ITR-SCOTUS: A Resource for Collaborative Research in Speech Technology, Linguistics, Decision Processes and the Law
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Mark Liberman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 725,000.00

This project will create a digital audio archive that will
enable&lt;br/&gt;scientists in several fields to approach novel research issues
in speech and language&lt;br/&gt;studies, issues in group decision-making, and
issues at the leading edge of&lt;br/&gt;human communication scholarship. The
Supreme Court of the United States&lt;br/&gt;(SCOTUS) has been recording its
public proceedings since 3 October 1955.&lt;br/&gt;These recordings - now in the
National Archives - span nearly five decades&lt;br/&gt;and consist principally
of oral arguments in which justices and attorneys&lt;br/&gt;engage in various
forms of persuasion and communication between bench and&lt;br/&gt;bar and,
obliquely, among the justices themselves. The arguments have
been&lt;br/&gt;transcribed professionally across the entire period, creating a
matchless&lt;br/&gt;collection of audio materials coupled with highly accurate
transcripts. The&lt;br/&gt;audio - along with other activities captured on audio
such as the&lt;br/&gt;announcement of opinions - offers a unique opportunity for
researchers&lt;br/&gt;across a wide spectrum of disciplines to engage in novel
and transforming&lt;br/&gt;research projects that were once thought beyond the
reach of investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief result of this work will
be a complete and continuing archive of&lt;br/&gt;more than six thousand hours
of SCOTUS audio. It will provide synchronized&lt;br/&gt;(i.e., time-coded)
transcripts of the collection, identify and tag&lt;br/&gt;individual speakers,
build new mark-up tools for these new domains, and&lt;br/&gt;share the corpus
with researchers and faculty. The result of this&lt;br/&gt;interaction among
political scientists, legal scholars, linguists, and&lt;br/&gt;computer
scientists will yield: new knowledge in the modeling of&lt;br/&gt;multi-party
discussions with complex goals, novel strategies in small group
decision&lt;br/&gt;process analysis, and path-breaking approaches to extended
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;commentary addressing the dynamics of human
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCOTUS archive will be maintained as a
shared public resource to&lt;br/&gt;enhance study and understanding of the
Supreme Court of the United States. It will&lt;br/&gt;be available to anyone
with World Wide Web access. Based on past&lt;br/&gt;experience, principal
audiences include: researchers across diverse domains, teachers&lt;br/&gt;and
students, lawyers and litigants, and the visually- and&lt;br/&gt;hearing-
impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, more than a million unique users access
selected SCOTUS materials&lt;br/&gt;each month. With a complete and updated
SCOTUS archive and improved ability&lt;br/&gt;to query and search, the number of
users should expand substantially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploiting common
interest and beneficial interactions among diverse&lt;br/&gt;research
communities, this project will create a vast collection of
digital&lt;br/&gt;objects. Working with partners experienced in data-sharing,
the effort aims&lt;br/&gt;at revolutionizing the ability to collaborate with
physically distributed&lt;br/&gt;teams of researchers and their students.