* 0325963
* ITR: Real-Time Data Aware System for Earth, Oceanographic, and Environmental Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* John Orcutt, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,344,407.00

The research in this project will focus on dynamically adapting downstream
processing and modeling as sensors are added to or removed from a real-time data
network. The research will also include work on methods to detect automatically
the occurrence of interesting phenomena in real-time data streams and to trigger
responses such as data analysis, modeling computations or turning on or off
parts of the sensor network. Once developed, this type of capability will be
potentially useful to large-scale environmental observing projects such as NEON,
Earthscope, NEES and ORION. The project builds on the wireless networking
infrastructure developed under the HPWREN project, the data management approach
developed under the ROADNet project, and existing ideas about "data grids" such
as those being developed and tested under the BIRN and GEON projects. The latter
data grid technology is built around the concept of finding and manipulating
data after it is stored in databases. The proposed project will investigate how
to extend data grid ideas to include real-time data streams and permit feedback
between observations and the operation of the observing
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tasks involved including developing the data cache
structure and data flow management needed for a distributed data-handling system
for multiple real-time data streams of varying bandwidth, the development of an
information discovery system capable of searching across a hierarchical and
multi-disciplinary metadata structure, the extraction of metadata from real-time
information flows, and the integration of asynchronous, autonomous processing
capability at different stages of the data transport system. The work includes
merging the existing ORB and SRB technology into a virtual object ring buffer
(VORB) and virtual metadata catalogue architecture for real-time data. The
planned design for the VORBs also includes the addition of data-push features.
The project will produce a working prototype, with data flowing from a variety
of different sensor networks including the Virtual Seismic Network, hydrological
and meteorological observations from Yosemite National Park and the Santa
Margarita River basin, the San Diego Coastal Monitoring and Observing System and
the Southern California Coastal Ocean Observing System, a GPS/seismic system for
Orange and Western Riverside Counties, and SDSU field
stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential for impacts in
several areas of environmental research. Once developed, this type of capability
will be potentially useful to large-scale environmental observing projects such
as NEON, Earthscope, NEES, ORION, the LTER network, environmental engineering
field facilities, and hydrologic observing networks. The successful development
and demonstration of a technology to integrate and manage archived and real-time
data coming from a diverse collection of observing systems could also provide a
common framework for integrated access to environmental data collected from
observing systems supported by a diverse collection of federal and state
agencies.