* 0325916
* ITR: An Internet Platform to Support Public Participation in Transportation Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Piotr Jankowski, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,710,018.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0325916&lt;br/&gt;Nyerges, Timothy
&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR: An Internet Platform to Support Public Participation in
Transportation Decision Making&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This project
develops and evaluates Internet-hosted capabilities, particularly based on
Internet geographic information systems (GIS) technology, to support
participatory modeling in transportation decision making.&lt;br/&gt; The project
makes a contribution to knowledge and understanding about Internet GIS
technology designs that can improve the publics' access to voice, competence of
knowledge, and shared understanding within transportation planning decision
situations. We make that contribution by implementing a prototype Internet
platform through which a variety of GIS-based analytic-deliberative agendas and
participatory choice models can be designed and implemented. As a broad impact
with benefits to society, the Internet GIS platform will provide a technology
prototype that supports enhanced participation in three, pervasive,
transportation planning decision contexts common to metropolitan areas across
the US. The results of the study are likely to be general enough to transfer to
other planning contexts such as land use and environment, because the
participation framework underlying the needs analysis is based in large part on
public empowerment in decisions. Enhancing participation in decision making is a
step toward improving local governance - a widespread challenge across western
democracies.&lt;br/&gt;