* 0325828
* ITR: A Networked, Media-Rich Programming Environment to Enhance Informal Learning and Technological Fluency at Community Technology Centers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Mitchel Resnick, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,999,435.00

ITR: A Networked, Media-Rich Programming Environment to Enhance Informal
Learning and Technological Fluency at Community Technology Centers The MIT Media
Laboratory and UCLA propose to develop and study a new networked, media-rich
programming environment, designed specifically to enhance the development of
technological fluency at after-school centers in economically disadvantaged
communities. This new programming environment (to be called Scratch) will be
grounded in the practices and social dynamics of Computer Clubhouses, a network
of after-school centers where youth (ages 10-18) from low-income communities
learn to express themselves with new technologies. We will study how Clubhouse
youth (ages 10-18) learn to use Scratch to design and program new types of
digital-arts projects, such as sensor-controlled music compositions, special-
effects videos created with programmable image-processing filters, robotic
puppets with embedded controllers, and animated characters that youth trade
wirelessly via handheld devices. Scratch's networking infrastructure, coupled
with its multilingual capabilities, will enable youth to share their digital-
arts creations with other youth across geographic, language, and cultural
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance understanding of the
effective and innovative design of new technologies to enhance learning in
after-school centers and other informal-education settings, and it will broaden
opportunities for youth from under-represented groups to become designers and
inventors with new technologies. We will iteratively develop our technologies
based on ongoing interaction with youth and staff at Computer Clubhouses. The
use of Scratch at Computer Clubhouses will serve as a model for other after-
school centers in economically-disadvantaged communities, demonstrating how
informal-learning settings can support the development of technological fluency,
enabling young people to design and program projects that are meaningful to
themselves and their communities.&lt;br/&gt;