* 0325641
* ITR:  A Biologically Inspired Adaptive Working Memory System for Efficient Robot Control and Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2009
* David Noelle, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2009
* USD 1,612,000.00

ITR: A Biologically Inspired Adaptive Working Memory System For Efficient Robot
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A major goal in robotics has
been to give robots the capacity to learn and reason about new tasks without
explicitly programming this new information. This approach takes the programming
of robots away from writing tedious code, and transforms it into a process of
learning through experience. Experience-based learning is employed by human
beings, primates, mammals, and a large number of other animals. In particular,
there is much evidence for the existence of an adaptive working memory in
primates. Such memory is closely tied to the learning and execution of tasks, as
it contributes to decision-making capabilities by focusing on essential task
information and discarding distractions. The employment of such a biologically-
based adaptive working memory within a robot has not been previously
investigated. Our goal is to develop an adaptive working memory to support the
following:&lt;br/&gt; Focus attention on the most relevant features of the
current task.&lt;br/&gt; Support generalization of tasks without explicit
programming.&lt;br/&gt; Guide perceptual processes by limiting the perceptual
search space.&lt;br/&gt; Provide a focused short-term memory to prevent the
robot from being confused by occlusions.&lt;br/&gt; Provide robust operation in
the presence of distracting events.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to integrate the
adaptive working memory structure into a robot in order to provide a solid
context for exploring the issues of task learning. The adaptive working memory
will be tested using a series of evaluation tasks on both humanoid and mobile
robot systems. &lt;br/&gt;