* 0325924
* Collaborative Research:  ITR:  Secure Signal Embedding -- Code Design and Cryptanalysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Pierre Moulin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,019,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0325924&lt;br/&gt;Pierre Moulin&lt;br/&gt;U of Illinois @
Urbana Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of technologies have recently
become popular for embedding one set of data into another; this includes
watermarking, steganography, fingerprinting and traitor tracing. These
technologies are finding applications in emerging areas such as intellectual
property protection, media authentication, database indexing, broadcast
encryption, broadcast monitoring, and covert communications. The application
areas are expanding: they also include communication problems such as broadcast
channels and wireless communications.&lt;br/&gt;While the development of these
technologies has largely been heuristic, recent research has
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;the feasibility of a more scientific approach rooted in
information theory. This project expands this scientific framework and explores
the multiple fundamental connections between the signal embedding applications
listed above. One central theme is the role of binning schemes for information
transmission; random binning schemes are known to be capacity-achieving in
problems of communications with side information at the encoder and/or decoder.
Yet these analyses are based on restrictive assumptions (such as coherent
communication channels) which have limited the practical applicability of
binning schemes so far. &lt;br/&gt;The second central theme of this project is
the premise that security requirements impose constraints which are naturally
addressed by a complexity-based cryptographic approach rather than a purely
information-theoretic or decision-theoretic approach. This project develops a
systematic framework for integrating the information-theoretic and the
cryptographic aspects of secure signal embedding problems.&lt;br/&gt;This
project is highly multidisciplinary and involves a synergy between research and
educational activities in signal processing, communications, coding theory,
information theory, and cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;