* 0325329
* ITR:  Knowledge-Enhanced Discovery System (KEDS):  Incorporating Background Knowledge for Scientific Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2012
* Kiri Wagstaff, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 795,640.00

The KEDS project is developing a toolkit for scientific discovery, which refers
to the identification of new predictive models for a set of phenomena of
interest from observational data about those phenomena. KEDS goes beyond
existing methods by incorporating background knowledge (such as dependencies
between variables, partial models, and information about the task for which the
learned models will be used) into the learning process, and by providing
analysis tools to aid the user in understanding, evaluating, and comparing the
learned models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KEDS provides a more flexible, interactive
approach to scientific discovery than current tools. The interactive techniques
in KEDS are also being applied to science education, supporting an iterative
process in which students refine their mental models, based on personalized,
targeted feedback from the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the
project will be an advance in how information technology is used in scientific
investigations and science education. In particular, KEDS will support a more
interactive style of scientific discovery, which will allow human domain experts
to integrate their previous knowledge into the discovery process more
effectively. Expected results include improved interactive methods for
scientific discovery and science education, data sets and benchmarks for
interactive scientific discovery, and a documented software package. The KEDS
system is currently being applied to astronomy science domains, but the
underlying techniques have broad applicability to many other science domains,
including earth sciences, biology and medicine, chemistry, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;