* 0325351
* ITR: Managing human attention
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Scott Hudson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2008
* USD 2,042,000.00

Since at least the early 1900s, the supply of information and communication has
been growing faster than our ability to consume it. From the information
producers' viewpoint, much information is wasted, in the sense that it doesn't
reach those to whom it is relevant. For the consumer, the glut of information
makes it increasingly difficult to find what is relevant, useful or enjoyable.
This "poverty of attention" also occurs in the domain of interpersonal
communication, where informal and spontaneous interaction, a hallmark of
managerial and professional work, generates interruptions and overload. In this
project, the PI and his team will develop, integrate and use principles from
social psychology, computer science, economics, and interaction design to devise
ways of economizing on attention in a communication rich environment.
Specifically, they will develop, deploy and evaluate techniques to mediate among
the often competing demands of responding to a barrage of communication requests
that compete for attention when performing a primary task, such as driving a car
or interviewing a client. To do so, the PI team will use sensing technology and
machine learning techniques to identify a worker's current task and degree of
interruptibility. They will display team members' availability to a subset of
communication partners and use principles developed in economics and social
psychology to balance the competing demands on the worker's attention. They will
also use principles developed in interaction design to build lightweight,
peripheral displays and context-aware interaction techniques that allow people
to briefly and simply comprehend information without disrupting their primary
task. Although the principles and techniques developed will be applicable across
many domains, this project will make use of a specific context for development
and testing, namely improving communication efficiency of mobile health care
workers caring for the elderly. The PI team consists of a social psychologist, a
computer scientist, and a designer, who have been working previously both
individually and jointly on problems of human attention; part of this project
will involve integrating results from research efforts already underway.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Issues of managing attention and
information overload are pervasive in our increasingly connected and
technological society. Development of principles and specific techniques for
addressing these issues has the potential for large benefit and widespread
impact beyond the eldercare domain. In addition, support for the project's
target domain - mobile eldercare workers - offers the potential of direct social
benefit to a rapidly aging population. The project will lead to better
understanding of design principles for economizing on attention, to prototype
development, and to lab and field testing of the models, all of which will help
save on the most precious of human resources - our attention.