* 0325377
* ITR:  Representation and Learning in Computational Game Theory
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2010
* Michael Kearns, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2010
* USD 420,000.00

Computational Game Theory is a rapidly emerging discipline at the intersection
of computer science, economics, and related fields. It is becoming a fundamental
tool for understanding and designing complex multiagent environments such as the
Internet, systems of autonomous agents, and electronic economies. The objective
of this program is the development of powerful new representations for complex
game-theoretic and economic reasoning problems, and strategic learning
algorithms for adjusting their parameters.

Special emphasis is being given to models permitting the specification of
natural network structure in the interactions within a large population of
players, and models generalizing the spirit of financial markets, in which
interactions take place via global intermediate quantities. Powerful recent
machine learning methods such as boosting and exponential updates are also being
applied to the more subtle and complex setting of learning in games.

The expected results of the program are a rich set of new modeling methods for
game-theoretic applications, and computationally efficient algorithms for
reasoning with them, including the computation of Nash, correlated, and other
equilibria, as well as efficient learning methods with known convergence
properties. Special emphasis will be given to formal analysis, and the resulting
methods will provide a new toolbox for researchers in economics, social science,
evolutionary biology, and other fields in which game-theoretic approaches are
common. The findings of the program will be widely disseminated through
international conferences and journals, as well as more specialized workshops
deliberately bringing together researchers from the different relevant
disciplines.