* 0325333
* ITR Collaborative Research:  Biometrics -- Performance,  Security and Social Impact
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2011
* Anil Jain, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2011
* USD 1,845,152.00

PI: Lawrence A. Hornak, West Virginia University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biometric
systems automatically measure a physiological or behavioral "signature" of an
individual, from which a decision can be rendered to either authenticate or
determine the identity of that individual. In this way, biometric systems
provide the means to bind the physical presence of an individual user with her
cyber action. Despite the increasing use of these systems, neither an analytic
framework for modeling and predicting their performance, nor a set of standard
data available to researchers for testing purposes is available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses these deficiencies by determining
an analytic framework in which the performance of biometric systems can be
modeled and predicted, removing key barriers to biometric system performance
through research in multibiometrics and effective vulnerability countermeasures,
and understanding the relationships among biometric applications, privacy,
security, and user acceptance that are essential for both informed public policy
and system design. Addressing this interrelated set of key technical barriers
and societal issues will advance the understanding of biometric system
acceptance, performance, and design, and will enable trustworthy authentication
and identification functions essential to pervasive computing and supporting
homeland security needs. The data sets generated by the coordinated tasks of
this research are also being made available as a resource to the biometrics
research, developer, and user communities.