* 0325868
* ITR: Hyperion - next generation measurement infrastructure and application use
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,711,486.00

Recent advances in processing (in particular, network processors) and storage
provide the technological foundation for a new generation of continuous-
monitoring measurement systems that can continuously and selectively capture,
process, and store packet/packet-header information for high-bandwidth links for
periods of time ranging from hours to days. Use of these measurement systems,
both individually and collectively will in turn enable a rich new set of real-
time, adaptive network-management and traffic-profiling capabilities, and
further enhance our fundamental understanding of network phenomena. In this
proposal, we describe fundamental, cross-disciplinary research aimed at the
design, development, and application-use of a next generation of distributed,
high-performance passive network measurement infrastructure. Our proposal brings
together researchers with the needed expertise in hardware and architecture,
operating systems, databases, and various aspects of networking (measurement,
protocol design and analysis, routing, security, and application-level
overlays). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project, which we refer to as Hyperion,
divides broadly into four efforts (i) Our first focus is on the design,
development, and prototype implementation of a new adaptable, resource-aware,
network measurement node architecture based on the use of emerging network
processor (NP) chips. (ii) While a single measurement node necessarily provides
a myopic network view, a system of Hyperion nodes will enable a much richer set
of network-management and traffic-profiling capabilities. With multiple Hyperion
nodes comes the attendant concerns of node synchronization, node placement, node
coordination, and distributed data compression. (iii) We also explore a number
of application-level uses of Hyperion nodes, including fault-detection, overlay
support, and traffic characterization. This application-use will help define and
refine Hyperion APIs, overall functionality, and internal structure and
operation. (iv) An important part of our proposed research will be to work with
network providers (of our departmental networks, a tier-II regional network, and
a tier-I backbone network) to understand network-management needs, and
demonstrate Hyperion capabilities. We will also distribute a number of Hyperion
nodes to external researchers, and make data we collect available to
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;