* 0325401
* ITR:     Collaborative Research:     Efficient Resource Management for Controlled-Mobility Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 210,000.00

Today's embedded computers are increasingly mobile and ubiquitous,
are&lt;br/&gt;capable of interacting with the environment, and can communicate
with&lt;br/&gt;one another over possibly vast and pervasive networks. While most
of&lt;br/&gt;the wireless networks are not expected to be capable of
controlling&lt;br/&gt;their own motion, new technological possibilities are
emerging to&lt;br/&gt;provide small embedded devices with the means to propel
themselves,&lt;br/&gt;with an energy expenditure that is comparable to the
energy budget of&lt;br/&gt;communication and
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Controlled-Mobility Wireless
Network (CMWN) is defined as a network&lt;br/&gt;of embedded devices endowed
with computation, communication and motion&lt;br/&gt;capabilities. The purpose
of this project is the development of a new&lt;br/&gt;conceptual framework for
the design, development and operation of&lt;br/&gt;efficient and reliable
networks with such characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives
of the basic research proposed in this
project&lt;br/&gt;are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The development of a conceptually
sound, consistent and complete&lt;br/&gt;framework for the analysis of the
interactions between competing&lt;br/&gt;computation, communication, and motion
control requirements, arising&lt;br/&gt;in the design of
CMWNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The design, analysis, and performance
characterization of&lt;br/&gt;distributed algorithms and communication protocols
for provably&lt;br/&gt;efficient and adaptive CMWNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The
specification, implementation and verification of software,&lt;br/&gt;middleware
and networking services for the deployment of&lt;br/&gt;representative
CMWNs.&lt;br/&gt;