* 0325544
* ITR:    Collaborative Research:   New Approaches to Experimental Design and Statistical Analysis of Genomic and Structural Biologic Data from Multiple Sources
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Saul Gelfand, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 579,921.00

The biological sciences are advancing by posing increasingly complex and
quantitative questions which require experiments that are increasingly complex
procedures, and analysis of increasingly complex and large data sets.
Information technology is pervasive throughout this process. Before beginning
the laboratory work, computation is necessary for planning the experiment, and
for later analysis of the results. In gene chip experiments for determining gene
activity levels, planning issues include which biological hypotheses should be
considered and what chemical conditions will yield the most informative results,
followed by computation to reduce the collected data, which can be gigabytes of
information, to forms that can be understood and exploited by biological
scientists. In electron microscope experiments for determining the 3-D structure
of viruses, planning issues include electron energy, defocus level, beam
current, number of tilts, and tilt angles, followed by computation to reduce the
measured data, which can be one hundred thousand or more images, to a
biologically-plausible 3-D structure. Historically, insufficient attention has
been devoted to the use of highly sophisticated information technology for
quantitative planning and analysis of experiments, which jointly takes into
account the behavior of the measurement apparatus, the goals of the experiment,
the unavoidable uncertainty in the system, and the algorithmic complexity that a
particular experimental design implies for the subsequent computational analysis
of the experimental data. The research objective of this ITR project is to bring
together a team of investigators from MIT, Purdue and NYU-Courant along with
their industrial collaborators to apply principles from information, coding and
systems theory, along with advanced computational methods for statistical
inference and numerical optimization, to create a unified approach to planning
and analysis of complex quantitative experiments in the biological sciences,
such as the determination of gene expression using gene chips and the
determination of 3-D viral structure from scattering and electron microscopy
experiments. These biological problems will challenge the state of the art in
information technology and an important characteristic of the project is the
parallel development of new information technology and new biological
applications. The human-resources objectives of this ITR project are to provide
the opportunity for undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
associates to learn about and contribute to this exciting area at the interface
between information technology and biological sciences. Because of the
biological focus of the research it is anticipated that the proposed project
will be an outstanding opportunity to recruit women and other underrepresented
minorities into the Systems, Information and Computer Science endeavor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;