* 0325812
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Software for Interpretation of Cosmogenic Isotope Inventories - Combination of Geology, Modeling, Software Engineering and Artificial Intelligence
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Kenneth Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2009
* USD 933,622.00

This project aims to improve the accuracy of geological chronologies based on
cosmogenic isotope data. It combines research on computer models of the effects
of various processes on the rate of accumulation of cosmogenic isotopes in
geological formations, the development of a database of data (such as isotope
abundances) and environmental parameters useful for cosmogenic isotope dating
(such as solar output and the state of the terrestrial magnetic field at
different times), and an artificial intelligence (AI) system to support the use
of cosmogenic isotope accumulation models in dating. The AI system will act as
an expert system guiding the user in the choice of modeling tools and data, and
integrating the selected models and data. The combined AI/database/modeling
system will be built using a component-based architecture to make it simpler to
modify and extend as new processes and data sets are
added.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the central importance to geological
inference of establishing the age of geological structures, this project, if
successful should be helpful in a number of problems in research and applied
geology. The project will also strengthen the connections between the geological
and computer science research communities, both by virtue of the collaboration
itself and by demonstrating the potential for exploiting information technology
to further geological research.