* 0325599
* Collaborative ITR:  Optical Control in Semiconductors for Spintronics and Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Lu Sham, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2009
* USD 525,000.00

This Information Technology Research (ITR) medium program will develop ultrafast
optical methods for controlling electronic, magnetic, vibrational, and excitonic
properties of semiconductors for fast information processing. Successful
manipulation of quantum states and processes in solids will be a necessary
breakthrough for implementing the emerging technologies of spintronics and
quantum information science. Optical control, as opposed to electrical control,
has the advantage of performing quantum control on femtosecond time scales,
which will be explored in the following specific contexts: (1) Optical control
of ferromagnetism in magnetic III-V semiconductors, (2) optical control of band
structure via the dynamic Franz-Keldysh effect, (3) optical control of electric
fields in GaN/InGaN strain superlattices, and (4) optical control of excitons in
coupled quantum wells. The proposed research work will train student researchers
for future employment in high technology fields such as nanoscience and quantum
information science and to produce scientists and engineers with a strong
background in spectroscopy, optics, photonics, solid state theory, many-body
theory, and quantum information theory. New courses on nanotechnology and
quantum information science will be developed in the Applied Physics curricula
at Rice University, the University of Florida, and the University of California
at San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Information Technology Research (ITR)
medium program is focused on fundamental studies of control of quantum electron
dynamics. It will develop 'designer' electronic processes for applications in
the emerging fields of spin-based electronics and quantum information
processing. The passive paradigm of studying natural processes is replaced by
the active one of designing controls of electron and crystal motion at the
quantum level. Advanced lasers are used to control motion at the time scale
between a trillionth and a quadrillionth of a second. Molecular beam fabrication
of nanostructures is used to confine the electrons to a spatial dimension around
a billionth of a meter. Such a space-time regime between that of the smallest
macroscopic device extant and the microscopic regime of the elementary particles
may be advantageous for quantum control and will be explored to utilize the
electron spin as an extra dimension for information processing and to produce
desirable magnetic, electrical and transport properties at will. The program
contains a strong effort in providing interdisciplinary education and research
experience in nanoscience and quantum optics. It prepares students for future
employment in the increasingly quantum-oriented world of high
technology.&lt;br/&gt;