* 0325361
* Studies of the Impact of Emission of Reactive Gases from Arctic Snowpacks and Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Paul Shepson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2006
* USD 450,018.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Shepson&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0325361&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is motivated by two environmental observations: 1) snowpack and sea ice
cover in the Arctic has been decreasing at alarming rates over the past couple
decades, presumably related to climate change, and 2) air-snow interactions
appear to have a significant impact on the composition of the lower atmosphere
in snow covered environments. Recent field measurements in the Arctic have shown
that sunlit snowpacks emit a variety of photolytically active species, such as
bromine (Br2), bromine chloride (BrCl), nitrogen oxides (NOx), nitrous acid
(HONO), formadehyde (HCHO), and (CH3CHO), into the atmosphere. These species
have an impact on the abundance of ozone (O3) in the lower atmosphere; in the
Arctic springtime, all the O3 in the lower atmosphere (up to ~ one km) can be
removed from halogen atom reactions related to processes that occur at the
snowpack/sea ice surface. Ozone can be destroyed within the sunlit snowpack, and
that halogen-atom related chemistry results in the conversion of gas phase
elemental mercury into potentially toxic particle phase mercury that then can be
deposited on the Arctic Ocean surface. It is also likely that the halogen
chemistry impacts the prevalence/severity of Arctic haze. Because O3 and
particles have an impact on Earth's radiative balance, and O3 helps determine
the oxidizing power of the atmosphere, and because snow cover is diminishing,
prediction of the future state of the atmosphere, and how that relates to the
Arctic, requires a quantitative understanding of air-snow interactions. Although
it is known that photochemically important species are emitted from sunlit
snowpacks into the lower atmosphere, the impacts of these processes on the
atmosphere are not well defined. The Principal Investigator will develop methods
to pursue these issues, through measurements of the vertical structure of the
emitted chemical species above snowpacks and sea-ice in the Arctic. He will
conduct vertical profile measurements of molecular halogens, some of their key
atmospheric reaction products organohalogen compounds that may be emitted from
the Arctic Ocean, and reactive carbonyl compounds, most specifically CH3CHO. For
the halogenated compounds, these objectives will be pursued through measurements
of vertical profiles from the surface to a few meters aloft. For CH3CHO, will
develop the capability to conduct vertical profiles from the surface to ~1km,
using an instrumented, battery powered small blimp. This sampling platform will
provide the flexibility to sample from the near surface to one km, over any
surface, such as open water, sea ice, and leads. They will conduct measurements
during one month in the spring, 2005, in the area around Barrow, Alaska, and the
local Arctic Ocean surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Although the
research community communicates effectively about environmental and atmospheric
research in the Arctic, it is also important to responsibly educate the public
about changes that are occurring in the Arctic. The Principal Investigator will
involve the well-known and successful adventurer/author, Peter Lourie, as the
first step to create a series of multimedia products aimed at educating school
children and adults about the Arctic, and its people, in the context of global
climate change and its impact on the Arctic. Mr. Lourie will travel to Barrow
and interview researchers and the local Inupiat Eskimos, in preparation for
production of books and videos. In addition, graduate and undergraduate
education are central aspects of this effort. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;