* 0325627
* Times Series Particle Flux Measurements in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Maureen Conte, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2005
* USD 897,259.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0325627&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current
understanding of present-day ocean/climate interactions is based largely upon
data collected as part of long-term research efforts. The contributions of long-
term studies to our knowledge of how the ocean works are numerous and far-
reaching. Yet, such studies are exceedingly rare- especially those with a
biogeochemical focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1978, the Oceanic Flux Program
(OFP), under the direction of scientists at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, has continuously measured particle fluxes in the deep Sargasso Sea.
The 25-year OFP time-series is, by far, the longest of its kind and unique in
its focus on the deep ocean. OFP has produced a unique, albeit "edited", record
of temporal variability in the "biological pump", a term loosely applied here to
material transfer from the surface to the deep ocean which results from upper
ocean biological/physical processes. The OFP provided the first direct evidence
for seasonality in the deep ocean and the tight coupling between deep fluxes and
upper ocean processes. It has provided clear evidence of the intensity of
biological reprocessing of sinking flux and scavenging of suspended material,
especially in mesopelagic waters. The record has documented interannual and
longer variations in material fluxes to the deep ocean and shorter-term
fluctuations driven by the interactions between mesoscale physical variability
and synoptic meteorological forcing. The time-series is now becoming long enough
that we can begin to study this variability in terms of multiyear basin-scale
climatic variations, which alter ocean functioning, such as the North Atlantic
Oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue the funding for
this unique and fundamental oceanographic time-series. As the record gets
longer, the scientific community will better able to put into perspective the
observed fluctuations in terms of the interplay between climate and ocean
functioning. The concurrence of three coordinated and complementary research at
the Bermuda time-series site -- the OFP, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series (BATS)
and the Bermuda Testbed Mooring (BTM) -- and new ocean technology now presents
an unprecedented opportunity to study the details of the coupled interactions
among ocean physics, biology and chemistry and material fluxes, and how these in
turn are linked to atmospheric and climatic forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;