* 0326831
* Sediment Dispersal off a High-Yield River:  Observations and Modeling of Gravity-Driven Transport and Deposition
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Lynn Wright, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 10/31/2006
* USD 754,102.00

Under this funding, the PIs will study, through direct observations and
modeling, the occurrence of hyperpycnal flows, their transport and extinction,
and their stratigraphic record in an environment where annual river flooding
generates sediment concentrations in excess of 20 g/l, the expected threshold
for the formation of such flows. The Waiapu River, New Zealand is one of the
most sediment-laden rivers in the world, with an average annual suspended
sediment concentration exceeding 10g/L, and routinely generates hyperpycnal
flows during annual flooding. This proposal hypothesizes that annual Waiapu
floods result in hyperpycnal flows that would settle near shore in the absence
of waves due to the low seabed gradient. Wave agitation, however, mobilizes
these sediments and sustains suspensions dense enough to cause further downslope
transport. In the proposed study, bottom-boundary layer measurements of sediment
gravity flows, resuspension, and transport by waves and currents will be made
under a range of forcing conditions on the inner and middle shelf using near-
bottom tripods. Seabed sampling and measurements will document deposition from
the initial flood pulse as well as the subsequent redistribution of material by
waves and currents, and will examine both the fine-scale stratigraphy developed
over a flood season and longer-term accumulation and stratigraphic signatures.
All of these observations will be used to calibrate and refine analytical and
numerical modeling efforts for sediment transport and deposition, and to
evaluate dispersal patterns over time and spatial scales longer than the
available bottom boundary layer observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;