* 0326371
* Benthic Responses to Seasonal Carbon Inputs: Size-partioned Remineralization on Two Arctic Continental Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Paul Renaud, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 286,532.00

Synopsis of proposal:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High latitude continental shelves
exhibit some of the highest levels of primary productivity, fisheries
production, and benthic faunal abundances found in the world.s oceans. These
observations are tightly linked to pronounced seasonality in solar radiation,
sea-ice dynamics, and unusually tight benthic-pelagic coupling. Recent climate
models predict that global climate change will be more pronounced in Arctic
regions, suggesting that ecosystems shaped in large part by seasonality in ice
cover may function differently under warmer temperature regimes. Continental
shelf benthos in polar regions derive nutrition from two main sources:
phytoplankton and ice algae, each displaying distinct seasonal maxima. The
amount of phytodetritus from the euphotic zone reaching the sea floor, and the
benthic response to that organic flux, is dependent on primary productivity
regime, timing of pulsed deposition, and algal source. Sediment communities in
the Arctic can rapidly cycle newly-deposited phytoplankton; and there is some
evidence that they also quickly process ice algae. How this remineralization is
partitioned among different components of the benthic community (from bacteria
to mobile megafauna) has been suggested to vary depending upon whether the
system is oligotrophic or more mes-/eu- trophic. To understand the role of the
benthos in biogeochemical cycling in the Arctic, therefore, it is important to:
determine how variability in phytodetrital flux to the sea floor at two Arctic
sites affects the distribution of labile food in the sediments, and how
different size classes of benthic fauna respond to food supply. Most of the
studies addressing these questions have been performed over a small fraction of
the annual cycle, usually well into the summer season. This study is the first
to investigate these processes over the entire annual cycle at sites different
in purported productivity levels. This study will take advantage of a unique
opportunity. There are currently several international research programs
studying carbon cycling in the Arctic. The Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study
(CASES) and the Norwegian/EU-funded CABANERA (CArbon flux and ecosystem feedback
in the northern BAreNts Sea in an ERA of Climate Change) project have agreed to
provide berth space for this project during the 4 (CASES) and 3 (CABANERA)
seasons of the respective studies. In the oligotrophic Beaufort Sea (CASES) and
the mesotrophic Barents Sea (CABANERA), surface sediments will be sampled to
determine the spatial and temporal variability in phytodetrital input to the
benthos. HPLC analysis of sediment pigments will help determine the sources of
the algal detrititus. Oxygen consumption by different components of the benthic
community will be determined by whole-core incubations, microvial incubations
(for meio- and micro- biota), and whole organism incubations (for epibenthic
megafauna). Densities of epifaunal species will be determined using a drop-
camera; and these estimates will help determine the importance of this component
of the benthos to total sediment-community oxygen consumption. The value of
collaborating with multiple researchers studying the same general questions from
different perspectives cannot be overestimated. For example, colleagues on both
cruises will be describing benthic community structure, suboxic and anaerobic
respiration pathways in the sediments, and carbon flux values. Additionally,
data on atmospheric, ice, and water column processes will be available under the
multidisciplinary organization of these projects. One component of this project
will provide a broader impact, beyond the scientific value of the research to be
conducted. Arctic research itself is intriguing, and carries with it a sense of
mystery. Research cruises present opportunities to demonstrate elements that are
prominent in national and state science standards: the scientific method, and
the integration of science and technology and its societal applications. In
collaboration with a Sea Grant Education Specialist, a CD-ROM will be produced
for K-12 educators that will contain photographs; data; graphs; supplemental
information about scientific topics, fauna, and geography; and interviews with
scientists, crew, and students. This CD-ROM will be distributed to teachers to
help them update existing or create new lesson plans in a variety of
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;