* 0326635
* ITR COLLAB: Theory and Software Infrastructure for a Scalable Systems Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2008
* K. Mani Chandy, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 11/30/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

Project Summary: The now well-known vision and challenge in post-genomics
biology is to make the entire process of research scalable to large networks
using high-throughput techniques and large-scale computation. Computational
biology and bioinformatics have focused attention on the need for sophisticated
methods for handling large databases and tools for modeling and simulating
complex networks. Not as widely recognized is that the scalability of the more
subtle processes of drawing meaningful and reliable scientific, medical, and
biological inferences from the wealth of data and computation is equally
important and requires the development of fundamentally new theory and software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to develop the
theoretical foundation and information technology infrastructure necessary to
accelerate progress in systems biology, with concrete demonstrations on a
variety of biological experiments. This ambitious goal requires augmenting
bioinformatics and current modeling and simulationapproaches with greater
understanding of the organizational principles underlying network complexity,
including connections with molecular details, and exploiting this understanding
to advance mainstream experimental biology. Building on recent breakthroughs in
theory and scalable algorithms for systematic robustness analysis and model
(in)validation of nonlinear network models with uncertain rate constants, the
project maps out a research path that will (1) develop the necessary rigorous
and practical mathematical theory; (2) embody it in a software environment that
supports the complex iterative processes involved in going from raw data to
modeling, analysis, and inference, with tight feedback to experimentation and
modeling throughout; and (3) apply the theory and software to specific
experimental studies in biology as a way of grounding the entire endeavor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit combines immediate practical impact
and conceptual depth. Automating and computationally augmenting scientific and
mathematical inference from noisy and incomplete data for uncertain models has
long been an elusive goal. Achieving it in the context of complex biological
systems is for the first time both a necessity and an achievable goal. To do
this, data and modeling assertions and questions must be described in a common
framework that is biologically natural, yet can be stored, manipulated, shared,
and ultimately turned over to powerful algorithms for resolution. Our objective
is to create tools which make it possible to systematically answer questions
such as: Is a proposed model consistent with experimental data? If so, is it
robust to additional perturbations that are plausible but untested? Are
different models at multiple scales of resolution consistent? What is the most
promising experiment to refute or confirm a model? Traditionally, such network-
level questions that arise naturally in biology have been considered
computationally intractable, since they are typically stochastic, nonlinear,
nonequilibrium, uncertain, involve multiple scales, and hybrid (mixing
continuous and discrete mathematics), limiting approaches to heuristic and
brute-force methods, or to extreme simplification. Recently this situation
changed profoundly, based on new methods developed by the research team and
their collaborators. A crucial insight is that evolution favors high robustness
to uncertain environments and components, yet allows severe fragility to novel
perturbations, and this "robust yet fragile" feature must be exploited
explicitly in scalable algorithmic approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact lies in the synergistic links this work forges with similar challenges
that exist throughout science and technology, such as the Internet, aerospace
systems design, materials science, multiscale physics, stochastic multiscale
chemistry, and disturbance ecology. The theoretical foundations build broadly on
robust control theory, dynamical systems, numerical analysis, operator theory,
real algebraic geometry, computational complexity theory, duality and
optimization, and semi-definite programming. The results will be made accessible
to the broadest possible audience, both with representative and challenging
experimental biology and the connections with other examples of complex systems.
The preliminary progress already made by this team is striking and has been
applied to understanding, for example, the robustness of complex control
systems, the performance of internet protocols, and
bacterial&lt;br/&gt;chemotaxis and stress response. The work is creating new
mathematics and algorithms, beginning to appear in the highest-impact journals,
and concretely demonstrating that this research can help experimental
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;Diversity and breadth appear at every level. In the
research group of the lead PI (Doyle), 6 of 11 graduate students and 2 of 4
postdoctoral scholars are women, and include a broad racial and ethnic
diversity. The other 5 co- PIs are from a broad spectrum of disciplines and
diverse but elite academic institutions, 3 are women, and all PIs have strong
and very concrete commitments to integrative, multidisciplinary research,
diversity, educational innovation, and outreach at every level including K-12.
The team members are frequent featured speakers at integrative conferences and
in interdisciplinary colloquia at premier universities, and speakers and
organizers of workshops and short courses in systems biology. This program both
directly involves leading mainstream biology, and has broad contact with it
through additional collaborations, creating conduits to broad dissemination of
the research results in biology. The team's algorithms and software
infrastructure are becoming de facto standard tools empowering research in
multiple disciplines, and forming a solid foundation upon which this program
builds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;