* 0326472
* ITR: Defending Against Virus Propagation on the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2011
* Benoit Morel, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,499,999.00

Since the Morris worm hit the Internet, the evolution of viruses and worms has
kept anti-virus analysts busy developing new scanning and detection
capabilities. New viruses continue to outsmart current technologies and wreak
havoc. It is clear that existing strategies do not suffice but rather only
contribute to the ongoing arms race between virus writers and the anti-virus
industry. This proposal addresses the question: "What is the next big break, the
next revolution in anti-virus technology?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose
a joint effort between CMU, Symantec and CERT to research global defense
mechanisms and deployment strategies. Instead of approaching the problem from
the perspective of individual nodes, this research will take on a network-wide
point of view. In addition to the immediate impact, the problem presents
research challenges that are extremely appealing to theorists and practitioners
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The preliminary study suggests that there appears to
be an analogy between the principles of self-organized criticality and virus
propagation-once the dynamic state of propagation crosses a critical level of
distribution, the virus flourishes and attains eventual prevalence. This is in
contrast to the traditional epidemic threshold that is characterized using only
static birth and death rate of the virus. Understanding this critical level of
distribution is an interesting problem, and it is likely to point to new methods
to thwart the spread of computer viruses. Studying the analogy between
mathematical models such as dynamic-state models and virus propagation is a
central theme of this proposal. The PIs propose three major thrusts in this
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Determine the topology underlying modern viruses
and worms. It has been suggested that virus propagation obeys a power-law
structure much like the physical Internet topology. However, there is no reason
to believe that viral propagations would mirror the physical topology of the
network. Rather, evidence suggests that they follow some sort of a social
network, or a random network in the case of some worms. Our work will be the
first to develop a definitive model of virus propagation topology using real
attack data and user data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Develop a new model that
captures propagation behavior on the virtual topology. Specifically, the PIs are
interested in modeling a) topology-aware propagation behavior, b) the effect of
environmental factors, and c) the dynamics between infections (dissipation) and
defenses (feedback force).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Use the mathematical models
to develop and reason about network-centric defense
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team is part of the Center for Computer
and Communications Security (C3S) at CMU. One of the center's goals is to
promote security education. We are in the process of engineering a new degree
program-Master in Information Security. We expect this collaborative research
effort to stimulate student interests and foster further research in information
security. Symantec will be an industry partner throughout this effort.
Specifically, they will supply us with their proprietary database containing an
extensive dataset with respect to virus incidents. In addition, two of the PIs
hold joint appointments with CERT (part of the Software Engineering Institute,
an FFRDC operated by CMU) and have access to a large and growing body of data
associated with real virus episodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;