* 0326553
* Collaborative Research: Interlingual Annotation of Multilingual Text Corporation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2005
* David Farwell, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2005
* USD 331,000.00

This multi-site research effort is aimed at developing a coherent, consistent,
standardized Interlingual representation along with a methodology and sharable
tools for annotating large bilingual corpora of parallel texts. It has four
central components: First, six corpora are being compiled, each consisting of a
number of texts in a particular source language along with three translations of
each text into English. Second, a standardized interlingual representation is
being developed based on a comparative analysis of these parallel text corpora.
Third, the bilingual corpora are being annotated using the standardized
interlingua and following a predefined annotation procedure. Fourth, metrics are
being developed for evaluating the accuracy and appropriateness of the
interlingual representations in terms of the grain size of the representation
given a particular task. The metrics are based on inter-coder reliability, the
growth rate of the interlingual representation, and quality of the target
language text that is be generated from the interlingua.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting annotated, multilingual, parallel corpora
will be useful as an empirical basis for developing a wide variety of
interlingual NLP systems for tasks such as machine translation, question
answering, web searching, summarization, or presentation generation, as well as
a host of other research and development efforts in theoretical and applied
linguistics, foreign language pedagogy, translation studies, and other related
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants include CRL at NMSU, ISI at
USC, UMIACS at the University of Maryland, LTI at CMU, Columbia University, and
The MITRE Corporation. The source languages include Arabic, Chinese, French,
Hindi, Japanese, Spanish and English.&lt;br/&gt;