* 0326778
* Exploring Recent Changes of Ocean Salinity Distributions in the Context of Climate Change
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Ruth Curry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 483,669.00

Because the hydrologic cycle remains one of the least well understood aspects of
the climate system, and freshwater forcing the most probable cause for
differences among climate models, the proposed research will provide an
important observational foundation for evaluating ongoing and future changes in
Earth's climate. Over the past fifty years, ocean salinity distributions have
been changing and the accumulating observational record is beginning to suggest
some trends of near global extent. Various studies have individually documented
salinity increases in tropical and subtropical surface waters of the Indo-
Pacific, Atlantic and Mediterranean in recent decades; while over the same time
period, the intermediate and deep water masses, ventilated at higher latitudes
in both hemispheres, have become increasingly fresh. The proposed research will
investigate whether these apparently large-scale and hemispherically symmetric
shifts in ocean salinity distribution can provide evidence of a change in the
planetary hydrologic cycle. It will engage in comparing the observed rates of
freshwater gains and losses in the ocean to results from climate model
simulations. Reflecting model predictions that the hydrologic cycle may have
climatically important effects on the thermohaline circulation (THC), the study
will evaluate the impacts of the observed changes in salinity and freshwater
distributions on ocean density. A systematic census of ocean property content
changes will be conducted for the Pacific, Atlantic, Arctic, and Nordic Seas
from 30 degrees S to 90 degrees N utilizing new climatology products and tools.
Volumetric integrals of salt will be used to identify first order changes in
ocean freshwater transports over the instrumental record and to estimate E-P
anomalies for the ventilated ocean layers. These anomalies will be compared to
the latest evaporation and precipitation climatology products derived from other
sources. Combining the Bergen Coupled Model with observations, the time-
dependent formation and subduction rates for Salinity Maximum Waters will be
investigated in conjunction with researchers at Laboratoire d' Oceanographie
Dynamique et de Climatologie (LODYC) in Paris, France. The observational
analyses will also be compared to results from NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL) coupled ocean-atmosphere models. These comparisons will assess
the degree to which the model projected changes in salinity resemble the
observed changes and provide perspective on whether they represent a signal of
any significance against the background variability of the climate system.
Finally, the amplitude of the dramatic freshening of the water column that has
occurred in the northern North Atlantic will be assessed in the context of
threshold values for the THC, as determined from model simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this study are
likely to be threefold. First, it will establish collaboration among researchers
from several groups, i.e., modelers and observationalists from WHOI, GFDL, and
LODYC. Second, the model-data comparisons will constitute a powerful tool for
calibrating climate simulations and may be a significant stimulus for further
model experiments to diagnose the mechanisms of hydrologic changes. Third, the
larger research community will benefit from the expansion of the HydroBase
quality-controlled database and gridded climatology products which will result
from this work.&lt;br/&gt;