* 0326999
* The Effect of Anthropogenic Disturbance on the Dynamics of Sin Nombre
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Stephen St. Jeor, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2010
* USD 1,933,943.00

Sin Nombre hantavirus (SN) is a recently discovered virus carried by deermice
that causes disease with high mortality in humans. Several recent studies have
proposed that human disturbance of habitat significantly affects the number of
deermice infected with SN. Given unprecedented rates of disturbance and limited
understanding of the mechanisms governing variation in SN infection, a thorough
study of how disturbance affects SN dynamics is warranted. The central focus of
the proposed study is to determine how human disturbance affects SN prevalence
in deermice and other reservoirs. To address this issue, a multifaceted research
program is proposed that includes empirical and theoretical work. The field data
will be used to determine the underlying mechanisms responsible for differences
in prevalence. These ground-based data will be used to generate predictive
mathematical models of prevalence using aerial and satellite
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include
education, interdisciplinary research and national security. Several
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained as part of this research.
The project unites scientists from diverse fields (geography, mathematics,
ecology, virology). Lastly, the research will yield critical information on the
biology of Sin Nombre virus, which is listed as a biological agent of concern
for national security.&lt;br/&gt;