* 0326540
* ITR:     Little Engines of Proof
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2007
* Natarajan Shankar, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2007
* USD 904,648.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computers are primarily used for automating
numerical&lt;br/&gt;calculation but they can also be programmed to make
inferences through&lt;br/&gt;symbolic calculation. Powerful automated inference
is key to a flexible&lt;br/&gt;and reliable computing infrastructure. Such
technology can be used to&lt;br/&gt;build and analyze abstract models of complex
systems, find bugs and&lt;br/&gt;optimizations in software and hardware designs,
and in the design of more&lt;br/&gt;expressive programming languages. These
engineering applications of&lt;br/&gt;inference technology require lightweight
inference tools that are&lt;br/&gt;embeddable and
composable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Infer! project is a collaborative effort
between SRI International,&lt;br/&gt;Clarkson University, and Pace University to
construct an open foundational&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure for inferential software
components. The Infer! project&lt;br/&gt;provides an abstract interface to a
range of basic inference capabilities&lt;br/&gt;through a logic middleware
layer. The Infer! middleware also includes&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms for combining
and mapping between different theories and levels&lt;br/&gt;of abstraction. The
theoretical and pedagogical foundations for the&lt;br/&gt;Infer! project are
developed in a discipline called "inferential analysis"&lt;br/&gt;that studies
efficient inference components and the architectural&lt;br/&gt;framework within
which they can be combined. The Infer! technology is&lt;br/&gt;used to explore
novel and exciting applications including the qualitative&lt;br/&gt;modeling of
complex phenomena and high-assurance open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts in research and education are
sought for this project&lt;br/&gt;by decomposing traditionally monolithic
inference frameworks into useful&lt;br/&gt;components that can be exchanged in
open source form and embedded within&lt;br/&gt;open verification technology. A
key part of the project is an outreach&lt;br/&gt;effort to establish standards
and interfaces for an open exchange of&lt;br/&gt;components within the
verification and analysis research community. This&lt;br/&gt;effort includes
active cooperation with the open source software community&lt;br/&gt;through the
development of verification components that can be integrated&lt;br/&gt;for use
in constructing dependable, verified, and self-checking software.&lt;br/&gt;