* 0326311
* Collaborative ITR:      Rigorous Techniques in Computational Problems with Distributed Adaptive Mesh Refinement
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,177,681.00

This ITR-Medium project will combine expertise in applied mathematics, numerical
relativity, computer science, and astrophysics to develop techniques needed to
simulate realistic strong-gravitational-field astrophysical systems. To this
end, a driver-problem is chosen that involves solving the equations of
Einstein's theory of general relativity coupled to electromagnetism and
hydrodynamics to describe phenomena such as black hole formation and the
accretion of matter around a black hole. Such efforts have historically
encountered a number of difficulties, and therefore a number of advanced
techniques will be brought to bear upon these problems.&lt;br/&gt;Maintaining
stability in such evolutions will be studied using properties of hyperbolic
equations, and numerical techniques will be developed to take advantage of
useful analytical properties. At the same time, development of distributed
adaptive mesh refinement will allow for the most efficient use of computational
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of physical phenomena are modeled by
these and similar equations, and thus the techniques and developments studied
here should be applicable to a wide range of problems. The physical situations
under study attract much interest, and better models of their dynamics
will&lt;br/&gt;benefit, in particular, the analysis involved in the LIGO project
to detect gravitational waves. This project also will train scientists in these
methods as well as publicize them with papers and conferences.