* 0326517
* ITR: Adaptive Query Processing Architecture for Streaming Geospatial Image Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Susan Ustin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 09/30/2008
* USD 800,000.00

This research project will develop models, techniques, and architectures for the
adaptive processing of real-time remotely sensed, streaming geospatial satellite
image data. It will develop a generic stream format, called GeoStreams, for
remotely sensed, geospatial image data, based on the widely used image data
formats to process continuous queries in an adaptive fashion and to deliver
tailored geospatial image data to consumers. The GeoStream query model and query
processing framework will extend current models and techniques for processing
continuous queries on data streams to handle complex query frameworks on
geospatial data. The main focus will be on query processing techniques to
optimize multi-query processing of spatial and sensor band selections.
Additional important operators on GeoStreams include sensor band algebra, pixel
neighborhood processing, spatial filtering, aggregation, and spatial reference
transformations. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA)
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) data, directly
accessible in this project, will serve as a primary testbed for the research. A
major testbed application will be in support of water balance applications. The
goal is to calculate spatially distributed daily reference evapotranspiration
maps for the State of California at high spatial resolution (1 km2-16 km2), and
in real-time. The methodology will use GOES data, properly combined with weather
station data, and ancillary spatial data such as digital elevation maps.