* 0326434
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated studies of biological community structure at deep sea hydrothermal vents
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* George Luther, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2008
* USD 353,310.00

This ivestigation represent an integrated program designed to assess factors
responsible for biological community structure at hydrothermal vents in the area
between 9'49.6 1' and 9'5 0.3 6'N (known as the Biologic?Geologic Transect)
along the crest of the East Pacific Rise (EPR). The objective of this
multi?disciplinary effort is to gain a fundamental new understanding of the
biological, chemical, and physical characteristics, variability, and processes
affecting organism community structure (from microbes to megafauna) in deep?sea
vent systems. Study sites have been selected that should maximize integration
with a variety of geophysical (e.g., seismic) and geochemical (e.g., major
element) studies being proposed by other workers. This project will address the
following broad hypotheses: (1) Dramatic changes in biological community
structure at vents are correlated with seismic, tectonic and/or volcanic
activity within the region; (2) Vent fluid chemistry (principally sulfide
speciation and concentration) is the predominant factor controlling the
structure of vent communities; and (3) The structure of microbial communities
associated with diffuse flows varies with time, temperature, and in response to
differences in oxygen, iron, manganese and sulfur speciation.&lt;br/&gt; At
several of the 9'50N vent sites that formed during an April 1991 eruptive event
in the area, mussels now dominate the faunal assemblages, while other habitats
within the region are dominated either by Tevniajerichonana or Riftiapachyptila.
The present approach builds upon the extensive data sets obtained at these sites
over the past decade and proposes a series of in situ measurements, sampling
approaches and manipulative experiments conducted using the deep submergence
vehicle AIvin to gain a more detailed understanding of factors controlling
biological community structure in these hydrothermal ecosystems. To this end, in
situ voltarnmetric sensor packages will be used to measure chemicals, oxygen, pH
and temperature over time in a variety of vestimentiferan and mussel
microhabitats from which fluid samples will be obtained for microbiological
characterization. Manipulative experiments will focus on removal and subsequent
exclusion of mussels from selected regions of mussel?dominated assemblages,
coupled with detailed geochernical and microbiological characterization of
associated microhabitats before and after mussel removal.
Subsequent&lt;br/&gt;recruitment and colonization within exclusion cages in
denuded areas, as well as in "control" areas&lt;br/&gt;within adjacent regions
of the population, will be followed through successive removal and
analysis&lt;br/&gt;of deployed basalt blocks over time. Concomitant chemical,
physical and microbiological analyses&lt;br/&gt;of fluids will permit
correlation of these parameters with temporal changes in community
structure.&lt;br/&gt; All of the investigators are committed, as they have been
in recent years, to active involvement in a myriad of educational and public
outreach activities. An integral part of our proposed effort will be to closely
coordinate the proposed studies with, formal and informal education and outreach
activities associated with an IMAX film (Volcanoes of the Deep Sea), scheduled
soon for release (fall 2003). In conjunction with Stephen Low Productions (the
company producing the film) they will put together a formal Teacher's Guide and
create a film?associated website www.volcanoesofthedeepsea.com), for which the
domain has already been secured. An integral part of the subject matter of the
film focuses on changes in biological community structure that have occurred
over the past decade in the vicinity of 9'50'N. During the course of each of the
proposed cruises to the area, they plan to involve museums and aquaria (i.e.,
those public education institutions having IMAX theaters) throughout the
country, together with science educators and the network of NSF COSEE Centers
(Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence) directly through "real time"
satellite networking tied directly to the website, providing daily data logs,
images, streaming video, etc. This initiative will be closely coordinated with
the Ridge 2000 Education and Outreach Program.&lt;br/&gt;