* 0326153
* IERI:  Integrating Speech and User Modeling in a Reading Tutor that Listens
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Joseph Beck, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2008
* USD 6,042,230.00

How can interactive systems model their users better by listening to them?
Conversely, how can systems listen better by exploiting user models? We propose
to investigate these questions in the context of a inter-disciplinary challenge
problem: developing a computational student model of children's oral reading --
that is, a model of individual student knowledge, behavior, and learning that
can guide a tutor. This work will integrate and extend methods from speech
technology, cognitive psychology, user modeling, and intelligent
tutors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will draw on, contribute to, and
test and refine the scalability of an innovative, technology-enabled
intervention and unique research platform developed with previous NSF support:
an automated Reading Tutor that displays stories on a computer screen, uses a
speech recognizer to listen to children read aloud, responds with spoken and
graphical assistance, and helps them learn to read. Its ability to listen
enables novel continuous assessments of students' reading progress. As of 2003,
the Reading Tutor was used daily by hundreds of children on 216 computers in
nine schools. The proposed work will use speech and other valuable data captured
by the Reading Tutor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children who use the Reading Tutor
have improved significantly more in reading comprehension and other skills than
statistically matched controls. However, its current effectiveness is limited by
inability to accurately hear and model the student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
challenge is to analyze children's oral reading and estimate various component
literacy skills at a sufficiently fine grain size to guide the decisions of an
intelligent tutor, so as to adapt to students' individual or collective
educational needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of developing a student
model of oral reading will provide a problem-driven basis for guiding the work
and quantifying its success. Incorporating successively better models in the
Reading Tutor will both test their accuracy and put them to immediate use in
improved literacy tutoring. Controlled studies will investigate how much
successive versions of the Reading Tutor increase learning gains for different
types of students. Automated experiments embedded in the Reading Tutor will help
analyze which tutorial actions help in which cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research combines broad technical and direct societal impact. Expected
technical contributions of this work include advances in speech recognition
(especially for young and disfluent speakers), user modeling, intelligent
tutoring, and automated assessment of comprehension and other literacy skills.
Broader impacts include improved literacy for thousands of children who use the
Reading Tutor during the study, and many more thereafter.&lt;br/&gt;