* 0326281
* ITR:     Deploying the LIGO Data Grid; Grid-enabling the Gravitational Wave Analysis Community
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Lee Finn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,000,000.00

This ITR-Medium award supports the deployment of a Grid-enabled LIGO (Laser
Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory) Data Analysis environment. The
Grid paradigm has been adopted by the LIGO collaboration to address its
computational needs as it prepares to conduct groundbreaking analyses of its
first data in the field of gravitational wave astrophysics. The research program
addresses issues relating to the authentication and secure access to LIGO's
computational resources using the Globus package. It also provides the tools and
the infrastructure for distributing and sharing LIGO's large volume of data
across the geographically distributed LIGO data analysis resources and
community. Finally, it incorporates Grid services to a primarily control-room
type data analysis environment called DMT (Data Monitoring Tool) thus making it
available to the wider LIGO community as a Grid-based application.

This research takes the Grid concept from a prototype stage to real deployment
and every day use for a large scientific experiment. This research experience
and the products delivered from it will have broad relevance to the overall Grid
and Information Technology initiative as well as to on-going work within the
GriPhyN and iVDGL Grid development projects. Many of the delivered components
will be sufficiently generic to be of use and interest to other large data
analysis projects.