* 0326902
* Acquisition of a MC-ICPMS for Earth Sciences Research in New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Lars Borg, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2007
* USD 498,100.00

EAR-0326902&lt;br/&gt;Asmerom&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New analytical capabilities
in Earth Sciences have made possible fundamental breakthroughs in our
understanding of vital processes, ranging from those occurring at the surface,
such as climate change, to those that occur deep within the earth, such as
melting and melt transfer. Recent developments in the measurement of naturally
occurring heavy isotopes, based on new-generation magnetic sector multi-
collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS), stand to
provide unprecedented gains in fine-scale resolution of time-scales and domains
of geological change. For example, our effort to understand annual scale climate
variability in continents, which is essential for arriving at a mechanistic
understanding of rapid climate change, is currently frustrated by the lack of
precision of our current instrumentation. The acquisition of a MC-ICP-MS through
this NSF grant, with contribution from the University of New Mexico, will
provide us the tool by which to gain the needed precision. Similarly, our work
on time-scale of magma generation, differentiation and transport, which utilizes
data of uranium decay series isotopes, will benefit from the new
instrumentation, both with respect to getting more precise data for those
nuclides for which we have capabilities, and also allow us to do measurement of
other essential nuclides, such as the isotopes of protactinium. Other areas of
research interests that will be impacted include terrestrial and planetary
projects that utilize long-lived isotopic systems that our current
instrumentation can not measure, such as osmium isotopes, or those that are
difficult to do, including hafnium isotopes. Recently funded environmental
isotope tracer projects, which require high throughput of data, will greatly
benefit from the added capabilities. The Laboratory is also deeply involved in
training students from New Mexico universities at all levels and from very
diverse social backgrounds. These new analytical capabilities stand to
profoundly benefit a wide range of research, training and outreach activities at
these New Mexico institutions of higher learning.&lt;br/&gt;