* 0326737
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Development of Geochemical Proxies for Bleaching Events and the Associated Stressors in the Great Barrier Reef
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Bonnye Ingram, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Coral reef ecosystems worldwide have been subjected to increasing natural and
human-caused disturbances over the last few decades. One of the negative effects
many of these stressors have on coral reefs is the breakdown of the symbiotic
relationship between coral polyps and the photosynthetic algae, zooxanthellae,
contained in the polyp tissues. This leads to loss of pigmentation, or
bleaching, of the corals. Most bleaching events result from the loss of the
zooxanthellae and/or the loss of the pigments of the zooxanthellae. If the
magnitude and duration of the bleaching event are great enough, coral mortality
will result, and lasting changes in the reef ecosystem may occur. This doctoral
dissertation research project aims to assess whether coral bleaching events are
increasing in frequency and to evaluate causative environmental factors for the
bleaching events. The objective of this project is to develop and calibrate a
methodology for identifying bleaching events using stable isotopic and trace
element analysis in coral cores. To achieve this objective, a 15-year time
series will be developed of oxygen and carbon stable isotopic measurements along
with trace element measurements of strontium/calcium ratios on Porites coral
cores obtained from Pandora Reef and the Keppel Islands on Great Barrier Reef
(GBR). Large-scale bleaching events in 1991 and 1998 around both regions were
probably caused by decreased salinity due to flooding, followed by elevated sea
surface temperatures (SST). To calibrate methods, the student will compare the
stable isotopic and trace element data from bleached and unbleached corals
during the 1991 and 1998 events with in situ measurements and observations of
SSTs and salinity on the GBR. The calibration effort will aid in the development
and interpretation of continuous, long-term records of coral bleaching events
for two regions of the Great Barrier Reef (Pandora Island and the Keppel
Islands) as well as French Polynesia.

Coral reef ecosystems in the Pacific have been severely affected by mass
bleaching events, and as a result, the mortality and changes in the reef
ecosystems could have a dramatic effect on the people and countries in the
region. The geochemical records generated as a result of this project will
provide important information about the long-term history bleaching events on
the GBR. These data will allow a more informed analysis of whether bleaching
events are increasing in frequency as a result of human-caused climatic and
environmental conditions or whether they are a natural phenomenon. The proposed
research will provide scientists, resource managers, and policy makers with a
better understanding of the long-term history of reefs and the potentially
catastrophic impact of bleaching events. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.