* 0326685
* Biogeochemical Cycling of Domoic acid in Natural Waters: The Influence of Bioactive Trace Metal Complexation and Photochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Wright, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2007
* USD 485,083.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0326685&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Domoic acid, a
powerful marine toxin produced by Pseudo-nitzschia species, is remarkably
pervasive in North American coastal waters. This toxin is a threat to public
health and some marine life, and has resulted in severe economic losses in the
shellfish and crustacean harvesting industry. Originally discovered as the
causative agent in an episode of fatal human poisoning in eastern Canada in
1987, domoic acid has subsequently been linked to other epizootics, particularly
on the western coast of North America where it has resulted in the death of
seabirds and mammals. Despite the significance of domoic acid to the
biogeochemistry of marine systems, virtually nothing is known about the fate of
that fraction of the toxin not transferred through the food chain - arguably the
vast majority of toxic material produced during harmful algal
blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the University of
North Carolina at Wilmington will determine the processes that control the
biogeochemical cycling of domoic acid once it is released into the water column.
This is significant because preliminary evidence indicates water column
concentrations of domoic acid can reach as high as 100 nM during a bloom event.
The research team will address the role of light (photochemically-mediated) and
dark (microbial and/or chemical degradation) processes and trace metal
complexation on the biogeochemical cycling and fate of this powerful toxin in
natural waters. They hypothesize that photochemical reactions are particularly
important because preliminary data indicates domoic acid is rapidly converted to
a series of geometric isomers and decarboxylated derivatives when exposed to
short-term irradiations using simulated sunlight. Photochemical degradation of
domoic acid is extremely significant because it reduces the lifetime of this
powerful toxin in surface seawater where it is produced, but at the same time
may also produce more toxic photo-produced byproducts. A second hypothesis,
based on recent evidence showing strong complexes are formed by domoic acid with
Fe(III) and Cu(II), is that trace metals play an important role in the fate of
the toxin once it is released into natural waters. Complexation of domoic acid
by these redox-active trace metals is important because the complexes will have
different photochemical reactivities than uncomplexed domoic acid (or its photo-
isomers) and may therefore have very different residence times and fates in the
environment. The experimental approach will be to irradiate domoic acid in
seawater to its three geometric isomers and decarboxylated derivatives under a
variety of conditions to quantify rates of photochemical degradation and
identify the byproducts produced. Similar experiments using dark controls will
provide information on kinetics of microbial and chemical degradation in coastal
waters. A series of metal- binding studies with the same suite of compounds will
determine the degree of metal complexation and the strength of the complexes
formed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is expected to provide
significant new information regarding the chemical and physical factors
influencing the residence time and fate of domoic acid and its byproducts in
natural waters. This proposal directly addresses fundamental ecological and
oceanographic questions related to domoic acid, a powerful and pervasive toxin
present in frequent Pseudo-nitzschia blooms in North American coastal waters. A
major part of the requested funding will be used to support a post-doctoral
researcher, a masters-level graduate student, and four undergraduate students
per year. The involvement of undergraduates will be an integral part of the
investigators research program. Young students are attracted to this type of
study because they perform environmental research of international interest. The
proposed research will continue this pattern by allowing undergraduates at a
coastal university to become involved in a high profile research question
associated with toxic algal blooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;