* 0326387
* ITR:     Research on the Profiling Problem in Cybersecurity and Anti-Terrorism
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2010
* Peter Chen, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,800,000.00

This project proposes to perform research on new and theoretically sound
profiling techniques for detection and identification of terrorists and cyber
attacks. A common thread of problems in such attacks is how can we detect "bad
guys" from good guys quickly? Various scientific techniques such as data
modeling and integration, meta-data management, discrete mathematical models and
algorithms, data mining, machine learning, visualization and statistical
techniques will be investigated. For example, new mathematical models and
algorithms for profiling "bad guys/transactions" will be developed and tested.
One research direction is to formulate the problem as a more generalized
formulation of the current set covering problem. Efficient algorithms will be
developed, and performance bounds of certain algorithms will be studied.
Simulations will be done to compare the performance of the new algorithms with
conventional algorithms, and the pros and cons of these algorithms will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making the models more realistic and testing
the algorithms/techniques against more realistic data sets will be done by
teaming with LSU's National Center for Security Research and Training (NCSRT) ,
FBI, AFRL, and others. The project team consists of diverse ethnic groups and
plans to organize a workshop dedicated to women and under-represented
minority.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project can have significant
impact on the scientific community and on the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;