* 0326985
* International Workshop on Science, Technology and International Affairs:  An Historical Perspective, March 2004, at Georgetown University
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Kai-Henrik Barth, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 9,804.00

This workshop aims to bring together scholars from the USA, Europe and Latin
America who will explore the place of science and technology in international
affairs, above all since World War II. Its seeks to go beyond the usual studies
of the technological arms race and the space race between the superpowers to
show how the content of scientific and technological knowledge is integrated
into policy debates and informs negotiations between states and power blocs in
the international arena. It will emphasize the contrast between the need to base
decisions on well-established truth-claims, and the inherent fragility and
tentativeness of those truth-claims. While major political initiatives and
policy decisions should ideally be based on "objective" knowledge in many areas
of global concern today (most obviously, global warming and climate change) the
evidence is itself highly contested and politicized. This workshop will explore
the significance of this uncertainty for the political and policy process,
opening a dialogue between historians and sociologists of science and
technology, scholars in international affairs, and policy makers themselves. In
line with this intellectual agenda, the PI is an historian of science and
technology, while the Co-PI is a researcher in international affairs. The
project is not only intended to facilitate multidisciplinary interactions
between researchers. It also aims to reach out to graduate students,
policymakers and administrators. To this end the workshop will be held at the
Center for Contemporary Arab Studies at Georgetown University in Washington DC
in March 2004. Approximately 20 leading scholars have already expressed their
willingness to participate in the project, and have provided topics and
abstracts of their proposed presentations. About 15-20 additional people from
the local area, including students and practitioners in the policy field, will
be encouraged to participate. In addition, the promotion of the project and the
dissemination of its results, will be secured by building a webpage that will
originally be hosted at George Washington University. The PI and Co-PI will also
co-edit Volume 21 of Osiris (an annual research journal devoted to the history
of science and its cultural influences, published by the History of Science
Society) in which the best papers presented at the workshop will be published in
2006.

