* 0327240
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Toward an Explanation of U.S. Prison Unrest, 1974 - 2000
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* John McCarthy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,480.00

The astounding increases in the rates of incarceration in prisons across U.S.
states during the last three decades have received widespread attention from
social scientists. However, less attention has been paid to how prison
institutions have been affected. How have state prisons changed across time in
their structural characteristics, institutional efficiency, internal conditions,
state-level political context and, most importantly, their level of social
unrest? How do changes in the structural characteristics, institutional
efficiency, internal conditions, and political context affect levels of prison
social unrest? The proposed research depends upon a synthesis of four theories
of prison social unrest (administrative-control, inmate-balance, breakdown and
state-centered) to guide the development of hypotheses about the relationship
between prison social unrest and its predictors across prisons, across state
prison systems and through time. Hypotheses will be tested with longitudinal
data on the population of state prisons that is in the process of being
assembled from a number of sources. These include, but are not restricted to,
the U.S. Census of Prisons, which includes six waves of data on all male-state
prisons for the years 1974, 1979, 1984, 1990, 1995 and 2000; information on
prisons at the state-level gathered by the American Corrections Association for
the years 1979 through 2001; and the Expenditure and Employment Data for the
Criminal Justice System over the past 25 years. This diverse set of sources will
provide multiple measures of key theoretical variables across time and at both
the individual prison level and state prison system level. In order to model the
distinct characteristics of the aggregated data set appropriate multilevel
Poisson regression techniques will be utilized. Three-level models will be
specified to initially determine the pattern of change in prison social unrest
over time. In addition, the multilevel models will allow the examination of the
relationship between prison level and state-level predictors of prison social
unrest. The broader impact of this research lies in its potential contribution
by systematically describing spatial and temporal variation in U.S. prison
social unrest and conditions over the last three decades as well as by showing
how variation in prison conditions and contexts dampen or encourage prison
unrest. Considering that the current prison population exceeds more than a
million inmates and annual expenditures for corrections is now straining almost
every state budget, prisons are a critical issue on the domestic agenda. Policy
makers and those responsible for carrying out policies will be better prepared
to make informed decisions regarding prisons with the benefit of a historical
understanding of the changes these institutions have undergone, as will be
illuminated by this project. Moreover, identifying the causal mechanisms of
social unrest that endangers both inmates and prison personnel will be helpful
in informing both future and existing prison
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;