* 0327256
* Collaborative Research: Air-Sea CO2 Fluxes and Surface Physical Processes in the Labrador Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Wade McGillis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 243,454.00

A study of the air-sea flux of carbon dioxide and the surface physical processes
controlling it will be conducted during the Labrador Sea spring bloom. The
Labrador Sea is highly significant as one of the areas of North Atlantic Deep
Water (NADW) formation. During the late spring months, the Labrador Sea
experiences a strong plankton bloom, and is an intense sink for carbon dioxide.
Deep convection during the subsequent winter mixes the carbon dioxide rich
waters throughout the water column. The newly formed NADW is transported
southward towards the Antarctic, via a system of deep currents. Given the
circulation time scale of order 1000 years, atmospheric gases within the NADW
are essentially sequestered. While mid-latitude areas of the global ocean are
equally strong sinks of carbon dioxide, gases absorbed into the ocean at these
latitudes remain in the near surface waters, and are returned to the atmosphere
on the decadal time scale. Hence the gas exchange characteristics in the
Labrador Sea are of particular interest because it is one of the few areas of
the global ocean that is a long term carbon dioxide sink. The ability to predict
and forecast air-sea carbon dioxide fluxes over large areas is also necessary to
quantify the adjacent terrestrial carbon budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this work relate to improvement of our ability to predict
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, and to assess how it might change climate
under various scenarios. The large uncertainty surrounding the flux of carbon
dioxide between the atmosphere and ocean prevent us from determining the
partitioning of the sink of anthropogenic carbon dioxide between the ocean and
the terrestrial biosphere. This uncertainty also limits our ability to
accurately model future atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. The process study we
have proposed will improve the accuracy of the global ocean carbon dioxide flux
estimates and increase our understanding of the causes of its variability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will involve students as undergraduate and
post-graduate research assistants. The University of Miami is a Hispanic Serving
Institution and thereby fosters the participation of under-represented groups in
science and engineering. The data will be made available through several data
bases via the World Wide Web. The project will contribute to the active outreach
activities coordinated through the Dean's Office at the University of
Miami.&lt;br/&gt;