* 0327544
* Antarctic Intermediate Water Formation in the Southeast Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Lynne Talley, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2010
* USD 2,163,543.00

0327544/Talley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project aims at
characterizing the processes responsible for the formation of Antarctic
Intermediate water (AAIW) in the southeast Pacific. The plan is to study (1)
northward Ekman advection of Antarctic Circumpolar Current surface waters across
the SAF, (2) convection driven by local air-sea fluxes, and (3) northward
subduction of AAIW across the northern front bounding the deep mixing region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic Intermediate Water (AAIW) is a low salinity,
high oxygen and low potential vorticity (thick) water mass that fills almost all
of the southern hemisphere and the tropical oceans at about 800 to 1000 m depth.
As the densest of the circumpolar Subantarctic Mode Waters (SAMW), AAIW is
formed as a thick, outcropping mixed layer in the southeastern Pacific just
north of the Subantarctic Front (SAF). SAMW and AAIW formation have a major
impact on the oceanic sink for anthropogenic CO2, whose largest uncertainty is
at intermediate depths. AAIW has a major role in southern hemisphere freshwater
transport and as such, can impact global-scale ocean overturning processes. AAIW
is the only intermediate-depth, large-scale water mass that has not been studied
at its winter source, despite general knowledge of the location of the source
region for several decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of a
winter hydrographic survey of the AAIW outcropping region and the fronts that
bound and a summer survey following the winter survey to study the evolution,
restratification, and dispersal of the previous winter's waters. Results from
this region will be relevant to Subantarctic Mode Waters (SAMW) formation in
other regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The high-quality data set
collected under this project with a comprehensive coverage in winter and summer
will fill an important and large gap in global ocean observations for physical
processes that impact long-term climate change. Training will be provided for a
graduate student and a post-doc. The proposed work will strengthen collaboration
between U.S. and Chilean scientists. The investigators will continue working
with Chilean and European Union graduate students, at no cost to
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;