* 0327633
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Multi-Resolution Inversion of Tectonically Driven Spatio-Temporal Gravity Signals Using Wavelets and Satellite Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* C. K. Shum, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

The primary objectives of this investigation include interdisciplinary studies
of tectonically driven spatio-temporal signals resulting from complex
geophysical processes. These processes include convergent plate boundaries,
earthquake deformation cycle, mantle convection, intra-plate deformations and
Glacial Isostatic Adjustment (GIA). At present, these processes generate small
but measurable signals in the form of surface deformations, which at present can
only be detected over land by either point measurements using GPS, or on small
spatial scales (<100 km) using InSAR. These "slow deformation" signals have
spatial scales longer than hundreds of km to continental and planetary scales,
and temporal scales of a year to decades, and millennia. The Earth's gravity
field and its spatio-temporal variations, providing insight on the integrated
mass redistributions within the Earth's systems, represent a unique fundamental
measurable quantity to directly study mechanisms which drive these complex
processes with many degrees of freedom. For the first time ever, dedicated
satellite gravity missions like CHAMP, GRACE and GOCE are anticipated to measure
these small, broad-scale tectonically driven signals in the form of integrated
mass change and vertical deformations. However, the contemporary mathematical
functions to represent the geopotential are conventionally spherical harmonics
which do not allow spatial localization. 3-D wavelets have notable advantages
over spherical harmonics, e.g. for multi-resolution representation and
localization, however, would have to satisfy the so-called "boundary-value
problem". The overarching scientific goal is to develop multi-resolution based
3-D wavelet tools to enhance the tectonically driven spatio-temporal gravity
signals for improved analyses and to make progress towards addressing the major
open scientific questions of understanding the driving mechanisms of these "slow
deformation" over land, ocean and ice-covered surfaces. The investigators
propose to develop mathematical tools based on two wavelet approaches: (1) the
rotational invariant spherical wavelet function, and (2) the non-separable
compactly supported tensor-product wavelets to represent the spatio-temporal
gravity field signals and perform geophysical "inversions" to enhance the
signals. The "inversion" of these gravity signals represents stringent
mathematical and numerical challenges, especially in light of the need for
multi-resolution representation to enhance localized signals and to consider
extending wavelets to include the time dimension. The broader impacts and
anticipated results include the development of 3-D wavelet tools capable of
solving the boundary value problem and inversion of gravity signals using
satellite data and to demonstrate and apply the technique in the Nazca and South
American plate region. The developed mathematical tools are intended to be among
the first steps to "popularize" the use of 3-D wavelets for teaching and
research, and are applicable to numerous interdisciplinary scientific studies
and engineering problems.

