* 0327518
* International Workshop on Molecular Methods in Soil Biological and Biochemical Diversity in Terrestrial Ecosystems.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* David Coleman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2005
* USD 20,000.00

Soils are the central organizing entities in terrestrial ecosystems and possess
extremely diverse prokaryotic and eukaryotic biota. They are physically and
chemically complex as well, with micro- and macro-aggregates embedded within a
solid-liquid and gaseous matrix that is continually changing in response to
natural and human-induced perturbations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances
in molecular techniques in systematics provide opportunities for the study of
biodiversity and biocomplexity of soil biota. The workshop as proposed builds on
these opportunities to address soil biodiversity, focusing particularly on the
application of molecular methods for its measurement. The workshop will include
presentation of jointly authored papers, each followed by working groups led by
Taiwanese and North American scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Taiwanese
government will provide support for all Taiwanese participants and all local
housing and per diem costs, transportation, etc., for the foreign participants.
NSF funding will be jointly provided by the Ecosystem Studies Program and the
Office of International Programs, and will be applied to international travel
costs for 10 senior and 5-6 junior (postdoctoral) participants from the United
States. Also invited are a few colleagues from Canada and the Antipodes
(Australia and New Zealand), who will provide their own travel funding.
&lt;br/&gt;