* 0327056
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Anthropogenic Change on the Ecology of Human Pathogens in a Eutrophying Estuary: The Neuse River Estuary, NC
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Richard Luettich, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,659,055.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE 0327056 /
OCE-0326811&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 75% of people live in coastal
watersheds, with coastal urbanization and agricultural and industrial
development increasing at rapid rates. Accelerating nutrient- and pathogen-
enriched wastewater discharge accompanying coastal development is putting
unprecedented pressure on estuaries that receive and process the bulk of land-
based runoff. Enhanced nutrient loading has led to increased primary
productivity or eutrophication, the symptoms of which pose a significant threat
to coastal resources and ecological health. This eutrophication leads to organic
matter enrichment of affected waters. Most human pathogens in wastewater
discharges are heterotrophs and may thrive under these enriched organic matter
conditions. As a result, pathogen populations may increase under nutrient
loading leading to eutrophication, as will human exposures and health
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel and University of North Carolina at Charlotte will
focus on understanding the relationships between nutrient loading in the Neuse
River Estuary, growth and fate of microorganisms linked to infectious disease,
and subsequent impacts on human health. The long-term goal is the creation of a
computational model useful in estimating the effect of watershed protection
policies on ecological and human health. While the research is not strictly
focused on human health risk, it will use a conceptual framework derived from
human health risk assessment, and data collected under that framework, to focus
on more fundamental scientific research in a way that ensures optimal reduction
of uncertainties in current understanding of the links described above. The
research will focus on microorganisms that are (i) of great significance to
human health, (ii) the subject of research expertise by the PIs, and (iii)
representative of the more general class of infectious disease agents whose fate
is governed by environmental conditions in estuaries. An Advisory Board of
distinguished scientists will guide the entire project from the range of
disciplines involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: This research
will employ an interdisciplinary approach by bringing together investigators
familiar with estuarine dynamics, pathogen ecology, and human health risk. The
result will be a new research program in the Ecology of Infectious Disease at
the participating institutions. A modeling framework will combine experimental
and field information to examine underlying mechanisms, environmental controls,
and trophic interactions in a well-characterized estuary experiencing advanced
symptoms of eutrophication. The result will be enhanced interactions between
experimentalists and modelers, ensuring that the two groups function as a single
research unit. The research site, the Neuse River Estuary (NRE), is an important
fisheries and recreational resource and key tributary of North Carolina's
Pamlico Sound, the Nation's 2nd largest estuarine complex and the East Coast's
most important fisheries nursery. Study of this system will provide a conceptual
and computational framework for studying other estuarine systems in which the
impacts of nutrient/organic matter concentrations on the diversity, growth,
survival, and proliferation of a range of particle-associated and freely
suspended bacterial human pathogens might be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research project will
facilitate a collaborative State-University-Industry water quality monitoring
and assessment infrastructure, fostering a synergistic research atmosphere. It
will also develop a novel, fundamental process-level understanding of the
hydrologic, nutritional and ecological controls of human pathogen dynamics in a
representative and tractable shallow estuary impacted by human development, with
direct applicability to policy analyses in such systems. The project will serve
as a keystone for an. experiential learning program for advanced undergraduates
at an existing field site, preparing science undergraduates for careers at the
interface of fundamental and applied science. Graduate students at both the MSc
and PhD levels will be involved in intensive molecular and. Classical
oceanographic training as part of this project. High school students, educators,
and the public at large will actively participate in field experience seminars,
using streaming video and interactive web-based activities as part of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;