* 0327875
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Geomagnetic Data Assimilation and Dynamo Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Weijia Kuang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 502,880.00

Understanding the origin of the Earth's magnetic field remains one of the most
challenging problems in Earth Science, a problem that is central to
understanding the dynamics of the Earth's deep interior and its interactions
with other parts of the Earth system. Recent years have seen great advances on
two separate fronts in our understanding of the origin of the field. First,
numerical geodynamo modeling has progressed to the point where numerical models
generate magnetic fields of similar morphology and temporal behavior to the
Earth's field. Second, the combination of a new generation of satellite magnetic
field measurements and advances in geomagnetic field modeling are providing new
observational insight into the geodynamo process. But, these two approaches
exist in large part in isolation from one another. A collaborative research is
necessary to integrate these approaches: assimilating geomagnetic observations
into core dynamo modeling to (1) understand better and forecast variations of
the geomagnetic field, and to (2) provide additional insight into the dynamics
of magnetic field generation in the core.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a data
assimilation system will be defined and developed with the MoSST core dynamics
model (a modular and scalable model) and observations of the geomagnetic field.
The proposed system is based on the ensemble Kalman filter (EnsKF) which is an
optimal assimilation method to estimate the forecast error covariance from an
ensemble of forecasts. This method eliminates the need to develop an adjoint of
the dynamo model, and reduces the computational cost of calculating the error
covariances. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed research include
(1) the first-ever assimilation system in geomagnetic/geodynamo field; (2)
prediction of changes in Earth's magnetic environment with surface observation
and numerical core dynamics model. The broader impacts of the proposed research
include (1) application of geomagnetic observations to numerical dynamo modeling
research; (2) application of core dynamics to geomagnetic field modeling
research; (3) application of core dynamics research to other geophysical
studies, e.g. Earth's rotation variation and time variable gravity field; (4)
new education/training project in geomagnetic assimilation