* 0327591
* Mantle Petrology and Tectonics at the Gakkel Ridge
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2007
* USD 385,008.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Dick&lt;br/&gt;OPP-
0327591&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will study
the petrology and tectonic setting of Arctic Ocean abyssal peridotites from the
Gakkel Ridge, a previously inaccessible geologic end-member for sea floor
spreading. It provides a window into the Earth's interior which critical for
geochemical mapping. Due to ultraslow spreading rates, the Gakkel is
tectonically distinct from other ridges with no transform faults along its 1800
km length, with thin highly variable crust, and abundant mantle exposures. The
Arctic Mid-Ocean Ridge Expedition (AMORE) was the first attempt to sample this
ridge and the expedition succeeded beyond all expectations. There were 200
successful dredges. From 3degreesE to 87degreesE, the Ridge proved to consist of
local volcanic centers linked by sparsely magmatic segments and peridotites were
dredged at 36 rift valley walls and floor locations. The Principal Investigator
will analyze peridotite modal mineralogy and trace and major elements of about
~150-200 samples. He will also study the tectonic setting and emplacement using
dredge results and the new high-resolution Seabeam data. This research will
constrain the relationship between peridotites and basalts, the nature of mantle
melting at its lower limit, and the composition of the Arctic mantle. This will
be a unique opportunity to assess models for mantle melting and the controls on
mid-ocean ridge basalt composition. Because peridotites representing the lowest
melting temperatures ocean ridges, they can also be used to direct constrain
models for the primary composition and variability of the MORB
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Principal Investigator will
continue use various outreach efforts to publicize the expedition and the
importance of Arctic research to the general public and scientific community. He
has already made a number of presentations at scientific meetings and held press
group interviews. He made presentations to a number of prominent congressional
staff and senators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There have been three comprehensive
studies of abyssal peridotites that show that these samples have much more
complicated histories that this proposal implies. Refertilization, melt
impregnation, high-pressure melt-rock interactions, "excess olivine" etc. have
all been identified in abyssal peridotites. These processes are also widely
recognized in xenoliths and massif-type peridotites, but the PI of this proposal
wants to interpret these GR data in a vacuum. This field is rapidly advancing
and the PI needs to become current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PI
states that approximately 2/3 of abyssal peridotites 'are like simple residues
of melting'. This statement is perhaps contradicted by studies that show that
most abyssal peridotites are enriched in Na and Ti above what is expected based
on fractional melting (Elthon, JGR, 1992; Asimow, EPSL 1999; Baker and Beckett,
EPSL, 1999). It could be that most abyssal peridotites are not particularly like
simple residues of melting, and this proposal doesn't suggest that the PI plans
to consider this issue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Moreover, in the PIs compendium
of mineral composition and modal data from abyssal peridotites (Dick, 1989; in
Magmatism in the Ocean Basins), the Mg and Fe contents of minerals are noted to
be potentially inaccurate in a footnote from the author. Finally, it seems that
Ni in olivine data published by the PI is perhaps systematically low, relative
to studies by other workers (in Dick, 1989, olivine in most samples are listed
as having NiO between 0.22 and 0.28 wt% and this range is definitely low
relative to results on abyssal peridotites published by most other workers). I
am somewhat concerned that the PI sends samples to be analyzed by someone else
at MIT, rather than personally overseeing the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3 makes the case that the Gakkel ridge
allows one to look at AP away from fracture zones-so we should be able to test
the idea that there are more dunites within magmatic segments. Surely the PI has
an idea about the answer to this right now simply by looking at the rocks
collected in hand sample. Indeed, an annoying statement is that there is 'a
growing body of data, LARGELY UNPUBLISHED, that dunite is common in rift valley
walls.' I have to suspect that much of these data are the PIs-why not published-
why aren't the data at least put in some assessable form rather than this
statement.&lt;br/&gt;