* 0327071
*  Post-Fire Hydrology, Biogeochemistry, and Vegetation Response
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Edith Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2006
* USD 94,236.00

0327071&lt;br/&gt;Meixner&lt;br/&gt;A stand-replacing wildfire burned through
the San Dimas Experimental Forest (SDEF) this past September. The SDEF has a
60-year record of watershed hydrology and a 20-year record of watershed nitrogen
export for several watersheds. The intense understanding of pre-fire conditions
at the SDEF presents a once in a lifetime opportunity to closely investigate the
impacts of fire as an ecological disturbance in a chaparral ecosystem. Existing
data at SDEF indicates that watersheds with more frequent fires have reduced
streamflow and inorganic nitrogen export on long timescales compared to
watersheds with less frequent fires. This existing data is especially important
because it indicates an interaction between disturbance regime and the
susceptibility of ecosystems to atmospheric deposition. More generally our
results will be relevant to understanding disturbance in ecosystems and
disturbance influences on hydrologic and biogeochemical processes. We intend to
investigate four major questions in this post-fire environment. First, we will
determine the relative control of fire frequency on sediment and nutrient export
with an observational network and process based studies. Second, we will
investigate the impact of changes in ET on watershed hydrology in the post-fire
environment with a robust observation network. This observation system consists
of several watersheds that were burned during the 1980's as part of a prescribed
fire experiment as well as several control watersheds. Third, we will
investigate how the high rates of N deposition influence vegetation recovery in
the post-fire environment with vegetation surveys at SDEF and at a low
deposition site in southern California. Finally, we will investigate how fire
history affects watershed hydrologic and biogeochemical export. We will also
prepare the ground for future studies with detailed assessment of digital
elevation data at the forest taking advantage of fire to collect both on the
ground and remotely sensed data as well as with preliminary measurements of ET
with an eddy-flux system with time and equipment donated by the University of
California, Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications&lt;br/&gt;The pre-
existing facilities and experimental framework (detailed fire history with
differences between watersheds) provide a truly unique opportunity to
investigate the impact of fire on the amount of water available for human use
and the impacts of fire on water quality. Since fire is such a dominant
ecosystem process in many ecosystems of the western United States, better
information on the impact of fire on water resources and water quality is
critical information for land managers. The research will also provide
information on how air pollution and disturbance interact and influence the
large-scale vegetation change currently occurring in California that threatens
the unique biodiversity of the region. . Additionally the location of the San
Dimas Experimental Forest in southern California with its diverse population and
numerous undergraduate institutions provide a perfect opportunity for outreach
to underrepresented groups in the environmental sciences: urban populations and
minorities. The University of California, Riverside and Long Beach State
University both serve predominantly minority populations. &lt;br/&gt;