* 0327560
* CMG: Numerical Coarsening and Upscaling for Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* James McWilliams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 641,182.00

Central to modern geophysical fluid dynamics are computational solutions to
Navier-Stokes equations. A continuing challenge is to solve them for ever larger
range of spatial scales at which turbulence reigns. Based on both multigrid and
renormalization group methods, a new computational paradigm that can meet this
challenge has recently emerged, called systematic upscaling. This is a
methodical approach to derive, from a given system of fine-scale physical
equations, equivalent numerical equations at increasingly coarser scales.
Switching back and forth between all scales, calculations can be restricted to
only small representative regions at each scale. The derived equations can be
either deterministic or stochastic, possibly changing with scale. The proposed
algorithmic development will use this methodology to computationally derive,
from the deterministic Navier-Stokes equations at the fine viscous scale,
stochastic equations for simulating turbulent flows at the large geophysical
scale. Unlike current turbulence modeling based on ad-hoc, limited-accuracy
assumptions, this will be a systematic derivation that recognizes the stochastic
nature of the problem and can in principle attain any desired accuracy at
reasonable cost. The project will also involve new algebraic multigrid solvers
for unstructured discretization of fluid problems, and will introduce new
multigrid-based highly adaptive discretization schemes for time-dependent flows,
potentially achieving better combinations of minimum-dissipation Lagrangian with
conservative Eulerian formulations.

To understand the behavior of the atmosphere and oceans, and to predict weather
and environmental effects of human activities, complicated fluid flows need to
be simulated on supercomputers. The main difficulty is the turbulent or unstable
nature of the flows, breaking down into myriads of small, medium and large
eddies within eddies, making them impossible to simulate on any present or
future computer. Various approximation methods have met with only partial
success. The objective of the proposed research is to develop for such flows a
new computational methodology, called systematic upscaling, designed to derive,
from known underlying physical laws, the relation that govern the behavior of
large-scale averages. The derived relations involve an element of chance,
correctly assigning a measure of likelihood to each of the predicted events. The
research project also makes basic contributions to the general development of
multiscale computation, potentially impacting many other fields, including
biochemistry to nanotechnology. The research team fits the aims of this project:
Prof. Brandt led the development of multiscale computational methods that are
already widely used, including recently the introduction of systematic upscaling
in problems of statistical mechanics and molecular dynamics. Prof. McWilliams
has pioneered computational studies of geophysical turbulence and has been a
leader in incorporating the results of such studies into standard oceanic
calculations. The research project will be combined with the classroom and
research training at UCLA's Departments of Mathematics and Atmospheric and
Oceanic Sciences, which have many students from under represented groups.
Results will be disseminated by conference lectures and publications.