* 0327280
* Oxygen Isotope Compositions of Tree-Ring Cellulose as a High-Resolution Proxy Record of Hurricane Activity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Claudia Mora, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 158,999.00

This research will investigate the potential use of the oxygen isotope ratios of
alpha cellulose (the basic component of wood tissue) in tree rings of pines from
southern Georgia, South Carolina, and coastal Texas as a proxy record of
hurricane activity. Organic oxygen isotopes in tree-ring alpha cellulose mainly
reflect the isotopic composition of the source water. In shallowly rooted
conifers, the source water is directly related to precipitation. Hurricanes
produce large amounts of precipitation with distinctly lower oxygen isotope
ratios than normal surface water, and these low isotope ratios may persist in
surface and soil water for several weeks. These anomalously light oxygen
isotopic compositions are likely incorporated into the tree-ring cellulose,
capturing an isotopic record of hurricane activity. Hurricanes most typically
affect the southeastern United States during August through October, months that
correspond to the latewood portion of the individual tree ring. Hurricane
activity may result in negative latewood d18O values (the ratio of oxygen-18 to
oxygen-16 relative to an internationally accepted standard) and relatively large
differences in the isotopic compositions of earlywood and latewood in an annual
ring. In years without significant hurricane activity, earlywood-latewood
differences are expected to be negligible. The investigators will first separate
individual tree rings into sub-annual segments of earlywood and latewood, then
resins will be removed. Oxygen isotope compositions of alpha cellulose will be
measured using a high temperature carbon reduction elemental analyzer interfaced
to an isotope ratio mass spectrometer. Because drought can potentially mask the
isotope signal caused by hurricanes, measured ring widths will be compared with
the actual oxygen isotope values. Years in which drought occurred will result in
both narrow tree-ring widths and anomalously heavy oxygen isotope values for the
earlywood portion of the tree ring.

This project has the potential to develop a proxy record of hurricane activity
that extends several centuries earlier than modern instrumental or historical
documents by combining detailed dendrochronological and isotopic analysis. This
longer proxy record will be useful to evaluate whether hurricane activity occurs
in multi-decadal-scale cycles and, independently of these cycles, whether the
longer record indicates an increase in hurricane activity during the latter 20th
century. These results should contribute to a refined, long-term record of
hurricane activity that may enhance statistical long-range future forecasts of
hurricanes, and will help to determine if there are specific actions we can take
to mitigate potential increases in hurricane frequency.

