* 0327474
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION   Niche City: Manufacturing a Service Industry Presence in the Postindustrial Economy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Harvey Molotch, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,254.00

The elegant etching on the door of a fine furniture showroom in High Point,
North Carolina reads "Paris-New York-London-High Point." To some observers these
cities might be seen to be listed in a descending order of importance. However,
in the furniture world, the order of importance of the cities on this list
indubitably ascends. Often times drawing upon the symbolic, economic, and
physical resources of its past, and other times creating such resources, the
leaders of High Point have secured and maintained their downtown's niche capital
investment--the International Home Furnishings Market--in the face of global
competition from larger, wealthier peers. They have done so by aesthetically
refashioning the entire downtown to suit the interests of this very specific
niche. This strategy, which is unique to the current moment in global patterns
of economic restructuring, exemplifies an urban form that this project terms
"niche city." In this research on the nature and emergence of niche cities, I
will use a case study approach to investigate how this transformation occurred,
postulate the implications that this transformation has for residents, and
explore the implications of these findings for other cities in similar
circumstances. This project will employ two sources of data: qualitative and
geographic. I will conduct interviews of over 70 key political, economic, and
social figures in High Point and will supplement these with geographic data
tracking changes in downtown real estate investment. This methodology will help
to address several issues of interest to urban sociologists, urban geographers,
political economists and urban studies scholars: the role of symbolic landscapes
in small cities, the balance between a city's livability for residents and
usability for visitors, the agency of cities vis-a-vis globalization, and the
prospect of urban niche specialization as a way to attract capital to the
center-city. This research will provide a counter-case to examinations of
restructuring in large cities and to studies of growth by way of economic
incentives, highlighting a small city that has utilized a unique approach to
downtown profitability. In analyzing a place that some commentators have called
"truly postmodern," this dissertation will analyze how leaders sculpt urban
landscapes for the purposes of capital, a topic that has been largely relegated
to theory and discussed in the passive tense as something that happens to
cities. The broader impacts of this research will through dissemination of
findings in published articles in scholarly and professional journals and in
presentations at conferences of several disciplines involved in the study of
globalization, economic transformation, symbolic landscapes, visitor economies,
and inquiries of space versus place as well as in presentations to local
political and media outlets as well as in public panel discussions and brown bag
lunches at local universities.