* 0327259
* A Pilot Study:  Analyzing the Differential Undercount of Children and the Poor in the US Census
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Beth Osborne Daponte, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2004
* USD 54,000.00

The is a pilot project to assess the feasibility of developing a strategy for
improving our understanding of undercounting children by the U.S. Census Bureau
and illustrating the impact that differential undercount of children according
to their income category may have on national estimates of child poverty.
Currently, estimates of the number of children and their poverty status are
derived solely from the Census and census-based products (e.g., the Current
Population Survey (CPS), the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)),
although vital statistics and administrative data sources also provide
information on the number and the income distribution of children. However,
there appear to be significant discrepancies between data sources on the number
of children and children's well-being. This research represents a beginning
effort to try to measure and reconcile these discrepancies. Both theoretical and
practical considerations motivate this work. Developing a deep and longitudinal
understanding of the child undercount has the potential to inform the degree to
which the social and economic recognition of a group has changed over time and
can be used to evaluate competing theories about the causes and perpetuation of
poverty. The practical value of the project and its broader impacts lie in the
utility to social science researchers and policymakers of assessing child
undercounts and in developing strategies for more accurately counting children
in the U.S., especially poor children. The research also aims to improve social
science's tools for assessing of the well-being of American
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Division
of Mathematical Sciences and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences as part of the Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.