* 0327722
* Carbon 14 Calibration, Production and Reservoir Changes Over the Past 50,000 Years
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Richard Fairbanks, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 09/30/2006
* USD 693,090.00

This award will measure paired uranium and thorium isotopes and radiocarbon
measurements on 300 coral specimens dated from between 12,000 and 50,000 years
before present. These data will extend the tree ring carbon isotope-based time
series to the technical limits of radiocarbon determinations using pristine
coral samples. Combining such results with records generated by others, the
researchers expect to contribute to a precise and accurate International
Radiocarbon Calibration program that will broadly impact those fields of science
that utilize radiocarbon data as a measure of time. The primary justification of
the research is that initial results from the analyses of corals demonstrate
that the radiocarbon time scale is more than 5,000 years offset from time scales
based on uranium and thorium methods, for the last glacial period.

Changes in the Earth's magnetic field, the Sun's convection, and supernova
events from outer space all affect the cosmic ray production of radiocarbon in
the atmosphere. The carbon exchange rate between the atmosphere, oceans, and
biosphere, and its decay, regulate the concentration of carbon isotopes in the
atmosphere. This history over the past 11,500 years is recorded in a variety of
natural archives such as annually banded tree rings, varved-sediments,
speleothems, and corals. Radiocarbon ages provide a critical radiometric
chronometer for many fields of science such as archeology, anthropology,
climate, paleoceanograhy, tracer oceanography, palynology, lake studies, and
antiquities dating. When combined with other geophysical data, it is possible to
interpret the radiocarbon time series as a monitor or measure of the Earth's
magnetic field, solar variability, magnetic excursions, and climate related
changes.