* 0327625
* Incoherent Scatter Radar Studies of Hot Oxygen
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2009
* William Oliver, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 10/31/2009
* USD 457,637.00

This is a project to study hot oxygen in the upper atmosphere. The energy of
solar photons absorbed in the upper atmosphere far exceeds the thermal energy of
atmospheric particles (tenth of an eV). Thus, the atmosphere is immersed in a
dilute sea of very energetic particles created by solar photon absorption. A
prominent member of this collection of energetic particles is hot oxygen, a
population of oxygen atoms found to be at a temperature of about 4000 K. This
project studies hot O in two ways. First, the incoherent scatter radar (ISR)
Data Base at the National Center for Atmospheric Research will be inspected for
evidence of the heating effects of hot O. Ions in the topside ionosphere are
hotter than classical theory says they should be, and hot O may possibly act as
the missing heat source. The hot O density may be deduced from the temperature
deficit between classical theory and measurement. The estimates of hot O will be
developed into a model and of its behavior. Once the hot O model is established,
it may be used to correct previous estimates of cold oxygen concentrations.
Though this work explicitly concerns hot O determination and modeling, the
longer term aim is to use the 30-year ISR data base to track cold O density
throughout that period. If cold O changes from one 11-year solar cycle to the
next it may indicate a measurable trend related to global change caused by
changes in greenhouse gases or ozone at lower altitudes, changes which are
expected to be amplified in atmospheric density at high altitudes. The second
method is based on concentrations of hot oxygen ions. If there is neutral hot O,
there must be hot oxygen ions present too. The ionosphere will be numerically
simulated to determine what densities of hot O ions may be expected to exist in
the ionosphere, given the model described above that will be developed for
neutral hot O. Since helium ions at 1000 K and hot O at 4000 K have the same
temperature-to-mass ratio, they cannot be distinguished by doppler radar
techniques. The hot O simulation results will be compared with reported
observations of helium ions in the topside ionosphere for likeness to determine
if hot oxygen may have masquerading as helium in past published reports. The
intellectual merit of the proposed project lies in the fact that it studies a
little-known atmospheric species whose presence is expected, or has the
potential, to explain a number of discrepancies between theory and observation,
e.g., excess satellite drag, airglow, and ionospheric heating at high altitudes,
and why satellite and radar measurements of oxygen density differ. The broader
impacts of the project lie in several areas, in the integration of classroom and
research activity, in the training of graduate and undergraduate students in the
scientific process and presentation skills, in the involvement of under-
represented groups, and in the provision to the scientific community a model of
the behavior of hot O which should be useful in a variety of applications in
which thermospheric and/or ionospheric mass or energy budget considerations are
important.