* 0327826
* Chromate Free Corrosion Resistant Coatings using Water-Dispersible Tannisulfonic Acid-Doped Conducting Polymers and Nanocomposites (TSE03-B)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Tito Viswanathan, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Continuing restrictions on volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and heavy metals
such as chromium in conversion coatings have made it necessary to search for
novel alternatives. Although inherently conducting polymers (ICPs) have long
been known to inhibit the corrosion process of metals, their use in industry
(with the exception of Ormecon in Europe) has been limited by their
insolubility. The ICPs proposed in this project will utilize tanninsulfonic
acid, a renewable resource material, as a template/dopant to yield water-
dispersible systems. Due to the already known ability of tannin to prevent
corrosion, tanninsulfonic acid-doped ICPs should provide environmentally
friendly corrosion inhibitors. Since tannins are known to complex metal ions
efficiently due to the presence of the o-catechol groups and the fact that
certain metal oxo nanocomposites themselves have been shown to inhibit
corrosion, metal oxo nanocomposites chelated to tanninsulfonic acid will be
synthesized. These tannin based nanocomposites will be used as templates/dopants
for the synthesis of novel water-dispersible ICPs. As a result of the
synergistic effects, these corrosion inhibitors may prove to be highly
effective. The synthesized ICPs will be characterized using various
spectroscopic and electrochemical methods. Those that show sufficient
conductivity, electroactivity, and dispersibility will be blended with a variety
of water-based commercial resins and applied on a variety of substrates
including alloys of iron and aluminum that are commonly used in industry.
Substrate preparation and coating application will be performed according to
ASTM standards. Corrosion testing will be performed using electrochemical
corrosion techniques such as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, cyclic
polarization and Tafel plots. The results from these tests will be directly
compared with conventional barrier and conversion coatings including chromates.

Broader Impact Due to the high volume of ICPs that could be used in the coating
industry, the future of conducting polymers may well lie in their success in
corrosion inhibition. In addition, the data generated during this research will
be helpful in elucidating the mechanism of corrosion prevention which still
remains somewhat elusive. The concept of using a renewable resource as a
substitute for a toxic heavy metal as well as in reducing VOCs without
sacrificing desirable properties in corrosion resistant coatings is both
environmentally and economically appealing and fits well with the scope of this
NSF/EPA project. The involvement of students in this project provides them an
opportunity to be involved in cutting edge research of importance to the
environment that includes elimination of chromates and VOCs at the source, while
training them to be polymer chemists. ICPs have already shown promise in the
biomedical field especially in the area of nerve regeneration and artificial
muscles. A concerted effort will be made to include members of the research
community at the nearby medical school in workshops and seminars so that future
collaborative projects with our group may be possible.

