* 0327674
* Polycrystalline Silicon Carbide Micro- And Nanoelectromechanical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mehran Mehregany, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to advance the state-of-the-art in silicon carbide
(SiC) microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems
(NEMS). The primary focus is on polycrystalline SiC (poly-SiC) and surface
micromachining as a parallel to polysilicon surface micromachining. Accordingly,
the proposed research will fabricate and evaluate the performance of a range of
surface micromachined devices that together enable a systematic understanding of
the relationships between material properties and device performance for poly-
SiC. While the MEMS-scale devices will be fabricated and characterized in our
laboratories, the NEMS-scale devices (e.g., resonating nano-beams) will be
fabricated and characterized in collaboration with Prof. Michael Roukes of
Caltech, whose contribution to this research project will be supported by
funding from complementary projects.

The central objectives supporting the goal of this proposal are: (1) a low
pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) technology for poly-SiC with
deposition temperatures around 600C; (ii) a controlled in-situ doping capability
for poly-SiC; (iii) a clear understanding of the poly-SiC material properties
and their relation to deposition conditions; and (iv) insight into device
performance as related to material properties. The 600C deposition temperature
range is significant (from a thermal budget and process compatibility point of
view) since polysilicon, the dominant MEMS material, is deposited in this
temperature range. This research will build on a unique, large-scale LPCVD
furnace recently constructed by our group at CWRU. The furnace is sized for
high-volume production of SiC films and thus will provide an enabling platform
for the proposed research.

Intellectual Merit: SiC is known for its outstanding material properties, which
are enabling for applications of MEMS/NEMS in harsh environments (e.g., in
presence of high temperatures, corrosive media, erosive conditions, high impact
loads) over silicon. Its inherent biocompatibility makes it a leading material
for MEMS therapeutic and diagnostic devices. Advancement of poly-SiC MEMS/NEMS
state-of-the-art will open new possibilities for advancement and growth of the
field. For example, SiC MEMS/NEMS are being pursued for wireless communication
and for micro-power generation applications. Broader Impact: The proposed
project has impact beyond research, in both education and commercial
applications. The knowledge gained will be actively incorporated into our
graduate and undergraduate research experiences and educational courses, and
disseminated to high school students. The research results will be
commercialized through our direct and indirect industrial collaborations.
Finally, SiC, being a high performance material, is of interest in many non-
MEMS/NEMS applications (e.g., coatings, dielectrics, high power electronics).