* 0327089
* New Pressure Swing Adsorption Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Phillip Wankat, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 277,155.00

Proposal Title: New Pressure Swing Adforption Processes Proposal Number:
CTS-0327089 Principal Investigator: Phillip Wankat Institution: Purdue
University

The objective of this project is to develop a local equilibrium theory for a
novel pressure swing adsorption (PSA) scheme, based on a distillation design.
Extensive simulations of the process will be done with a commercial simulator.
Detailed computer simulations will be done for a number of different PSA
processes to determine the range of applicability of the new procedure. Research
in this proposal builds on prior work in the patent and open literature to
develop improved PSA processes to increase the recovery of the weakly adsorbed
component and purity of the strongly adsorbed component. Potentially, these
processes have significant advantages compared to current processes. The
proposed research will use detailed simulations to delineate separation problems
for which the new processes are an improvement compared to existing processes.
The new procedure for reducing compression will be included in these new cycles.
This project is also designed to have a broader impact. In addition to being
educationally beneficial for the graduate students, new methods to teach
graduate and eventually undergraduate students adsorption will be developed. An
advanced adsorption simulator for both PSA and temperature swing adsorption will
be introduced into a graduate level chemical engineering elective using a
computer laboratory as part of the lecture course. The results of successful
research will be new PSA designs that are ready for pilot plant testing before
commercialization.