* 0327208
* Narok Paleontological Survey Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Leslea Hlusko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2004
* USD 15,274.00

Molecular studies have concluded for decades that the evolutionary split
between the human and great ape lineages occurred during the Late Miocene, c.
5-8 ma. Only recently has the paleontological evidence started to provide
significant anatomical data about this divergence. Fossils from Chad, Ethiopia,
and Kenya shed the first light on what our earliest ancestors were like, where
they lived, and what the evolutionary forces may have been that ultimately
resulted in the species we know today. The sedimentary deposits in which we find
these Late Miocene remains are rare and difficult to locate. Despite the
difficulty and challenges, their yields are of critical importance to
reconstructing the evolution of the human lineage. This High Risk Research in
Anthropology project is a systematic paleontological survey of the area around
Narok, in southern Kenya. The Late Miocene site of Lemudong'o was discovered in
this region in 1995 and has since yielded fossil remains suggesting the type of
habitat in which hominids are found in other areas of Africa (closed/woodland
environment). Geochronology places the site securely at 6 ma. Lemudong'o
Locality 1 is a very small site and has not yet yielded hominids. An imagery-
based survey of the region is proposed to locate additional outcrops of these
same sediments, increasing the number of fossils recovered and increasing the
likelihood that if hominids lived in this area 6 ma, and if they were preserved
in these sediments, some of their remains can now be found. Though this survey
project is high-risk, the intellectual merit of the proposed activity and the
potential for success is high given the recent documentation of Late Miocene-
aged deposits in the area. The team members have done considerable research at
Lemudong'o Locality 1 and the immediately surrounding area. Therefore, we
already have an understanding of the geology, terrain, local people, and perhaps
most importantly, ground truth to apply to an imagery-directed survey approach.
Satellite and other imagery-based survey approaches have proven to be highly
successful and the PI has considerable experience working with this approach
with colleagues in Ethiopia. The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity span throughout the biological sciences and geology to the general
public at large. Success in finding hominid-bearing Late Miocene sediments will
immediately contribute significantly to the known range in geography and
biological variation of early hominids. Just one tooth would shed light on the
apparent morphological differences between the Late Miocene hominids of Ethiopia
and Chad compared to those from more northern sites in Kenya. Many fossils aside
from hominids will be recovered, contributing to the field of vertebrate
paleontology. The geological work that will take place in conjunction with this
survey project contributes to the larger understanding of rift valley systems
and the patterns and process of continental plate tectonics. And finally, human
biology is rooted in evolution. The more we understand about the animals through
which we evolved, the better we understand our modern biology and biological
variation, with an impact that reaches from biomedical advances to
sociopolitics.