* 0327332
* Wave-Driven Porewater-Seawater Exchange in Sandy Coastal Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Mark Merrifield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2009
* USD 461,553.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327332&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shallow-water
surface waves traveling above permeable sandy sediments (i.e., those with grains
coarser than ~80 um) can induce greatly enhanced mixing across the sediment-
water interface and rapid transport of water and particles within the sediment.
Thus, hydrodynamic transport in sandy sediments in nearshore and continental
shelf waters can be expected to (1) substantially increase the rates of
biochemical processes occurring in sediments by increasing the supply of oxygen
and particulate matter to the sediment, and (2) significantly increase the rate
of return of degradation products such as nutrients to the water column, thereby
increasing water-column and benthic primary production. The rapid transport of
porewater and particles in sandy sediments renders the calculation of benthic
fluxes using conventional diffusion-based models invalid and thus confounds the
interpretation of chemical profiles collected in coastal areas and on the
continental shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the
University of Hawaii will conduct studies to describe and quantify the transport
of solutes and particulate matter in sandy sediments. Using field
investigations, they will confirm or refute the validity of available
theoretical models of hydraulic transport through sediment pores and evaluate
the importance and timescales of the hydrodynamic pumping mechanisms. They
propose to (1) measure wave-induced porewater movement/dispersion under a range
of wave conditions; (2) evaluate current theories of wave-enhanced porewater
movement/dispersion and exchange using the results of these measurements; (3)
establish an array of physical sensors at the field site, and collect synoptic
data over a range of wave conditions; (4) measure porewater concentrations of
biogeochemically important constituents across the array; (5) compute porewater-
seawater fluxes as functions of wave conditions; (6) compare these porewater-
seawater fluxes with those calculated using measured 222Rn distributions and
eddy correlation techniques; (7) measure wave-induced particle transport rates
into and within sandy sediments, as a function of particle size and wave
conditions; and (8) investigate the effect of bedforms on porewater and particle
transport. This research will be conducted in sandy sediment off the south shore
of Oahu, Hawaii, a site that is subject to a wide and predictable range of wave
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is presently a lack of suitable tools for
quantifying porewater and particle motion, including sediment-water fluxes, in
sandy sediments. The proposed research aims to provide practical methodologies
to overcome this limitation and to develop a generic process understanding that
will allow the estimation of interstitial transport rates in biogeochemical
models used to represent diagenesis in sandy sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;