* 0327574
* CMG:  Summer School on Mathematical Seismology and Uncertainty in Earth Models
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Michael Ritzwoller, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 180,296.00

This proposal is to establish a summer school aimed at quantifying uncertainty
in earth modes obtained from seismic imaging. The resolution in imaging
techniques in global seismology has increased dramatically in recent years due
to the explosive growth in the amount of digital data and computational
facilities. However, the accuracy of the spectacular images of 3D Earth
structure that are being produced is usually poorly known. The deployment of the
USArray component of Earthscope will dramatically increase the coverage of the
continental US with digital seismic stations, resulting in unprecedented
quantities of data. The full potential of this data set can only be realized
when the uncertainty in the constructed earth models can be quantified
adequately.

This school focuses on the quantification of uncertainty in seismic imaging in
the geosciences. Since this problem requires the input from seismologists and
mathematicians, the school is aimed at equal participation from both groups. The
material that will be covered includes tutorial material as well as recent
research. The presented material will be presented in the form tutorial
lectures, lectures on recent research, computer exercises and problem sets,
group meetings with a a mentor, poster presentations, and field trips. The
school will be held at the campus of the Colorado School of Mines in the summer
of 2004. The duration of the school is two weeks.

Intellectual merit: The topic of the school addresses an issue that is of
paramount importance in the geosciences. The connection between the constructed
3D Earth models and decision making can be called poorly-developed at best.
Addressing these questions requires a joint effort of mathematicians and
geoscientists.

Broader impact: The quantification of uncertainty in 3D models in the earth
sciences is of relevance for the exploration and production of hydrocarbons, a
better understanding of geo-dynamics with implication for natural hazards, as
well as to non-seismological aspects of the geosciences that include ground
water management, the detection and spreading of pollutants, the detection of
un-exploded ordnance, and monitoring nuclear treaties. The quantification of
uncertainty in seismology is essential for the analysis and interpretation of
the US-Array data that will be collected as part of Earthscope.

