* 0327191
* Collaborative research: Biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in plant-grazer systems: experimental tests in a marine benthic community
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* John Bruno, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 293,686.00

The maintenance of biological diversity and the ecosystem processes dependent on
it are key goals of conservation biology and are issues of great societal
concern. Influential research in terrestrial habitats has shown that several
ecosystem processes are related to plant diversity. Yet links between plant
diversity and function remain poorly studied in marine ecosystems. Moreover,
consumers play central roles in regulating primary production and community
structure, particularly in the oceans. But the importance of consumer diversity
in mediating plant diversity and production relationships as well as other
important ecosystem processes is poorly known for any system. With increasing
human perturbation of marine habitats and the growing likelihood of
unprecedented extinctions, there is a pressing need to understand the functional
roles of the identity and diversity of marine plants and animals. This research
project will address the foregoing issues using a diverse assemblage of marine
macroalgae and their herbivores, including amphipods, isopods, gastropods,
urchins, crabs, and fish, in mesocosm and field experiments in North Carolina.
Factorial manipulations of algal and consumer identity and diversity, as well as
resource availability (i.e., nutrients and light), will test the relative
independent and interactive effects of these factors on primary and secondary
productivity, and individual and community?wide consumption rates. Several
characteristics of this system make it exceptionally tractable for this study,
including a detailed understanding of its natural history and ecology.
Specifically, this project will address the following five questions: 1) How do
algal identity and diversity affect net primary production? 2) How do algal
identity and diversity affect individual and whole?community consumption rates
and secondary production? 3) How do consumer identity and diversity affect net
primary production? 4) What are the relative independent and interactive effects
of plant and herbivore identity and diversity in controlling net primary
production? 5) How do plant diversity and herbivory interact with resource
availability to control net primary production? What is the relative importance
of these interacting factors?&lt;br/&gt;This will be one of the first studies to
test the effects of species diversity on ecosystem properties using field
manipulations in a marine community, and one of the few studies in any system to
consider simultaneously the roles of prey and consumer diversity in a factorial
design. In doing so this research will directly test how the widely publicized
effects of plant diversity on ecosystem processes are altered through realistic
levels of consumer pressure. This research program also brings together three
principle investigators with complementary strengths in experimental benthic
marine ecology, restoration and landscape ecology, and specializations in
macrophyte, fish, and invertebrate biology. The research fits within the
Biological Diversity in Marine Systems special theme of emphasis of the NSF
Biological Oceanography Program. The results will help ecologists and policy
makers understand the potential consequences of the ongoing loss of species
diversity, potentially benefiting society by helping to wisely conserve similar
systems. In addition, this project will have broader impacts in education and
training by providing research opportunities to young scientists at a range of
educational levels (from undergraduate to postdoctoral scientists) and
backgrounds, including groups that are underrepresented in science. Results will
be disseminated through publications in top journals, and to the general public
through articles in non?technical magazines, our web sites, and public
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;