* 0327030
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Learning to Love Labor:  Low-Income Mothers, Work-Family Balance, and Public Assistance
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Mary Blair-Loy, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,451.00

Recent decades have witnessed dramatic changes in women's lives in the U.S.,
including higher employment rates among mothers. Additionally, the 1996 welfare
reform, The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PROWRA), ended low-income mothers' entitlement to cash grants to care for
dependent children and initiated time-limited support that mandates work as a
condition of state support. This dissertation research analyzes evolving models
of wage work and motherhood through the experience of low-income women facing
welfare reform. While much of prior research portrays low-income women as
passive recipients of state policy, this study theorizes them as agents
creatively responding to cultural and moral definitions of work and family as
well as to the financial resources given or withheld by the state. The research
questions are as follows. To what degree do low-income mothers' work and family
decisions reflect the cultural assumptions about paid work and family
responsibility embedded in welfare reform? By the valorization of women's
participation in wage work, does welfare reform reshape women's taken for
granted definitions of being a good mother or a good worker? Or do low-income
women reject and resist these cultural definitions? Finally, how do low-income
women themselves actively engage and reshape present-day cultural understandings
of work, welfare and family? The population of this multi-method case study
consists of 1300 women in Spokane, WA, who have enrolled in a program intended
to lead to self-sufficiency. Methods include in-depth interviews and a self-
administered survey of a stratified random sample of this population. The
qualitative approach in this study is designed to capture the meanings and self-
definitions of poor women themselves in meeting the demands of work and family.
The survey data allow comparison of themes and patterns found in the qualitative
sample across a larger sample. This project will contribute to sociological
understanding of work-family conflict among low-income women, a group largely
ignored by work-family researchers. The research also demonstrates how social
policy can develop out of broader social trends and cultural models while at the
same time crystallize and reinforce these trends and models. This study brings
together the publicly shared moral dimension of the welfare state with
contemporary work and family practices. The study's broader impact will be its
potential to inform the decisions of policy makers and others concerned about
consequences for women and children in the wake of welfare reform.