* 0327869
* U.S.-Mexico Plannning Visit:  Linking human socioeconomic systems with marine ecosystem functioning along the Pacific coast of Baja California, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Laura Gonzalez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2003
* USD 2,334.00

0129002 &lt;br/&gt;Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program will
support a planning meeting in La Paz, Mexico, jointly organized by Dr. Laura I.
Gonzalez-Guzman, of SUNY and Dr. Sergio Hernandez-Vazquez of the Centro de
Investigaciones Biologicas del Noreste, in La Paz, Mexico. The organizers plan
to develop a collaborative and interdisciplinary research project aimed at
building a conceptual framework for linking the socioeconomic dynamics of
community-based fisheries with the dynamics of natural ecosystems, and
determining how these joint forces influence the marine environment and the
sustainability of fisheries in the Northern Pacific West Coast of
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will involve scientists with
backgrounds in ecology, fisheries science, economics, resource management, and
geography from the US and Mexico. The research program that will be the outcome
of this planning meeting will have three main components: an ecosystem
component, a socioeconomic component, and an education and outreach component.
Ultimately, the project will serve to develop now approaches to fisheries
management in Baja California and models and guidelines for management and
conservation to be applied to the coastal fisheries of the Pacific
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;