* 0328729
* Best Practices in North-South Research Collaborations: A Case Study of Sri Lanka
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Sujata Gamage, Gamage                  Sujata         N
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 07/31/2005
* USD 49,313.00

The outflow of S&T expertise from the developing world (or the South) to the
developed world (or the North) is a concern to both parts of the world.
Importance of research in this area is highlighted in the 2002 Science &
Engineering Indicators Report of the U.S. National Science Foundation.
Policymakers in the South also have an interest in ensuring that North-South
partnerships bring true benefits to the South. For example, a key goal of the
University Grants Commission of Sri Lanka is to nurture emerging nuclei of
research excellence. The Commission views collaborative research between local
and international researchers as a means to the desired end, and a study that
sheds light on best practices in North-South collaborations would be of
immediate relevance to the Commission. This investigator will select a set of
researchers in Sri Lanka who have collaborated with other researchers, both
local and international, identify nuclei of research excellence from among those
researchers, and survey those individuals to determine if and how the research
collaborations with the North affected the progress of their research careers.
The concept of research excellence as it applies to a developing country will be
explored in depth here. Publication and citation data for Sri Lankan researchers
will identify researchers who have collaborated and the potential of those
researchers to be nuclei of research excellence. A database of these 'nuclei of
research excellence' will be set up using additional data collected from their
curriculum vitae, interviews and questionnaires. Each joint publication by these
researchers will be labeled a collaboration, and publication and citation data,
interviews, and/or surveys will be used to compile a database of characteristics
for each collaboration for a given researcher. The two datasets will be compared
to elucidate links between the type of collaboration and the success of the
researcher.

S&T personnel of developing country origins who live and work in the developed
world are a group that can useful in facilitating the reverse flow. Such a
strategy, known as the Diaspora strategy, sounds feasible, but very little is
known about the efficacy of such a strategy or how such a strategy compares with
other strategies for developing R&D capacity in developing countries. A second
goal of this proposal is to elucidate the role of the Diaspora in North-South
research partnerships. Current studies on research collaborations do not pay
sufficient attention to collaborations as goal oriented arrangements or address
the structure of collaborations in depth. The proposed study situates
collaborations as inputs to specific outcomes and analyzes the related
structural features in depth. Answering this research question may indicate a
strategy for balancing the brain drain from the South to the North. In addition,
the research question addressed is of immediate relevance to the S&T capacity
building strategy of Sri Lanka.