* 0328886
* Molecular Basis of HEL 74-96-Specific CD8-CD4 Cell          Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Navreet Nanda, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 09/30/2004
* USD 138,588.00

Prevention of auto-immune reactions and the self-limiting nature of normal
immune responses require inactivation of mature lymphocytes. This research
focuses on understanding mechanisms by which suppressor T lymphocytes, that
class of lymphocyte responsible for a wide range of immune cell regulation, are
involved in down-regulation of antigen-specific responses of other, so-called
helper T lymphocytes. A notable function of helper T cells is to stimulate yet
another class of lymphocytes to secrete antibodies. The helper T cells are
formally designated CD4 T cells on the basis of their surface molecules. The
suppressor T cells are designated CD8 T cells. The molecular mechanism by which
the CD8 T cells interact with CD4 T cells to inactivate them is not well
understood and currently is an important area of immunological research.
Preliminary evidence in support of this project suggests a novel model for this
interaction. In this model, antigen-specific receptors of CD8 T cells recognize
two cell surface molecules on either CD4 cells or other cells that function to
present these molecules. The first is the antigenic peptide itself and the
second is the CD4 antigen-specific receptor. Current thinking suggests that each
molecule is bound as a complex to a class of tissue compatibility molecules
called class I major histocompatibility complexes (MHC). The novelty of the
hypothesis is that a single CD8 T cell receptor would recognize two distinct
molecules simultaneously, something that has not been proposed before for this
type of regulation. To substantiate these results, the project will pursue two
specific aims in which responses to a defined peptide antigen will be monitored.
Aim 1 is to isolate and characterize the antigen-specific CD8 T cells that are
activated by the CD4 cells and peptide. The molecular structure of the receptors
of these CD8 T cells will be determined. Conversely, aim 2 is to characterize
the antigen-specific CD4 T cell receptors that activate the CD8 cell
counterparts. The experiments as a whole have the potential of defining a new
and generalized mechanism for the self-regulation of lymphocytes during the
course of an immune response.