* 0328522
* CAREER: Multiwavelength Studies of Microquasars
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Stephen Eikenberry, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 04/30/2006
* USD 213,983.00

AST-9983830&lt;br/&gt;EIKENBERRY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiwavelength studies of
the Galactic relativistic jet sources -- the "microquasars" will be carried out.
The overall goal of the research is to understand the origin, formation, and
evolution of relativistic jets in black hole X-ray binaries. The knowledge
gained by these studies will be used to understand black-hole/relativistic-jet
systems in our Galaxy and their larger analogs in active galactic nuclei. This
research builds on previous work on X-ray and infrared (IR,) studies of the
microquasar GRS +105 and other microquasar candidates. Highlights of the
scientific work to be carried out include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordinated
X-ray, IR, and radio observations of relativistic jet formation in the
microquasar GRS 1915-105: The previous coordinated X-ray/IR/radio observations
of this object provided the first direct, tine-resolved observations of
relativistic jet formation in any system. These and other observations have also
shown that GRS 1915+105 exhibits many different states of jet-producing and non-
jet-producing behaviors. The observational campaigns will help to classify these
states and understand the physical conditions necessary for the formation of
relativistic jets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordinated x-ray, optical, IR, and
radio observations of other Galactic rela-tivistic jet sources: These
observations will include the astronomical sources GRO J1655-40, Cyg X-3, XTE
J1748-288, SS 433, CI Cam, and LSI +61 303. The comparison of the observational
data between these objects and with GRS 1915+105 will provide insights into the
origin and nature of relativistic jets in Galactic X-ray
binaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term IR monitoring of microquasars using
Cornell's 0.6-m telescope and a new IR array camera: This type of monitoring,
which has not been possible previously, will allow measurement of binary periods
and recurrence timescales of IR flaring. Undergraduate students will carry out
this work in the summer months and results of the research will be incorporated
into the existing undergraduate astronomy laboratory classes during the academic
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and implementation of strategies for
identifying new microquasar systems: This effort will include the study of
candidate IR counterparts for the microquasars lE 1740-29 and GRS 1758-258,
which were discovered using deep IR images from the Keck 10-m
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational effort will include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, a laboratory
curriculum will be developed and implemented for 5th-7th grade students, which
emphasizes the fundamental importance of measurement to the scientific process.
Key features include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration with the Ithaca City
School District (ICSD) to develop basic hands- on experiments with links to
current astronomical research. The goal is to help answer the question "How do
we know what we know about the Universe?" The ICSD teachers will "field-test"
the experiments and the results will be used to refine the
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration with the Cambridge Public
Schools to develop a Spanish-language version of the laboratory and Web
materials for use in bilingual classrooms. Field-testing of the Spanish version
in Cambridge will also be used to refine the experiments. This component will
provide an important means for outreach to historically underrepresented
Spanish-speaking children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of Web-based
resources which will allow students/teachers to explore the relationship between
the results of their experiments and those of researchers working at the
forefront of astrophysics. In the future, the resources will be made available
nationwide to both English- and Spanish-speaking classrooms via the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Astronomical Sciences provides
support for this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***