* 0328316
* PEET: Monographic and Phylogenetic Research on the Saprolegniales (watermolds)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* David Padgett, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 763,908.00

Filamentous microbes belonging to the order Saprolegniales (watermolds) are
important environmentally and economically for a great variety of reasons, but
the study of these important organisms has been hampered for over 200 years
because of the extreme difficulty involved in their identification. This fact
probably more than any other has obscured understanding not only of how to
control those species that cause devastating plant and animal diseases, but also
of the significant environmental benefit that still other species provide.
Watermold identification (a component of their systematic biology) historically
has been difficult because morphological features used to characterize them
overlap significantly between species to the extent that one
species&lt;br/&gt;usually cannot be distinguished from its close neighbors. It
is now recognized, however, that modern DNA technology and gene sequencing
techniques offers a much-needed tool for helping to resolve the boundaries
between species thus enabling accurate and fast identification. The research
program in this Partnership for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy (PEET) project
will employ gene sequencing techniques to define the boundaries between
watermold species more precisely and in so doing will revise the systematics of
this group such that environmental and economic investigations of watermolds
will be made much easier. All products of this research will be freely and
openly accessible to the world scientific community on the world-wide-
web.&lt;br/&gt; Owing to the extreme difficulty of identifying watermolds, young
scientists have avoided investigating them, such that there now is a worldwide
critical shortage of watermold systematists. A principal objective of the
current project is to begin the training of the next generation of watermold
systematists using modern techniques that not only will clarify watermold
systematics, but also will provide the foundation for answering important
"applied" questions about their significance to society and the environment. The
investigators have partnered with the Science and Mathematics Education Center
of the University of North Carolina at Wilmington to develop an educational
outreach program to public schools in southeastern North Carolina
to&lt;br/&gt;better inform the public of the importance of this group and to
encourage school-age children to understand the significance, beauty, and
excitement not only of watermolds, but also of science in general. &lt;br/&gt;