* 0328393
* Online Data Migration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Betty Salzberg, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 202,270.00

Online Data Migration

Current demand for scalability in databases leads to an architecture of loosely-
coupled computer nodes which can be expanded or contracted at will. Demand for
24/7 availability leads to requirements for online reorganization. To satisfy
these demands, this project develops algorithms for migrating data from one node
to another in a distributed system while still allowing users to access the
data. First, several schemes for deciding which data to move are considered.
While the goal is load balancing, performance of the migration algorithm itself
is also a consideration. Algorithms must move only a small amount of the data,
not reassign everything to a new node. Experiments are run to measure the
"goodness" (coefficient of variance) of load balancing as well as the cost of
migration. Second, index maintenance during migration is considered. When only a
relatively small amount of data is moved, creating new indexes is more expensive
than merging indexes or index entries of moved data into already existing
indexes at destination nodes. This merging process must also be online so that
users have access to all the data almost all of the time. Experiments measure
both efficiency and concurrency for index merging algorithms. Broader impacts of
this research include (1) educating the future educators of our technological
workforce, (2) enabling efficient online reorganization of massive databases,
such as occurs when government agencies are combined and (3) aiding the database
industry in satisfying customer demand for scalability and 24/7 availability.
More information about this project is available at
http://www.ccs.neu.edu/research/dblab/