* 0328920
* PEET: Monographic Research of Tropical Bark Beetles (Curculionidae:Scolytinae): Taxonomic Expertise
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Anthony Cognato, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 01/31/2007
* USD 575,042.00

This study preserves and modernizes the taxonomic expertise of bark beetle
biologists through apprenticeships and the systematic study of tropical bark
beetle biodiversity. In general, bark beetles function ecologically as
decomposers of wood. However, some species kill live trees, especially during
periods of environmental stress. These pests cause severe economic and
ecological losses, which often equate to millions of dollars. In addition, bark
beetles comprise the majority of exotic insects intercepted at ports and those
beetles that have escaped detection have greatly impacted forest economics and
ecology. Many intercepted species are ambrosia beetles (Xyleborini), a poorly
studied but diverse pantropical group with approximately 1,200 species. Their
clone-like mating system and associated fungus increase their potential as
exotic pests. However, efforts to study and/or control this group are hampered
by a lack of taxonomic knowledge. This need to describe, classify and catalog
ambrosia beetle biodiversity unfortunately coincides with a worldwide decline in
bark beetle taxonomists. Thus this study provides a new generation of bark
beetles taxonomists, generic revisions, keys, and monographs for Southeast Asian
beetles. Direct training of two Ph.D. students will proceeds in a collaborative
atmosphere using current expertise. Training includes field and museum methods,
computer databasing, species-level taxonomy, including video-aided morphological
analysis and contemporary phylogenetic analysis. Taxonomic studies include two
economically important tropical Xyleborini genera. This monographic information
along with other data obtained from worldwide museums and recent field
collections is formatted as a web-assessable and searchable database. Keys to
these species and exotic ambrosia beetle of North America are constructed.
&lt;br/&gt;Completion of this project will result in a better understanding of
and organization of tropical bark beetles and in the preservation and growth of
much-needed taxonomic expertise. The modernized monographs and keys will allow
for speedy identification of potential exotic pests. Early detection of pests
will ultimately save US lumber producers millions of dollars and protect the
ecological integrity of US forests. Also, increased understanding ambrosia
beetle biodiversity will undoubtedly aid international conservation of tropical
forests. The education of new bark beetle systematists ensures continued study
of these economically important beetles and that waning taxonomic knowledge is
preserved for future generations.&lt;br/&gt;