* 0328203
* FSML:  Improvements in Computer-Based Communications at the Highlands Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Robert Wyatt, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 37,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Western Carolina University to Dr Wyatt, to make
improvements in computer-based communications at the Highlands Biological
Station. Since its founding in 1927, the Highlands Biological Station has served
to facilitate research on the biota and ecosystems of the southern Appalachian
Mountains. Increased usage of HBS has put a strain on its limited capacity for
computer-based communications. Recent upgrades of the connection have not been
effective because of the need to extend the local area network. Preliminary
testing has proved the feasibility of installing a wireless system that will
allow access from any building on the HBS campus, including the dining hall,
dormitories, and the Nature Center, which offers K-12 and adult science
enrichment and environmental education. Given the steep, rocky terrain and dense
vegetation, this approach is more sensible and cost-effective than stringing
fiber optic cable between all of the buildings, whether buried or aboveground.
Strong winds, with or without accompanying rain, snow, or ice, frequently bring
down tree limbs in Highlands, interrupting power and communications on a regular
basis. Wireless antennas on each building seem to be the best solution for HBS.
In addition, HBS will upgrade its computer infrastructure. The upgraded
communication infrastructure will facilitate new applications in teaching,
research, and outreach. Researchers, including many graduate students with
grants-in-aid from HBS, will benefit from an expanded capacity for e-mail, web-
based literature and database searches, data storage and analysis, etc. Also
benefiting from the enhanced telecommunication infrastructure will be courses
for graduate students and advanced undergraduates that focus on the ecology,
systematics, evolution, and conservation of those groups of organisms that are
especially diverse in the region. In the fall and spring, HBS regularly hosts
student groups on weekend field trips as well as providing residential
facilities for UNC-Chapel semester long Carolina Environmental Program. In
addition to formal academic coursework in natural and social sciences, these
students work as interns on research projects mentored by local experts with
federal, state, and private conservation organizations. Finally, upgraded
capabilities at HBS will enhance informal learning opportunities for the public,
which are offered through programs at the Highlands Nature Center and the
Highlands Botanical Garden, which are part of HBS. &lt;br/&gt;