* 0328511
* BE- MUSES:  Towards Sustainable Materials for Drinking Water Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Anne Camper, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2008
* USD 145,003.00

This collaborative Biocomplexity in the Environment Materials Use: Science,
Engineering and Society (MUSES) project addresses research issues associated
with sustainable materials for drinking water. In the United States, the
declining public infrastructure loses 10-32% of potable water resource to holes
formed by corrosion, and the cost to simply repair and replace degraded pipes is
estimated at $22 billion per year for the public (utility) infrastructure and
nearly twice that for private (residential, commercial, school) infrastructures.
Leakage and changes in water quality can occur in copper and plastic plumbing
systems. This investigation is driven in part by observations of corrosion and
pinhole leakage in copper water systems due to reduced natural organic matter in
the water, an unintended consequence of emerging water quality requirements that
is proving a fruitful focus for technical research with high social impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary study of materials use in drinking
water infrastructure brings together researchers and students from seven
disciplines: economics, food and sensory science, community health, civil
engineering, environmental engineering, microbiology, and materials engineering.
Because all problems with materials use in drinking water infrastructure are
inextricably interwoven, three phases of work will be conducted on the basis of
organizational necessity including: (1) biochemistry of materials degradation
and water quality; (2) aesthetics and analytical chemistry of corroded
materials; and (3) economics, health and perception in consumer decision-making.
This project will establish the degradation of systems from the macro to the
micros level of study, integrating between materials use and human needs /
perceptions in a rigorous fashion through the modeling of economic decision-
making that is tied to the experimental investigation of corrosion and taste
testing, as well as the analytical models of consumer preference. International
collaborations with South Korea and Brazil, and the involvement with USEPA,
Washington Suburban Sanitation council, US Army, US Department of Human and
Heath Services, and several consumer groups will provide methods of
disseminating the research and educating the public to the broader significance
of maintaining a sustainable potable water infrastructure