* 0328554
* SGER: Proteomics as a Tool for Cloning Leptin from Fence Lizard Sceloperus Undulatus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Richard Londraville, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/2005
* USD 80,019.00

Proteomics as a tool for Cloning Leptin from fence lizard Sceloporus
undulatus&lt;br/&gt;Peter H. Niewiarowski1, Richard L. Londraville1, Michael
Kinter2&lt;br/&gt;1The University of Akron and 2The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Fat metabolism centrally influences physiological choices
that organisms make with the calories they acquire. Whether the goal is to
discover the molecular basis of obesity in humans, or to understand how and when
a hibernator accumulates fat to survive the winter, studying proteins that
influence fat metabolism gives insight into those processes. Leptin is a
recently discovered protein hormone that affects both the anabolic (fat storage)
and catabolic (fat burning) aspects of fat metabolism. Because leptin has the
potential to explain so many aspects of fat metabolism, it has been studied
intensely (&gt;6000 studies since 1994). Nearly all of these studies have been
focused on mammals, with relatively little attention paid to ectotherms.
Studying leptin (and other proteins that influence fat metabolism) in non-
mammals brings the historically strong approach of comparative biology to
studies of fat metabolism. Although leptin has been cloned and sequenced in
dozens of mammals, no sequence is published for any ectotherms despite
considerable effort. This award funds a new approach, proteomics, to cloning and
characterizing leptin from fence lizard (Sceloporus undulatus).
&lt;br/&gt;Proteomics is the study of all proteins present in a given tissue at
a given time. Under previous funding (IBN-0099303 to PHN and RLL), a protein in
lizard blood and brain that binds to leptin antibodies and is the same size as
mammalian leptins was identified. Concentrations of this putative lizard leptin
were measured in natural populations of fence lizards; lizard leptin peaks in
the spring and summer and then declines significantly in the fall as the lizards
accumulate fat and prepare for winter hibernation. This is consistent with the
pattern of leptin concentrations described for some mammalian hibernators. It is
possible now to use this pattern of seasonal variation to compare the proteomes
of lizards at their peak and nadir of leptin concentrations. Proteins from
liver, brain, fat bodies, and serum will be extracted and separated according to
their charge (first dimension) and size (second dimension) by gel
electrophoresis. This procedure results in a two-dimensional 'map' of proteins
that is characteristic for each tissue. The two-dimensional maps will be scanned
and compared (via digital imaging) between fall and summer lizards from the same
population. All proteins that change in relative amount with season will be
submitted to mass-spectrometry analyses for identification. The mass-
spectrometry experiments can determine the identity of the protein by cutting it
at known amino acids (protein digest) and then measuring the mass of the
resulting pieces; this collection of masses is compared to all known protein
sequences, all of which have been cut the same way (virtually, by a computer).
If there is no match, the unknown can be further fractionated to determine its
amino acid sequence. This amino acid sequence can subsequently be used as the
basis for traditional molecular cloning experiments and other experiments to
determine the function of the novel protein.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed research are that it will promote teaching, training, and learning
via incorporation of proteomics into laboratory exercises for undergraduates at
the University of Akron (UA). PHN and RLL both hold current teaching scholarship
grants (GK-12 and CCLI) in which integration of research and teaching is an
essential goal. Therefore, this research will be used seamlessly to enhance
learning for undergraduate and graduate students. The proposal will also broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups. UA Biology has a significant
minority student population, and they will be exposed to the proposed research.
In addition, PN and RL have successfully in the past, and will continue to
recruit underrepresented groups to work on the proposed research. By
establishing a new partnership between UA and The Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
we will enhance infrastructure for research and education. The benefits of the
proposed activity to society are significant. This research is a new approach to
studying a hormone (leptin) that is established to play a role in the global
health epidemic of obesity. &lt;br/&gt;