* 0328325
* Turbulent Drag Reduction in Polymer Solutions:  Studies of the Interaction of Viscoelasticity and Exact Coherent States
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 03/31/2008
* USD 278,611.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0328325&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: MICHAEL D.
GRAHAM&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF
WISCONSIN&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TURBULENT DRAG REDUCTION IN POLYMER SOLUTIONS:
STUDIES OF THE INTERACTION OF VISCOELASTICITY AND EXACT COHERENT
STATES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energy required to rapidly pump a liquid can be
dramatically reduced by addition of a small quantity of very large polymer
molecules. This "rheological drag reduction" phenomenon has found widespread
application in reduction of energy losses in pipelines, has spurred research
into reducing drag over ships and has recently gained attention for its
potential to dramatically improve efficiency of so-called district heating and
cooling systems, in which chilled or heated water is generated at a central
location and pumped to buildings in the surrounding area. Despite its widespread
current and potential applications, however, the fundamental mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon remain unclear. This study builds on the recent
discovery of "exact coherent states" -- traveling wave flow patterns that
underlie the organized fluid motions of turbulence near solid surfaces. These
organized motions, or "coherent structures" are closely associated with the
energy consumed by the flow, so the exact coherent states provide a natural
starting point for better understanding rheological drag reduction. Using
computations with molecularly based mathematical models of the flow of polymer
solutions, the effect of polymer on these states will be elucidated and compared
with those observed experimentally. Of particular interest is the origin of the
so-called "maximum drag reduction asymptote", the experimentally observed upper
limit on the amount of drag reduction that can be achieved with polymer
additives. &lt;br/&gt;This study will provide educational opportunities at a
number of levels. The graduate students involved will gain a unique
multidisciplinary perspective, combining polymer physics, rheology, fluid
dynamics and nonlinear dynamics. Undergraduate students will participate in a
project involving practical issues of implementing drag-reducing fluids in a
large-scale flow system. The knowledge gained under this study will lead to
principles for rational design of both fluids and flow systems to best take
advantage of drag-reducing additives. More broadly, the study will enable
development of energy saving flow control strategies by contributing to a firm
understanding of the coherent structures of turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;