* 0328605
* Collaborative Research:  Deformation of the Arctic Sea Ice Cover: Formation and Action of Failure Zones
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Erland Schulson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 301,800.00

ABSTRACT Schulson OPP-0328605 Hibler OPP-0328728

The Principal Investigators describe new numerical and laboratory experiments
that should elucidates the physical mechanisms that underlie the formation and
subsequent behavior of failure zones that form within the annual arctic sea ice
cover. The failure zones, termed. linear kinematic features (LKFs), often occur
in conjugate sets of sub-parallel faults that traverse a large fraction of the
arctic basin. Upon formation, the ice cover generally dilates somewhat and
subsequently oscillates, thereby enhancing transfer of heat from the ocean to
the atmosphere as well as increasing oceanic salt flux as new ice forms on open
water. The LKF.s/faults most probably affect the ice thickness distribution in
that, upon subsequent convergence of the ice pack, pressure ridging occurs. The
lineaments (and other large-scale fracture features) are similar in appearance
to smaller-scale compressive shear faults seen in laboratory specimens,
suggesting, when the fractal character of ice breakup is also taken into
account, that the physics of fracture is scale independent. Three different sets
of numerical experiments will be performed. In the first series, idealized and
numerical grid experiments will be carried out to examine the effect of
different flow rules on fault formation and on the attendant weakening of the
pack. In the second set, idealized spatially-varying wind forcing will be used
with heterogeneous initial strength and a laboratory-generated flow rule to
investigate the characteristic opening and closing of deformation faults as well
as their angle of intersection. In the third series, high-resolution basin-wide
modeling will be performed using a full-thickness ice distribution formulation.
These simulations will be compared with a variety of recently acquired
deformation data, most notably with recently declassified thickness-distribution
data from upward-looking submarine sonar observations. Such comparisons will
access the utility and applicability of this research to numerical air-ice-ocean
models for the numerical investigation of climate. Five sets of systematic
biaxial compressive experiments will be performed in the laboratory on blocks of
salt-water ice.

Intellectual Merit: In focusing on the development of a scale-independent sea-
ice model, particularly applicable to spatial resolutions less than 10
kilometers and to the resolution of failure zones/faults, this research
represents a new paradigm for sea ice dynamics. Under this paradigm, high
internal ice stresses leading to localized fracture occur over short periods of
time and rapidly decrease as a fault is formed. This differs significantly from
conventional formulations (of the ice pack and its thickness distribution) which
are used in current numerical investigations of climate and which implicitly
assume a smoothly-varying deformation field in both time and space. The
expectation is that the new model will more realistically capture the
distribution in sea ice thickness and, thus, will be more useful in the
numerical modeling of climate and its sensitivity to the polar sea ice cover.

Broader Impacts: The research will constitute an intense intellectual enquiry
carried out with the assistance of graduate students at two universities active
in polar research. It will contribute to the intellectual development of a new
generation of investigators, as well as enhance the research environment of the
two institutions. In addition, through the revelation and understanding of new
physical effects, the study will enrich both the undergraduate and graduate
teaching of the Principal Investigators. The activity will contribute also to a
working partnership in polar studies between Dartmouth and The University of
Alaska. To enhance scientific and technical understanding, the results of the
work will be disseminated broadly, through presentations to workshops and
societal meetings and through contributions to the technical and scientific
literature. A review article or book chapter is also planned.