* 0328686
* The Intersection between climate change water resources and humans in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,646,687.00

0328686&lt;br/&gt;White&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater is critical to the sustainability
of humans in the Arctic. Water used for drinking or cleaning can promote good
health or propagate disease. Water supports the plants and animals used for
subsistence harvest. Water prevents or promotes access to food or shelter. Water
has always been and will always be integral to the culture of humans in the
Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past 30 years, the climate in the Arctic
has warmed appreciably and there is evidence for a significant polar
amplification of global warming in the future. Recent studies suggest that
climate change will have a significant impact on arctic hydrology. Changes in
the hydrologic cycle will affect both the presence of surface water and the
thermal balance in soil. While preliminary evidence suggests a changing climate
will have a significant impact on the hydrologic cycle in arctic regions, very
little evidence is available to predict how the quality and quantity of
freshwater available to humans is likely to change. Even less is understood
about how hydrologic changes will affect the health, sustainability, and culture
of humans in the Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the
proposed research is to understand the vital role of freshwater in the lives of
humans in the Arctic, how it has changed in the recent past, and how it is
likely to change in the future. This work will build a model that will allow us
to predict climate-induced changes in the hydrologic cycle and their effects on
water quality and availability. On the basis of this data, it will attempt to
understand how these changes will impact the life and culture of Arctic peoples.
This study will take place on the Seward Peninsula, where climate-induced
changes in the hydrologic cycle are already apparent. Although the Seward
Peninsula is south of the Arctic Circle, it is a very good analogue for a warmer
Arctic. It is predominantly underlain by continuous permafrost in the northern
and central peninsula and the predominant vegetation is tussock tundra. This
project will draw upon community interaction, historical documentation, field
observations, laboratory experimentation, and computer modeling. The PIs have
extensive experience conducting research on the Seward Peninsula, working both
in the physical and social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project are two fold. Regionally it will employ a public outreach program
to promote water resource education and awareness in Alaskan villages. This
project will involve efforts to increase participation of Alaska Natives in
undergraduate and graduate studies. Outreach will be accomplished by integrating
this proposal into existing education infrastructure between the University of
Alaska and some Seward Peninsula villages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globally, the
broader impact of this study lies in its extractability to the entire
circumpolar Arctic. The Seward Peninsula lies at the southern boundary of
continuous permafrost. In this environment, slight changes in the permafrost
will cause long lasting changes to the hydrologic cycle and the quality and
availability of freshwater. If the climate continues to warm, the southern
boundary of permafrost will advance northward, eventually impacting all humans
in the Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
lies in the building of a model for interdisciplinary work that truly integrates
the physical and social sciences. This project couples the work of a cultural
anthropologist, a biologist, a hydrologist and an engineer. No one part of this
project is independent. In order to understand the potential impacts of climate-
induced changes in the hydrologic cycle on humans, two things are required.
First, the potential hydrologic changes must be quantified. This requires
regional scale modeling of a physical science. Second, the social science is
necessary to characterize the human dependence on the resource and response to
potential changes. Without the true integration of these two objectives one
cannot begin to understand the intersection between climate change, water
resources, and humans in the Arctic. While this study is on water as a resource,
this experimental approach could be extended to other resources in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;