* 0328827
* Room Temperature and Atmospheric Pressure Dioxygen Activation for the Deep Oxidation of Organic Wastes (TSE03-O)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* I Cheng, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 10/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

0328827 Cheng (1) Intellectual merit of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this investigation is to use dioxygen from air as the oxidizing agent for the
destruction of organic pollutants and their surrogates under mild reaction
conditions. We have recently discovered a method for the aqueous, room
temperature, and atmospheric pressure of dioxygen from air. Such scheme is
remarkable in that only air, water, iron particles, and a suitable iron
chelation agent are required (Fe(0)/EDTA/O2). No expensive precious metal
catalysts are used in the process. This process is a rare instance of abiotic
dioxygen activation at room temperature. To our knowledge this is the only
instance in which complete degradation of chlorinated organics compounds
proceeds with dioxygen as the ultimate oxidant under such mild reaction
conditions. We have recently demonstrated this system's oxidizing capabilities
on a variety of surrogates including 4-chlorophenol, pentachlorophenol, phenol,
nitrobenzene, and malathion. In all cases the starting compounds were degraded
into simpler non-toxic carboxylic acids, and carbon dioxide. In this study we
intend to examine the mechanism by which this system is able to generate
kinetically facile oxidizing species from O2, a study of the reaction pathways
through an elemental balance of the products, a survey of the oxidizing
capabilities of this system. In terms of a study with both scientific and
technical aspects, kinetic studies of the process are also proposed. Variables
such as Fe(0) dissolution rate, O2 demand, and EDTA concentration are of
interest with the eventual goal of increasing reaction kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity.&lt;br/&gt;There is a
significant interest in the discovery of a method for the destruction of organic
pollutants under mild reaction conditions with inexpensive reagents. The
Fe(0)/EDTA/O2 process fulfills these criteria. Ultimately, it is hoped that this
system will lead to the development of field portable organic pollutant
destruction schemes that can be rapidly commercialized and used by non-
specialized personnel. The Fe(0)/EDTA/O2 process has a strong possibility for
scale-up since there are no specialized catalysts or reagents required to
activate dioxygen.&lt;br/&gt;