* 0328870
* BE: MUSES:  Tracking Heavy Metal Life Cycle Pathways with Input-Output Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Lester Lave, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,229,500.00

This Biocomplexity in the Environment - Materials Use: Science, Engineering and
Society research project is aimed at developing input-output models of heavy
metal flows throughout some 500 economic sectors in the United States, including
those representing product use and recycling. This next generation of models
will build upon the existing Economic Input-Output Life-Cycle Assessment (EIO-
LCA) model, providing a basis for the materials use studies of metals such as
cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury and nickel. The heavy metals are of
considerable concern as they are in widespread use in numerous industries and
many are quite toxic. Understanding how and why we use these toxic materials can
help the decision-makers make use of them more effectively or reduce/eliminate
their use altogether. &lt;br/&gt; This research will result in an inexpensive,
quick analysis tool for both existing material flows and changes in material
flows. Emissions estimates will be corroborated using independent information
sources for emissions and ambient concentrations, and these will be combined to
assess and characterize the uncertainty in model predictions. International
comparisons of metals use, reuse and recycle rates in Canada and Japan will
provide insights into the magnitude of problems and possible material management
strategies. These next generation LCA models will permit steady-state supply
chain, releases, uses and recycling flows of heavy metals to be identified at
the individual product level up through the industrial sector level. The models
will also provide estimates of changes in heavy metal flows due to new
technologies, growth in economic activity and changes in mix of economic
activity. Scenarios leading to long-term sustainable materials use will be
identified involving both new technologies and management strategies. With
comparison to multiple datasets and simulation results, the data and model
uncertainty will be identified and characterized. The project will implement the
models on the Internet for widespread use, including education modules and a
specialized interface intended for middle and secondary school students. The new
models will inform the various stakeholders such as industry, environmental
groups, regulators and the public at large who are concerned with these heavy
metal flows.