* 0328350
* Collaborative Proposal:  Constituting Nature and Society in the Global Environment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sheila Jasanoff, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 269,613.00

The emergence of the global environment as a site for scientific and social
action is one of the transformative events marking the turn of the 21st century.
In scientific terms, the global framing has altered the scales at which, and the
methods by which, we seek to understand natural and social influences on the
environment, as well as interactions between them. In social and political
terms, environmental globalization has given rise to new concepts, institutions,
actor coalitions, political strategies, and norms that transcend or compete with
the politics of nation-states. Using theories in science and technology studies,
about globalization and environmental governance and about co-production, this
project will explore the implications of these coupled changes for emerging
structures of global governance, focusing specifically on new institutional
arrangements around global environmental science, politics, and policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globalization is seen for purposes of this project as
dynamic, interacting with processes of localization and requiring diverse
accommodations between global and local institutions, norms, practices, and
technologies. To understand environmental globalization, it is therefore
necessary to examine processes operating below the global levels. Co-production
is the joint production of natural and social order, or knowledge and forms of
life. This framework is particularly useful for studying emergent phenomena such
as environmental globalism, and for understanding persistent differences in
societal approaches to studying and managing the natural world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design is comparative, across nation-states
(U.S., Germany, India) and across non-state sectors (science, corporations,
civil society). In each research site, the project will focus on three anchoring
concepts that are both policy-relevant and theoretically interesting:
sustainability, vulnerability, precaution. The objective will be to uncover how
natural knowledge and social response are being co-produced through attempts to
define and implement these concepts. Methodologically, the project will
incorporate qualitative approaches (including case and country studies) from
science studies, law, anthropology, history of science, and comparative
politics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate new knowledge,
research methods, and institutional insights relevant to the organization of
global environmental science and public policy. Research results will illuminate
means of enhancing relations among the institutions of global environmental
governance and a global citizenry. Outputs will include recommendations for: (1)
the design of global environmental research programs, especially approaches to
integrating social and natural science research (e.g., modeling, collaborative
teams, interdisciplinary training programs); (2) proposals to strengthen
linkages between science and policy, especially evaluations of assessment
methods (e.g., intergovernmental, multi-stakeholder, consensus conferences) and
their varying receptivity across political cultures; and (3) identification of
governance arrangements that appropriately recognize and take into account
cross-national variation in global environmental science and policy. The project
will train graduate and postdoctoral researchers and will strengthen
collaborative networks in environmental research and science and technology
studies between the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard and the La Follette
School of Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. &lt;br/&gt;