* 0328333
* 2003 Summer Bioengineering Conference, June 25-29, 2003, Sonesta Beach Resort, Key Biscayne, Florida
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Louis Soslowsky, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 05/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

0328333 Soslowsky The Summer Bioengineering Conference is a multidisciplinary
biennial biomedical engineering event sponsored by the Bioengineering Division
of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). This year's Conference
is co-sponsored by other well recognized societies related to Bioengineering,
including the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES), the American Institute of
Chemical Engineers (AIChE), the U.S. National Committee on Biomechanics (USNCB),
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (IEEE EMBS), and Biomat.net. The multidisciplinary nature of
bioengineering is well represented by participation of these sponsoring
societies. A hallmark of this meeting has been the interaction and true
integration of rigorous engineering principles and rigorous biologic concepts.
The meeting is to occur at Sonesta Beach Resort, Key Biscayne, FL June 25-29,
2003.

Support is provided for 3 plenary speakers who will make presentations about
fields just outside of mainstream bioengineering, such as; genomics;
biomechanics of cell motility; environmental stresses on cell behavior; systems
analysis and biotechnology to understand disease; gene regulatory networks. The
intellectual merit of the expert plenary speaker concept is high as advanced
scientific concepts are to be introduced to bioengineering researchers.
Similarly, a broader impact should occur from the presentations by providing
important cross-fertilization of ideas, concepts, tools, and approaches to
problem solving.

All conference presentations will be documented in two page extended abstracts
and compiled in a CD format, distributed free to all paid registrants. Copies of
this CD will also be provided to all co-sponsoring societies. The contents of
this CD will be posted on the conference web site at
http://www.asme.org/divisions/bed/events/summer03.html.