* 0329597
* Sensors: Multi-Sensor Information Processing with Automotive Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Le Yi Wang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 297,774.00

Technology advancement in automotive engine, transmission, and emission
aftertreatment systems has&lt;br/&gt;ushered in new challenges in developing
sophisticated information processing and control strategies
to&lt;br/&gt;optimize vehicle performance at reduced costs. Sensor information
processing is of vital importance in&lt;br/&gt;this pursuit. Optimal utility of
low-cost sensors, information coordination of multiple sensors,
and&lt;br/&gt;estimation of internal states and system parameters using sensors
of limited capability and accuracy have&lt;br/&gt;become one of the key design
considerations.&lt;br/&gt;Using automotive systems as a key platform, and
gasoline direct injection engine and its aftertreatment&lt;br/&gt;system for
methodology development and implementation, this project will investigate the
following&lt;br/&gt;fundamental issues on sensor information processing: (1) How
can one identify system parameters or&lt;br/&gt;estimate internal states by
using low-cost sensors that provide only limited information and accuracy?
(2)&lt;br/&gt;How can one maximize the information utility of multiple sensor
systems? (3) What is the impact of&lt;br/&gt;sensor location configuration and
characteristics on performance benefits and costs? Due to
high&lt;br/&gt;nonlinearity, large uncertainty, and sensor limitations, these
issues are extremely challenging, and&lt;br/&gt;demand new methodologies and
implementation technologies that will push forward the frontiers
of&lt;br/&gt;system identification and practical sensor information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Project: With over 220 million
registered vehicles and 2.8 trillion miles of&lt;br/&gt;annually traveled
distances, the US automotive industry bears an enormous impact on the national
and&lt;br/&gt;global economy, safety, and environment. This project will develop
an innovative methodology of multi-sensor&lt;br/&gt;identification and
estimation, on the basis of extensive past research effort from the PI and
his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators. In collaboration with researchers from the
automotive industry, findings from this&lt;br/&gt;investigation will be employed
and implemented to design better control and adaptation strategies
in&lt;br/&gt;automotive systems for improved performance.&lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of this project will also introduce new identification and sensor
information&lt;br/&gt;methods that go much beyond what is known in these fields.
In particular, it will lead to new multi-sensor&lt;br/&gt;identification methods
that use binary-valued and other nonlinear sensors, and new understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;implementation issues on practical sensor information processing.
In light of tremendous sensor&lt;br/&gt;development effort in many application
areas, such as gas content sensors, biosensors, wireless
medical&lt;br/&gt;sensors, nanosensors, etc., which will all demand advanced and
new information processing techniques to&lt;br/&gt;maximize their capabilities
and utilities, this project anticipates such emerging requirements for
sensor&lt;br/&gt;information processing methodologies, and develops generic
methods that will see increased utility when&lt;br/&gt;new sensors are
developed.&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: Beyond the automotive powertrain platforms,
the findings from this project will have&lt;br/&gt;direct utility in a wide
array of applications, including vehicle rollover prediction, fault diagnosis of
fuel&lt;br/&gt;cell systems and vehicles, computer network traffic control,
medical sensor information processing, and&lt;br/&gt;process control problems.
The PI and his industry collaborators are currently pursuing
methodology&lt;br/&gt;enhancement, technology transfer, and device development
in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;This research project encompasses fundamental research
and technology development across a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of disciplines. It
targets directly at a broad and important automotive application;
involves&lt;br/&gt;mathematics modeling, sensor signal processing, and system
identification; and utilizes the most&lt;br/&gt;advanced facility at Ford Motor
Company. As such it provides participating undergraduate and
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students an excellent opportunity to be exposed to a large
spectrum of scientific and technology frontiers&lt;br/&gt;with fundamental
methodology development, hand-on design skills, and industry experience.
The&lt;br/&gt;research findings and course material from this project will be
widely disseminated in professional&lt;br/&gt;conferences and journals. Software
packages resulted from this project will be released through
the&lt;br/&gt;project homepage for the public use free of charge.