* 0329143
* Collaborative Research:     Privacy-Sensitive Data Mining from Multi-Party Distributed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Hillol Kargupta, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 256,020.00

Collaborative Research: Privacy-Sensitive Data Mining from Multi-Party
Distributed Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing number of data mining
applications need to deal with data sources that are distributed, possibly
proprietary, and sensitive to privacy. This has resulted in the development of
several privacy-preserving data mining techniques. Many of these algorithms work
using randomized techniques to perturb the data and preserve the data privacy
while still guaranteeing the invariance of the underlying patterns. This
proposal first points out that the popular naive randomization of the data (more
specifically, additive random matrices) may preserve little data privacy in many
cases. It proposes a framework to understand these data masking techniques using
the theory of random matrices to shows the problems of some existing privacy-
preserving data mining techniques and potential research directions for solving
the problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal also suggests the development
of a collection of randomized techniques that are provably correct in supporting
privacy-sensitive applications. It proposes a randomized projection-based
technique to compute statistical aggregates from multi-party distributed data.
It also suggests research on a privacy-sensitive distributed Bayesian network
learning algorithm for similar applications. The proposed algorithms will be
developed, tested, and evaluated using a collection of testbeds that the PIs
have been developing for the last several years.