* 0329424
* (TSE03-O) Bauxite Residue (Red Mud) Neutralization/Treatment Using Fly Ash and Direct Carbonization
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* David Dzombak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 10/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Safe treatment and storage of high volume industrial waste streams pose unique
waste management challenges. Land disposal of these materials often has negative
environmental impacts such as contamination of soil and groundwater, and
consumes vast areas of land. Bauxite residue (Red Mud) from aluminum production,
fly ash from coal combustion, and waste water treatment plant (WWTP) biosolids
are three examples of high volume waste streams. Approximately 3 million tons of
Red Mud are produced in the U.S. each year (30 M/yr globally), and are disposed
in land-based impoundment reservoirs. Approximately 63 million and 7 million
tons of fly ash and biosolids are generated annually in the U.S., respectively,
much of which is disposed of in landfills. Another high volume (Gigatons/yr)
waste stream with serious environmental impacts is CO2. Safe disposal of these
wastes are a requisite. New methods for sustainable management and ways to find
beneficial use for these wastes are highly desirable. Red Mud is usually managed
by discharge into engineered or natural impoundment reservoirs, with subsequent
dewatering by gravity consolidation and sometimes with capping for closure.
Revegetation of dewatered Red Mud is not possible without addition of amendments
because of the high pH, high salinity, and absence of nutrients and organic
constituents.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates the potential of using high
volume waste materials, specifically CO2 and acidic fly ash, to neutralize Red
Mud for the purpose of soil building and revegetation. The potential of Red Mud
to safely sequester CO2 will also be determined. Bench scale batch experiments
will be used to evaluate the rate and extent of Red Mud neutralization by
contacting with dilute carbon dioxide waste streams, and by addition of acidic
fly ash. The properties of the resulting mixture will be evaluated including pH,
heavy metal leaching potential, carbonate mineral content, texture, bulk
density, and water holding capacity. The additional neutralization capacity and
reduction in heavy metal leaching afforded by WWTP biosolids, a common organic
soil amendment needed to aid revegetation of surficial neutralized Red Mud, will
also be determined. Various Red Mud to ash ratios, CO2 concentrations, and
organic amendment concentrations will be used to determine which ratio provides
optimal soil properties for revegetation. Lastly, engineering schemes to
implement this technology will be evaluated for a possible Phase II field
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;Expected benefits and broader impacts. This project
will provide new methods for neutralizing Red Mud, a high volume, highly
alkaline residue from bauxite mining, with other high volume waste materials
(CO2, acidic fly ash, biosolids). Treatment of Red Mud will make possible
revegetation and environmental restoration of the large Red Mud disposal areas
in the U.S. and elsewhere. The beneficial use of CO2, fly ash, and biosolids for
this purpose will lower the environment impact of several industries. The
potential exists to use millions of tons of CO2 or fly ash in Red Mud
neutralization rather than emission to the atmosphere or disposal in a landfill,
respectively. As much as 785% of the annual CO2 emissions from aluminum smelting
can potentially be sequestered in the process of neutralizing Red Mud currently
in storage. This project will also provide unique training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students in the area of sustainable environmental
management.