* 0329924
* SENSORS:  Optical Whispering-Gallery Modes for Diverse Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Albert Rosenberger, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 09/30/2007
* USD 300,001.00

This Sensor proposal focuses on transparent fused-silica microspheres, which
support&lt;br/&gt;whispering-gallery modes (WGMs)- light trapped by total
internal reflection and orbiting just&lt;br/&gt;beneath the surface. These
modes, excited by optical tunneling from an adjacent tapered
fiber,&lt;br/&gt;have an evanescent component outside the surface and a very
sharp frequency resonance (high&lt;br/&gt;Q). The mode amplitude and resonant
frequency can be very sensitive to changes in the&lt;br/&gt;microresonator's
environment, and thus enable sensing of, for example: strain,
acceleration,&lt;br/&gt;thermal effects, trace gases, chemicals, and
modifications of the surface.&lt;br/&gt;This project will: further develop and
advance previously-demonstrated methods of&lt;br/&gt;WGM evanescent-wave sensing
of trace gases in the atmosphere and chemicals in solution;&lt;br/&gt;extend
earlier applications of WGM microsensors, in measuring thermal and
absorptive&lt;br/&gt;properties, to the characterization of transparent thin
films; pursue novel techniques that enable&lt;br/&gt;the multiplication of
sensitivity enhancements, by combining effects such as modal
interference&lt;br/&gt;with WGM microsensing; and apply to WGM microresonators
methods of surface preparation&lt;br/&gt;that have proved useful in fiber
sensors for gases, chemicals, and biological agents. In&lt;br/&gt;accomplishing
these objectives, all aspects of the project will benefit from: improving
control&lt;br/&gt;and coupling techniques, utilizing various redundant
measurements to characterize WGMs,&lt;br/&gt;studying the effects of changing
system configurations, and expanding the numerical modeling&lt;br/&gt;of the
microsensors. Specific parts of the project will involve: implementing
wavelength-modulation&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy with the WGM locked to resonance
with a frequency-scanning laser,&lt;br/&gt;and ruggedizing the sensor by
attaching the coupler(s); measuring the thermal
accommodation&lt;br/&gt;coefficient and optical absorption coefficient of a thin
film coating the microresonator; using&lt;br/&gt;cavity ringdown of the
scattered light, and applying controlled multimode-taper coupling to
the&lt;br/&gt;WGMs of the microresonator, to amplify its absorption-detection
sensitivity; and combining&lt;br/&gt;surface-enhanced Raman scattering with WGMs
by coating the microresonator with a thin film&lt;br/&gt;containing gold
nanoparticles, as well as using the techniques of surface coating with xerogels
or&lt;br/&gt;antibodies for biosensing.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Even a
supposedly well-understood system can exhibit novel&lt;br/&gt;behavior under
extreme conditions, or when interacting with another system. The
exquisitely&lt;br/&gt;high Q of a WGM provides extreme conditions here, and
interactions between WGMs and&lt;br/&gt;surface or coupling effects give a
multiplication of sensitivity-enhancement factors.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The graduate students involved will be learning fundamental physics&lt;br/&gt;as
well as becoming grounded in real-world applications; they will also be directly
involved in&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of results through conference presentations
and peer-reviewed journal&lt;br/&gt;publications. This work will benefit the
University's multidisciplinary Photonics degree&lt;br/&gt;programs and its
interdepartmental Center for Sensors and Sensor Technologies. The
sensing&lt;br/&gt;techniques to be developed here have many potential benefits
to society, as has already been&lt;br/&gt;recognized by the Oklahoma Center for
the Advancement of Science and Technology, NASA's&lt;br/&gt;Marshall Space
Flight Center, and Nomadics, Inc., through their support of and collaboration
on&lt;br/&gt;related work.