* 0329905
* SENSORS: Biological Sensor Data Acquistion System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Kurt Fristrup, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 375,000.00

Tagging animals with miniature electronic instruments provides unique
opportunities to observe physiology, movements, and social behavior in a free-
ranging context. The addition of environmental sensors to animal tags provides
the capacity to monitor ecological and oceanographic processes, and the animals
can be viewed as self- sustaining autonomous vehicles that focus sampling effort
on regions of biological interest. Although some scenarios permit recovery of
the tags, a much broader domain of applications requires telemetry of data from
the tags, usually using radio frequency signals. Radio tags confront conflicting
demands: minimization of transmit power to enable extended operations with small
batteries, and maximization of the area over which the tags can be tracked. In
the current systems for marine animal (e.g., whales) data acquisition, the
attached (implanted) radio tags measure data about the animals and their
environments and store the data in memory as packets. When the animal surfaces
in view of a satellite, this data is transmitted to the satellite where the
biologist can retrieve it. Once the packet is transmitted to the satellite, it
may be deleted from storage on the animal-implanted device. The devices on
animals transmit at preset intervals to the satellite. However, the use of the
satellite system accepts certain limitations: substantial transmission power
requirements, high cost, and probable limits on connections, because satellites
may not always be in view. The last problem may prove serious if the tags cannot
transmit at any time. Many marine mammal species have dive durations exceeding
30 minutes, and may spend less than 15% of their time on the surface. Moreover,
the cost and energy consumption are critical issues due to the low battery power
of the implants. In this proposal, the proposer advocate a different approach:
the infrastructure is extended to the animals (mobile nodes) by the mobile nodes
themselves, by creating a sensor network infrastructure composed of the animal
tags. The information that is created in a network node is allowed to be
diffused (replicated) among the nodes, as the nodes come into contact due to
their mobility. In other words, as a node comes into reception distance from
another node, the information stored in the memory of the node is replicated and
stored in the memory of the recipient node. An information collecting station is
placed within the animal habitat, and when an animal comes within the reception
range if a collecting station, all stored information in the memory of that
animal tag is offloaded to the collecting station. To increase the probability
that the information is recovered from the network, a number of collecting
stations can be distributed throughout the habitat. Thus, only one of each
information piece needs to reach only one collecting station to be successfully
offloaded. The propoer term this networking model the Ad Hoc Infostation model.
As part of the research, it propose to address three areas: research into the
design and performance evaluation of the Ad Hoc Infostation model, development
of a practical sensor tag that would operate in a network of Ad Hoc
Infostations, and integration of the sensor tag into a network of Ad Hoc
Infostations. In particular, examples of topics address under the first area
include design of the network of Ad Hoc Infostations to reach the terrestrial
network, networks that include a hierarchy of different-mobility nodes, such as
those that include mobile Ad Hoc Infostations, and examination of the "capacity-
delay" tradeoff offered by the Ad Hoc Infostation model. In their work, plan on
using the vast knowledge in epidemic modeling to leverage from in studying the
Ad Hoc Infostation model. Under the second area, a new transceiver tag will be
developed, which will support all of the RF capabilities needed for the wireless
Ad Hoc Infostation networking nodes. Under the third area, the tags and Ad Hoc
Infostation receivers will be tested locally, and evaluated in two pilot
projects to assess their biological utility. Initial functional tests will be
conducted by setting up Ad Hoc Infostations in the local Tompkins Country, and
driving tags around to simulate animal movements. The second project will
utilize the networking capabilities to gather bioacoustic data from a matrix of
dispersed fixed sensors. As the broader impact of the proposal, whales and other
marine mammals are crucial to several marine environmental issues and improved
understanding of the factors that enable prediction marine mammal distributions,
and of the responses of marine mammals to anthropogenic noise, is a long0term
research priority of naval research. Also, NSF has proposed a National
Environmental Observation Network, a 10 year $120M program. Two of the proposed
12 sites have been earmarked for funding in the President's proposed budget. Our
proposed system could implement a heterogeneous network of stationary
instruments, relatively sedentary animals, and wide-ranging animals to
efficiently transmit telemetry data from areas that are inaccessible or very
difficult to access.