* 0329347
* Sensors:     A New Class of Devices Based on Interfacial Effects in Metal-Semiconductor Hybrid Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Stuart Solin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

1. Intellectual Merit We have recently demonstrated experimentally that hybrid
thin film structures possessing an appropriately selected geometric interface
between a semiconductor and a metal display a new phenomenon that has been
labeled extraordinary magnetoresistance (EMR) and that InSb devices with either
internal or external Au shunts exhibit room-temperature EMR as high as 100% to
750,000% at magnetic fields, ranging from 0.05T to 4 Tesla, respectively. These
nonmagnetic structures are readily fabricated for practical sensor applications
such as read-heads for ultra-high density magnetic recording and rival the
performance of conventional sensors based on the giant magnetoresistance (GMR)
effect. We have also demonstrated that EMR devices are scalable from macroscopic
to nanoscopic dimensions in the range of millimeters to 20 nanometers. It has
recently been realized that EMR is but one example of a broad class of geometry-
driven interfacial effects in hybrid semiconductor-metal structures. Now a
second example of such interfacial phenomena, extraordinary piezoconductivity
(EPC), has also been demonstrated by Solin et. al. Here we propose to establish
proof of principle, elucidate the underlying physics and develop prototypes of a
new class of ifEXXly sensors in which the sensitivity of the metal-semiconductor
interface to external perturbations gives rise to similar extraordinary
responses. In the case of EMR we propose new prototype array structures for
ultra-high resolution magnetic sensing and magnetic imaging. For EPC we propose
to clarify the physical principles and to develop prototypes of ultra sensitive
and robust strain and pressure sensors. For extraordinary electroconductance
(EEC), extraordinary thermoconductance (ETC) and extraordinary optoconductance
(EOC) devices we will first establish proof of principal and thereafter move to
the prototype stage. All EXX effects are critically dependent on the geometry
and physical properties the metal-semiconductor interface. We have already shown
that the finite element method (FEM) for modeling EMR provides excellent ixno
adjustable parameterl" agreement with experiments while revealing the current
and potential distribution in the device in exquisite detail. Therefore, we
propose collateral investigation of these novel EXX effects using FEM modeling
since it incorporates geometrical issues, while accounting for the attendant
complex boundary conditions. FEM is also ideally suited for the design
optimization of the structures in order to enhance sensitivity. 2. Broader
Impact It is anticipated that the proposed research will have broad beneficial
impact on education, technology, and society. It will expose graduate and
undergraduate students from a number of disciplines/departments to new
experimental techniques, basic physical principles, and novel fabrication
methods related to EXX sensor development thus providing interdisciplinary
skills that will be mandatory for the next generation of the nation's scientists
and engineers. Research results will also be integrated into the undergraduate
course work at both institutions and into a special topics course for ioMagnetlo
high school students. The proposed research will enhance the opportunity for
adding women and under-represented minorities to the Washington University
faculty through hiring programs currently chaired by the PI. It will also
significantly augment the development of a new campus-wide Materials
Initiative/Center that is lead by the PI. EXX sensors could impact a variety of
diverse technologies including sensors for medical applications, manufacturing
quality control, automobile safety, pollution-control and fuel-efficiency,
thermal imaging devices and consumer electronics with obvious social, medical
and economic benefits.