* 0329572
* SENSORS: Novel Optical Fiber Sensors for Civil Engineering Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Maria Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 290,465.00

Recent collapses of bridges and buildings due to earthquakes, accidents, and
terrorist attacks have highlighted the urgent needs to monitor the condition of
the nation's civil infrastructure systems. However, one of the major obstacles
preventing sensor-based monitoring is the lack of reliable, easy-to-install, and
cost-effective sensors that are suited for and can be densely deployed on large-
scale civil infrastructure systems. This research focuses on development of a
distributed optical fiber accelerometer system recently conceptualized by this
PI. The sensor system represents a novel integration of the moir phenomena and
fiber optics to achieve a robust performance in addition to its immunity to EM
interference, easy cabling, and multiplexing capability. All of these,
impossible to achieve by the conventional sensors, make the proposed sensor
system ideal for applications in civil infrastructure monitoring. The objective
of this research is to investigate whether it is technically feasible to
engineer the sensor concept into a high-performance and low-cost multiplexible
optical fiber sensor system. Major research tasks include (1) development of a
prototype accelerometer with optimal tradeoff between resolution and bandwidth,
(2) development of software that further increases the sensor resolution through
innovative measurement and signal processing, and (3) field test in the world
largest Three Gorges Power Plant in China, where the conventional sensors are
rendered inoperable due to strong EM interference, high moisture, and huge
scale. The highly interdisciplinary nature and the international collaboration
component of this project provide unique educational opportunities to
undergraduate and graduate (including underrepresented) students. This research
will advance scientific knowledge in the areas of innovative sensing concepts,
signal processing, and field implementation. The proposed high-performance
optical fiber sensors will have a positive impact on the safety and reliability
of the nation's civil infrastructure.