* 0329549
* SENSORS:    Placement and Operation of an Environmental Sensor Network to Facilitate Decision Making Regarding Drinking Water Quality and Security
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Mitchell Small, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,506,000.00

0329549&lt;br/&gt;VanBriesen&lt;br/&gt;This project couples knowledge discovery
in large environmental databases with in situ biological and chemical sensor
networks to revolutionize drinking water quality and security decision making.
Water quality and security data provide a compelling application, with large,
real datasets, where data mining and decision-making tools will be designed and
tested. It is proposed to produce a distribution and operation protocol for the
placement and utilization of in situ environmental sensors by combining (1) new
algorithms for spatial-temporal data mining, (2) new methods to model water
quality and security dynamics, and (3) a sophisticated decision-analysis
framework. This project will be beneficial to Environmental Decision Making
(providing cutting-edge database and data-mining technology to enhance
environmental science and policy decision making), to Environmental Sensor
Development (providing critical feedback on sensitivity and specificity needs),
and to Information Management (providing large, real datasets and real queries
as well as multiple research challenges related to spatio-temporal patterns and
imputed information). Further, the project represents application of these
research areas to the critical current issue of ensuring safe and secure
drinking water to the population of the United States.