* 0329482
* NTE:  Innovative Technologies for Heavy Metals Removal by Tunable Biopolymers with Customized Properties (TSE03-N, PHASE II)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Mark Matsumoto, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 12/31/2007
* USD 362,000.00

Chen&lt;br/&gt;0329482&lt;br/&gt;Soil and groundwater contamination by heavy
metals is prevalent at hazardous waste sites in the United States. To remediate
these sites there is a strong interest in developing novel polymeric materials
that have superior affinity, capacity, and selectivity for target heavy metals
because of their unique physical, chemical and biological properties. Genetic
and protein engineering have emerged as the latest tools for the construction of
novel materials that can be controlled precisely at the molecular level. With
the advent of recombinant DNA techniques, it is now possible to create
"artificial" protein polymers with fundamentally new molecular organization. The
most significant feature of these nanoscale biopolymers is that they are
specifically pre-programmed within a synthetic gene template and can be
controlled precisely in terms of sizes, compositions and functions at the
molecular level. In our Phase I NTE project, a class of tunable biopolymers,
which can reversibly aggregate, has been developed and were shown to have high
specificity for the target heavy metals in a highly heterogeneous solution. The
overall objective in Phase II is to further our investigations on the design,
synthesis, and applicability of these new tunable biopolymers both in situ and
ex situ removal of cadmium, lead, mercury and arsenic. A class of protein-based
triblock polymers will be created and the feasibility of utilizing the resulting
porous structures as affinity barriers will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The tunable biopolymers proposed
herein are extensions of ideas from nature toward entirely new objectives.
Molecular-level protein-protein recognition is tailored specifically into
tunable metal-binding biopolymers. These biopolymers can be easily applied for
both in situ and ex situ heavy metal removal. This operation is environmentally
friendly since no toxic chemical is required for synthesis of the biopolymers
and regeneration can be achieved easily. This strategy, if successful, will
provide a low-cost, efficient, and environmentally benign technology for heavy
metal removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This proposal will combine
the multidisciplinary expertise of the PIs to develop a potentially reliable and
economical process for the decontamination of heavy metal contaminated
groundwaters and/or soil. The integration of the development of tunable
biopolymers for heavy metal removal with process development represents a unique
effort that expands the fundamental development of protein engineering with the
implementation of process technology. The proposed research involves
intersection of principles and methods of molecular genetics, protein
engineering, material research, and process engineering. Graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers participating in this research will gain an integrated
perspective of the important interfaces and synergies connecting biochemistry,
modern genetics, and process engineering. As the integration of research and
education is one of the key programs of NSF, the proposed research will involve
the participation of K-12 school students, undergraduates and graduate students,
particularly form underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;