* 0329111
* Interacting with Threaded Event Scenarios
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Johnetta Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 93,768.00

Threaded event networks are hypertext-like structures which the PI has
previously explored in three domains (science education, narratives, and digital
preservation) employing distinct but related formalisms: qualitative causal
maps, plot units, and role-activity diagrams. While these formalisms appear to
be generally effective, they are considerably more complex than simple node-and-
link hypertext. Moreover, event networks are often associated with text passages
and are often intended for educational uses where repeated navigation through
the network following different paths is to be expected. In these contexts, ease
of user access is crucial in order for the formalisms to be effective for users.
In this project, the PI will extend his work on threaded event scenarios to
address interface issues and develop supporting navigational landmarks, by
applying composite hypertexts to complex domains to further develop timeline
toolkits that his earlier work have created or suggested. He will develop more
interactive and adaptive presentations, which allow users to branch from
established guided tours within the event networks, and which, as the users gain
greater familiarity with the network, enable adjustment of the landmarks that
are presented to provide context for the users. Authors and other users will
also be able to add annotations, and even structured meta-comments, to the event
networks, for which dialog management and rhetorical structures will be
supported. The PI will conduct three levels of evaluations: for the low-level
tools, for the use of the tools in high-level tasks, and as the basis for
developing communities discussing science and history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because discussion of causation is so
common in areas as diverse as science and history, tools to highlight and
explore event networks potentially have a wide range of applications. These
tools should help students to develop richer conceptual understanding of events
in science and history. The tools may also be used by the public to create
discussion sites about history, and they should be useful for practicing
scientists, historians, archivists, and genealogists.