* 0329810
* Design Methods for High-Performance Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Marilyn Wolf, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wolf Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
developing new methods for the design of high-performance sensor networks
&lt;br/&gt;that perform significant amounts of computation within the sensor
network. High-&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth signal processing applications, such as
distributed audio or video processing, are becoming &lt;br/&gt;increasingly
common, and performing large amounts of processing in the distributed
&lt;br/&gt;system that implements the sensor network poses new design
challenges. On the &lt;br/&gt;one hand, high-performance sensor networks are
like distributed embedded systems, which need &lt;br/&gt;to be optimized to the
application in order to minimize power consumption and cost and
&lt;br/&gt;maximize performance; on the other hand, they are like ad-hoc
networks that need to be &lt;br/&gt;able to be operate in a number of different
configurations without radically increasing the &lt;br/&gt;cost of operating the
network. New design methodologies and tools are needed that can
&lt;br/&gt;create a resilient architecture that still takes advantage of
application-specific &lt;br/&gt;characteristics. Traditional algorithms and
methodologies for designing distributed &lt;br/&gt;embedded systems can handle
some of the aspects of sensor networks, namely distributed
&lt;br/&gt;computation and the effects of communication delay, but their purpose
is to select a &lt;br/&gt;single good design. They provide no guarantees that
any changes in the system &lt;br/&gt;parameters (number of nodes, communication,
power budget) will result in a system &lt;br/&gt;that operates anywhere close to
optimality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the proper choice of nodes and links, and
the right topology and &lt;br/&gt;communication patterns within the high-
performance sensor network, the cost/power/performance &lt;br/&gt;of the network
can be substantially improved. A &lt;br/&gt;combination of design-time and run-
time decisions is required for the successful design &lt;br/&gt;and deployment
of high-performance sensor networks because certain characteristics
&lt;br/&gt;of the system will not be known until run time, &lt;br/&gt;and those
characteristics may change during operation of the network. Furthermore, the
&lt;br/&gt;configuration of the network may not be known at design time. The
overall &lt;br/&gt;hardware and software architecture of the network must be
designed to operate well not &lt;br/&gt;just at a single design point, but
across a range of possible configurations and operating &lt;br/&gt;decisions.
This research seeks to balance the needs for optimizing the design and adapting
its &lt;br/&gt;operation at run time by developing new design methods that find
pareto-optimal regions &lt;br/&gt;in the design space. Pareto-optimality has
been used to design small-scale embedded &lt;br/&gt;systems, but this work
improves on previous efforts in several ways: handling larger
&lt;br/&gt;systems, lower-variance design; analysis of run-time behavior; and
inclusion of Monte-&lt;br/&gt;Carlo methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The methods developed in the research will directly
enable&lt;br/&gt;systems for security and a variety of industrial applications.
High-performance audio and &lt;br/&gt;video are especially important in security
applications and distributed real-time &lt;br/&gt;processing of data will help
to create security systems that can identify problems more &lt;br/&gt;quickly.
Design tools, benchmark data, and lecture materials on distributed embedded
systems&lt;br/&gt;will be distributed over the web.