* 0329470
* BE: MUSES:  Multilevel Cycles, Models, and Scenarios for Iron Alloying Elements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Robert Gordon, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,024,914.00

This Biocomplexity in the Environment - Materials Use: Science, Engineering and
Society research project focuses on linking the use of alloying elements used in
steel production through materials flow analysis (MFA) and economic analysis. To
date, no multilevel linked cycles have been constructed for any technological
materials, such as steel. World steel production has increased by almost a
factor of ten since the Second World War. Advances in metallurgy have occurred
over the same timeframe, making it possible to produce a wide variety of steels
with considerably enhanced properties, achieved through the alloying of iron
with small to moderate amounts of a suite of other engineering metals. For some
of these elements, industrial use is significantly linked to the demands of
steel production. Very little information on the material flow cycles of these
elements is available, especially on how those cycles are linked together, and
on what the implication of changes in those cycles might be for resource
availability, economics, the environment, and options for governmental policy.
&lt;br/&gt; This research will use a dynamic material flow analysis model to
study the linking of the alloying elements, as well as to trace the histories of
the ferroalloy element use and to develop long-term scenarios for the future. In
parallel, an economic model incorporating materials flows will be developed for
the United States to explore market structure, costs, and related drivers as
influences on future materials flows. A unique information exchange will be
created with a six-member advisory team of researchers from the steel industry,
government, and academia representing Europe, Asia and the United States. In
order to inform the broader public of the significance of decisions regarding
steel and its alloying elements, an exhibit on material flow cycles will be
organized for the Yale Peabody Museum. This research directly addresses a key
topic, identified by the National Research Council, on "Reinventing the Use of
Materials". It is expected that the integrated, dynamic framework of MFA and
economics that results from this project will enable future research studies on
materials and the environment by both national and international researchers in
industrial ecology. The award is jointly funded and monitored by the BES and CMS
divisions of the NSF Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;