* 0329241
* Applying Multiple-Instance Learning to Content-Based Image Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Sally Goldman, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2006
* USD 320,999.00

Applying Multiple-Instance Learning to Content-Based Image Retrieval

With the development of the web, there has been an explosion in the volume of
both textual and digital media. Effective use of that information requires
efficient technology for locating relevant material. Algorithms for textual
search, such as string matching for keyword searches, are well understood.
However, effective techniques to retrieve images based on semantic content need
to be developed. Manual keyword annotation is not feasible due to the size of
the image repositories, the rich contents of the images, and the subjectivity of
human perception. This project applies new segmentation methods and multiple-
instance learning, a new machine learning technique, to the image search
problem. The research activities promise to enable effective image search in
which a user provide an example of a desired image and indicates which of a
small number of candidate images are desirable. Unlike existing content-based
image retrieval (CBIR) systems, this project uses multiple-instance learning to
automatically determine which portion(s) of the image are important to the user.
Just as textual search technology has revolutionized the way people search for
textual information, efficient image retrieval based on semantic content has the
potential for large productivity gains in the way people work with images,
including better utilization of the increasing volume of information available
as images, with accompanying economic benefits. Undergraduate and graduate
students will receive training through independent research experiences,
classroom presentations, and course final projects. The PI will encourage more
women to study computer science through interactions with high school women
through the outreach activities of Washington University's Society of Women
Engineers (SWE) and through interaction with college women through mentoring
activities of SWE. Dissemination of the research results will be through
conference presentations and papers, journal publications. Also papers and
software will made available at www.cs.wustl.edu/~sg.