* 0329195
* GOALI:  Atomic-scale Investigation of High Dielectric Constant Thin Films Using In Situ and Other Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Christos Takoudis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 09/30/2007
* USD 338,881.00

This GOALI project includes atomic level studies of thin film structures needed
for future generations of nano-electronics technology. The initial focus will be
on hafnium oxide on silicon, later extending to more technologically interesting
systems such as hafnium silicates on nitride barriers. This project will involve
graduate students working in an academic and industrial (Air Liquide (AL))
setting to establish the relationships among growth conditions, hafnium-
containing precursor purity, method of transient delivery of reactive fluids,
atomic scale structural properties of the high dielectric constant
structure/Si(100) interfaces, and high-temperature post-
processing/structure/&lt;br/&gt;function relationships. The gas phase
composition during the growth process is to be monitored with unique real-time
vapor phase detection. The properties, structure, and functionality of the films
will be investigated with complementary techniques such as atomic scale
resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy/electron energy loss
spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy with monolayer sensitivity, X-ray
diffraction, and electrical characterization. The solid-state diffusion-reaction
problems emerging from the oxidation and silicidation among adjacent elements
during high temperature post-deposition processes will be studied with detailed
physicochemical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is anticipated to have
a broad impact on micro- and nano-electronics technology and on the development
of human resources. The involved students, both graduate and undergraduate, will
engage in different atomic scale approaches to the growth and characterization
of surface and interface nanostructures. Graduate students will regularly
present their work to AL researchers, who will also provide experience in
communication and project-oriented style of research management in an industrial
setting. The University of Illinois at Chicago has a strong record of providing
excellent educational experiences to a diverse body of students, including many
women and under-represented minorities. An NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site is also in place at the Chicago campus focused on "Novel
Materials and Processing.&lt;br/&gt;