* 0330226
* Traps in MBE-grown III-Nitride FET Structures on SiC
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Mulpuri Rao, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2008
* USD 327,735.00

Intellectual Merit: A lack of sufficient knowledge on traps, which are present
in bulk, at surface, and at heterojunction interfaces is one of the main
obstacles for the progress of high-power III-nitride compound semiconductor
microwave devices. The proposed basic research is aimed at identifying the traps
(i.e. finding their energy in the bandgap with respect to a band edge, their
capture cross-section and origin), which profoundly effect the device
characteristics such as: drain current collapse, gain compression, gate and
drain lag, frequency dispersion of transconductance and drain conductance of
MBE-grown III-nitride GaN MESFETs, AlGaN/GaN HEMTs, and AlInGaN/InGaN HEMTs.
Identification of traps in these device structures is very important for
optimizing the device design, growth, and processing conditions and consequently
for maximizing high-power microwave performance. The AlInGaN/InGaN HEMTs are
projected to yield record power performance once their design, growth, and
processing conditions are optimized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of sets of
samples will be fabricated, with only one growth/processing condition (growth
temperature, surface passivation etc.) or a device design feature (alloy
composition, layer thickness etc.) varied in each set keeping all the remaining
conditions same. All devices will be characterized first for their DC, and
pulsed drain current-drain voltage-gate voltage performance including the gate-
lag and drain-lag; output power, gain and power added efficiency performance as
a function of input power at various bias conditions and frequencies; and then
for traps in the device structure. The traps will be studied by drain-current
and gate capacitance deep level transient spectroscopy, photoionization
spectroscopy, and transconductance and output-admittance frequency dispersion
measurements. Energy location of the traps with respect to the band edges, their
capture cross-section and concentration will be determined by analyzing the
experimental data. Trap measurements also will be performed on devices subjected
to short and long-term bias stress. For each set of samples the device
performance and trap measurements results, and the extent of change in
growth/processing/design parameter in that set of samples will be correlated to
identify the trap/traps responsible for deterioration of a specific device
performance quantity; origin of the trap/traps; and the growth, processing and
design conditions, which can minimize the trap concentration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed work is a careful, detailed
basic research, which requires careful experimentation and analysis. Results of
this work will have an immediate impact on advancing high-power microwave III-
nitride compound semiconductor device technology, by providing optimum growth
and processing conditions, and device design features required for obtaining
maximum device performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will be performed in
collaboration with III-nitride device research group at Naval Research
Laboratory (NRL). The PI has been successfully collaborating with NRL
scientists, for more than 15 years, on NSF supported projects. This project
offers an excellent opportunity for students for gaining hands-on experience on
using state-of-the-art device growth, processing and characterization equipment
in a prestigious government laboratory on an important research topic. This
experience prepares students well for pursuing careers in industry and
government. Both graduate and undergraduate students will participate on the
proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;