* 0330749
* "CSEDI Collaborative Research: Observational and Theoretical Constraints on the Structure and Rotation of the Inner Core"
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Xiaodong Song, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2008
* USD 223,338.00

The major goals of this collaborative project are two-fold: (1) To obtain high
resolution images of inner core anisotropy, through a proposed PASSCAL
experiment; (2) To develop a geodynamic model for the origin of the observed
seismic anisotropy. The investigators plan to deploy two linear arrays of 15 new
stations in the interior of Alaska, coded as Alaska Receiving Cross-Transects
for the Inner Core (ARCTIC). New data from earthquakes in South Sandwich Islands
to the arrays will provide critically needed lateral and depth samples of the
inner core for determining the inner core rotation and for resolving the
structure of the inner core transition zone and the depth-dependence of inner
core anisotropy and attenuation. the team plans to develop a geodynamic model
for the formation of anisotropy, using the new and existing data as a
constraint. The major objective of the modeling is to identify and investigate
physical processes, including effects of plastic deformation, inner-core growth
and recrystallization, and anisotropy in the thermal conductivity, that can
account for the observed depth and lateral variations in anisotropy. The
developed model will serve as a physical context for interpreting the seismic
observations. Predictions of the model will be used to calculate synthetic
waveforms, which are subsequently compared with the observations to refine the
model. The new data collected will also be used to elucidate crustal and upper
mantle structure of the Alaska interior. The north-south line from Fairbanks to
Prudhoe Bay will cross the Brooks Range in northern Alaska, and The east-west
line between Fairbanks and Nome will cover parts of western Alaska in a known,
but nearly unstudied, region of extensional tectonics.