* 0330525
* FSML: Planning Proposal for Plum Island Coastal Research Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

A grant has been awarded to the Marine Biological Laboratory under the direction
of Dr. William Speck to develop a Master Plan for the Plum Island Coastal
Research Facility that will meet the needs of a multi-institutional,
interdisciplinary research, education and outreach program. The goal of the Plum
Island Coastal Research Facility is to develop a scientific and societal
understanding of coastal ecosystems through integrated research, education and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;Under this grant, a plan will be developed for a modern
research facility on the northern shore of Massachusetts in the Plum Island
Watershed. Plum Island has a long history of use as a research site by a variety
of researchers and institutions because it is the largest and most pristine
saltmarsh system on the Northeast Atlantic Coast. Despite the national and
regional significance of the Plum Island ecosystem, no research facility exists
in the area. This new facility will allow scientists and students to remain for
longer periods of time and to process samples on site, fundamentally changing
the types of questions that can be answered. A workshop, involving scientists,
educators, and field station managers, will be held to develop a conceptual
statement of ideal facilities. An architect will translate these diverse
viewpoints into an integrated and scientifically attractive Master Plan.
Ultimately, the product of this planning proposal will be a Master Plan
detailing improvement of existing structures and describing any new facilities
that might be needed. &lt;br/&gt;Wise use and conservation of coastal ecosystems
will require knowledge of the physical environment, the species that live there
and human use, and depends on transferring this knowledge to society through
education and outreach. This project will substantially improve our
understanding of complex ecosystem processes by improving scientific
infrastructure and by increasing interactions among and within scientific
disciplines. The proposed facility will triple the available housing, thus
allowing long-term and short-stays by more researchers and students and allowing
multiple groups to be on-site simultaneously. It will increase laboratory space
by an order of magnitude and provide facilities that will allow researchers to
use modern technologies to take and process samples on site. This will provide
immediate data and feedback on experimental results and enable researchers to
more effectively plan the next steps in discussions with their co-workers. This
project will address broader societal concerns about the environment and will
provide a venue and focal point for education and outreach efforts in the
watershed. Currently, scientists, teachers, students from K-12 through post-
doctoral scientists, town and state managers and volunteers from the general
public have joined forces to study the watershed, estuarine and nearshore
ecosystems of Plum Island. Their work addresses pressing environmental concerns
such as the consequences of eutrophication and biotic impoverishment on
vulnerable coastal ecosystems of importance to humans but they have no place to
meet or organize. This facility will enhance the ability of people to
communicate by providing an appropriate venue for the exchange of ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;