* 0330451
* SENSORS: Fabrication of Reversible Microarray Sensors using Thermally  Responsive Biopolymers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Ashok Mulchandani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2007
* USD 748,806.00

EXPERIMENTAL AND INTEGRATED ACTIVITIES &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SENSORS:
Fabrication of Reversible Microarray Sensors Using Thermally Responsive
Biopolymers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wilfred Chen&lt;br/&gt;(EIA -
0330451)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of this research is to develop a simple and reversible patterning
technique on an inexpensive substrate for biological molecules by thermally
addressing a patterned hydrophobic surface template. Also, this research will
investigate the utility of this powerful and simple patterning technique for the
fabrication of antibody microarray sensors for the sensitive detection of
multiple biological agents. The tunable biomolecules proposed here extends on
ideas from nature, but toward entirely new objectives. The protein-protein
recognition exhibited by stimuli-responsive elastin biopolymers is tailored
specifically into tunable hydrophobic interactions, which is exploited as a non-
covalent method to reversibly immobilize biomolecules in a functionally active
orientation directly to an array surface. The end result is a simple and
reversible patterning technique for micorarray sensor fabrication by thermally
addressing a patterned hydrophobic surface template.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are several-fold. This research will combine
the multidisciplinary expertise of the PIs to develop a potentially reliable and
economical technique for the fabrication of reversible microarray sensors. The
use of elastin biopolymer for immobilization has significant advantages over
existing covalent coupling because regeneration of the immobilization pattern is
possible simply by modulating the solution environments. If successful, this
technology will find applications in a variety of enzyme or antibodies arrays as
well as the fabrication of DNA and protein microarrays for genomic analyses. The
proposed research involves the intersection of principles and methods of
molecular genetics, protein engineering, material research, and process
engineering. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers participating in
this research will gain an integrated perspective of the important interfaces
and synergies connecting biochemistry, modern genetics, and process engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;