* 0330566
* Student Housing for Instructional Programs and Field Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* James Sanders, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2006
* USD 187,500.00

A grant has been awarded to the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, under the
direction of Dr. James Sanders. Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, a unit of
the University System of Georgia, serves as a gateway to marine environments and
helps to integrate marine programs throughout the University System. This
mandate and the Institute's remote, pristine location have provided the
Institute with a wealth of visiting scientists and students, seeking access to
SkIO's faculty, facilities, near-by research environments, and unique, hands-on
educational opportunities. The Institute's remote location makes on-site housing
a necessity. Many visitors and students do not have access to automobile
transportation. In the past 10 years, SkIO has built and renovated a number of
apartments and housing units for students and visiting scientists. This
combination of housing facilities remains filled at or near capacity throughout
the year with students, visiting scientists and interns, with approximately 300
visitors using housing over the past two years. With this level of use,
availability of housing has limited our educational and research programs.
Difficult decisions have been made concerning the relative priorities of
specific research or instructional programs, and SkIO cannot successfully meet
or expand its mission to educate students through field oriented research
without the construction of additional housing facilities. This proposal
requests partial funding to construct an eight bedroom housing unit which is
designed in a manner that is flexible enough to serve short-term, intensive
classes of up to sixteen students while still accommodating smaller, longer-term
research groups or individuals when field programs are not in residence.