* 0330075
* SENSORS: Rapid, Multi-Analyte Immuno Biosensor with Passive Microfluidics: A Model System - Four Cardiac Marker Monitoring Device
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Kyung Kang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2007
* USD 686,000.00

0330075 Kang The goal of this research is to develop Antibody Sensitized Tapered
Fiber Sensors arrays and Oligonucleotide Signatured Fiber Sensors for rapid
direct detection and quantification of bioterrorism agents and their confirming
DNA signatures using optical means with high specificity and sensitivity, and
very low false positives. The proposed sensors will use evanescent absorption,
scatter and fluorescence in continuous biconical tapered fibers for detection
and quantification. The investigators will examine one- and multi- photon
evanescent absorption, scatter and fluorescence for detection. The proposed
sensors will not only measure the presence of bioterrorism agent(s) at very high
sensitivity, but also establish their viability. The use of multiple strategies:
evanescent absorption, scatter and fluorescence in single and multi-photon mode
with the aid of surface immobilized monoclonal antibodies and unique DNA
sequences specific to the target organism offers a comprehensive approach for
detection.

The broader impacts of this research are several-fold. The ability to detect and
identify the presence or absence of pathogens or bioterrorism agents is
essential for fighting terrorism. In addition, pin pointing the nature of the
pathogen, especially its viability and virulence is paramount. If these can be
accomplished expeditiously at the resolution of a single bacterium, the benefits
to the society could be enormous. In addition, the sensors developed under this
research can also be used for metabolic imaging of tissue in vivo. By
positioning the tapers external to the tissue, the penetration of the 2-photon
fluorescence excitation will enable the metabolic activity information from
depths of several centimeters to be determined optically. A sequence of these
tapers over the breast (as an example) can identify malignant tumors several
centimeters beneath the surface.