* 0330171
* Sensors and Sensor Networks:  A Control and Optimization Science Base for Sensor Networks in Adverse and Stochastic Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2009
* John Baillieul, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,487,459.00

The goal of this project is to develop the foundations of a control and
optimization science base for sensor networks viewed as complex systems
operating in an uncertain and potentially adverse environment. The approach
taken is a combination of addressing fundamental research issues while
maintaining a focus on a specific target application domain, a manufacturing
enterprise, in order to generate concrete, implementable results. The proposed
research plan adopts three complementary, interconnected views of a sensor
network: as a collection of elements that need to communicate among themselves,
as a dynamic system whose control depends on a thorough understanding of element
interactions, and as a multi-time scale distributed system that requires a layer
of coordination. The analytical and computational challenges involved in this
plan will be faced through novel modeling, estimation, and optimization
approaches. An important component of the project is the development of an
experimental sensor network testbed based on several low-power digital signal
processors and microcontrollers. A mobile robot squadron will provide multi-
sensor platforms networked with a group of laptop computers serving as the
processing nodes of the resulting system. Research results will include new
sensors for manufacturing systems, new energy saving protocols for wireless
sensor networks, and new modeling and control approaches for complex engineering
systems, all validated on this testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance the state-of-the-art in all application domains that can benefit from
sensor networks, primarily focusing on manufacturing where advances will result
in increased energy efficiency, accelerated productivity growth, improved
product quality, and enhanced workplace safety and security. Other societal
applications include transportation safety and homeland security. On the
educational front, plans include multidisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students, creating software modules for educational case studies,
and working to reach out to high school students.