* 0330227
* Nanodevice for Imaging Normal Stress Distribution with Application in Sensing Texture and 'Feel' by Touching
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Ravi Saraf, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 270,000.00

Touch is one of the five senses designed by nature for survival. 'Touch' may
(partially) be characterized as a sensory operation for measuring texture and
softness of an object by mechanical contact. We propose to design, fabricate,
study and develop, a novel, large-area, touch sensor made from nanoparticles.
The nanodevice is a self-assembled thin-film sensor that will convert static or
dynamic (compressive) normal stress distribution to, (i) visible-light , and/or,
(ii) electrical current or voltage. The optical and/or electrical signal is
proportional to the magnitude of local stress on the sensor's active area. By
detecting the light intensity distribution and/or, probing the current
distribution on the active area using an electrode array, potentially, the
stress distribution can be obtained in less than millisecond speeds at spatial
resolution of &lt;1 mm spot. Importantly, the dynamic range and the sensitivity
of the sensor can be tuned. Due to high speed (especially for electrical
signal), the external stimulus (i.e., stress distribution) may be mechanical
force, pressure or ultrasound radiation. The structure of the device will be a
suitable test-bed to study physics and characteristics of electronic transport
across nanoparticle/nanoparticle and nanoparticle/insulator junctions, both at
single particle resolution. This fundamental study will potentially lead to
design rules to optimize the device performance of the proposed sensor, also
dubbed 'Artificial Skin'. The thin-film device may be supported or directly
self-assembled on flexible or rigid substrate. The sensor will have broad range
of other applications such as, ultrasound medical imaging/diagnostics, smart
materials, and non-destructive diagnostics of large
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;