* 0330356
* Sensors and Sensor Networks:  Design, Fabrication and Application of Distributed Micro Sensors Embedded in Metal Tooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Xiaochun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2006
* USD 590,038.00

The objective of this award is to develop a sensing methodology that enables
highly reliable and accurate monitoring and diagnosis for manufacturing
processes. This proposed research is to use a system approach to study the
design, fabrication, optimization, assessment, and applications of distributed
micro sensors embedded in metal tooling that is fabricated by Rapid Tooling
manufacturing processes. A multidisciplinary research team seeks to advance
fundamental knowledge in sensor technologies, including sensor design and
fabrication for high-temperature strain and temperature measurements, the
embedding of sensors into metal manufacturing tooling, and the interpretation
and use of sensor data in decision-making for manufacturing process monitoring
and control. Three interrelated research tasks are planned. Task 1 will focus on
the design, fabrication, embedding, and optimization of distributed micro
thermo-mechanical sensors in metal tooling. Task 2 focuses on the research on a
new process monitoring and diagnostics methodology that can quickly identify
both sensor and process faults. Task 3 will address issues related to the
sensing system implementation and testing. The validation and testing of the
system will be conducted on an industrial testbed. Wireless system
implementation will also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New course
development, existing course improvement, mentoring and outreach activities will
attract and engage students as well as industry to smart tooling technologies.
Embedded sensing systems will provide measurement with high spatial and temporal
resolution at critical process locations, thus enabling a much more reliable and
accurate monitoring and diagnosis system. The proposed embedded sensing system
would also be extremely appealing in practice, striking to enhance the
competitiveness of US Tooling industry as well as numerous manufacturing
processes.