* 0330230
* Collaborative Research:  Molecular Growth in Forced, Time-varying Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* J. Houston Miller, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2007
* USD 198,257.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a coordinated, comprehensive
study of molecular growth chemistry in forced, time-varying flames involving
groups at Yale and George Washington University. Major species concentrations,
small radical concentrations, velocity, and temperature are determined using a
suite of laser-based techniques. Larger species are sampled using a novel pulsed
microprobe coupled to a mass spectrometer. The experimental work is complemented
by time-dependent computations of flame structure that include molecular growth
chemistry. Three time-varying, non-premixed flames are studied: a non-luminous,
nitrogen-diluted methane flame, a&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;40% ethylene-60% nitrogen
flame that is slightly luminous, and a 60% ethylene-40% nitrogen flame that is
more luminous. The first flame will provide a base case and demonstration
environment for the approach. The steady "40/60" flame has been observed to have
peak soot loadings along the centerline while the "60/40" flame shows highest
soot levels near the edges, indicative of the subtle interplay between molecular
growth chemistry and the time-temperature history experienced by a packet of
fluid. The goal is to provide experimental data for a rigorous test of competing
soot growth models, and also to guide the development of intuitive understanding
of the process. Time resolved measurements of the concentrations are made for a
host of intermediate hydrocarbons formed from fuel pyrolysis and molecular
growth chemistry; these four-dimensional data are combined with high-fidelity
temperature and velocity fields to map experimentally the entire particle-
inception process; and molecular growth chemistry is simulated numerically using
three of the most evolved soot-formation chemistry models
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion-
generated soot particulates from land-based sources are now acknowledged to pose
a significant health risk and have been the subject of stringent new EPA
regulations. From the standpoint of an engine designer, the concern about soot
goes beyond these regulatory issues. High soot concentrations in combustor
primary zones contribute to high thermal radiation loads on combustor liners.
Soot coatings on liner surfaces will drastically increase underlying metal
temperatures. These issues are exacerbated by the high pressures at which new
combustors are operated, because soot production is very sensitive to the
pressure. If soot and the problems associated with it are to be controlled,
quantitative understanding of the soot growth and oxidation mechanisms in the
form of computational models supported by experimental measurements is
essential. An essential component of the proposed work will be education of
undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and mechanical engineering.
Also, on-going activities in K-12 education will continue and be expanded
through the Research Experience for Teachers (RET)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;