* 0330333
* SENSORS:  Biomimetic Interfaces Coupled to Thermotropic Liquid Crystals for Real-Time Biological Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Nicholas Abbott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2006
* USD 373,933.00

0330333 Abbott This project seeks to develop a fundamentally new approach for
real-time sensing of biomolecular interactions. The approach revolves around the
design of a biomimetic layer that will be formed at the interface between a
micrometer-thick film of liquid crystal and an aqueous phase. The system will be
designed such that specific binding events engineered to take place at the
interface will be amplified into changes in the orientation of the film of
liquid crystal. Whereas the research performed in a previous grant involved the
deposition of a film of liquid crystal onto the nanostructured surface of a
solid following the capture of the targeted protein on the nanostructured
surface (a procedure suitable for use in an assay), the principles to be
developed in this project will permit real-time and continuous sensing of
biomolecular interactions at biomimetic interfaces.

The broader impacts of the proposed project are several-fold. The research
described in this proposal is fundamental in nature but possesses the potential
to provide the basis of a broad and general technology for biological sensing.
Such a technology could be of substantial utility in a number of contexts. For
example, detection of protein toxins could be broadly useful for monitoring the
security of our water supply at a cost and level of complexity that is
substantially lower than existing technologies. In addition, this project is
occurring in the context of two active educational programs at University of
Wisconsin: these programs train graduate students at the intersection of the
disciplines of Chemical Engineering and Biomolecular Chemistry, and include
outreach to the undergraduate population at University of Wisconsin, local
colleges, as well as the general public.