* 0330235
* SENSORS: Optical Wireless Sensor Networks for Critical Infrastructure Surveillance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Uzi Vishkin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

There is a growing need, especially in light of Homeland Security, for
surveillance of our critical infrastructure, including road, water, electrical,
and rail systems. There is an equally compelling concern for a high level of
effectiveness among first responders to incidents that may be terrorist related,
but could also be the result of weather events or hazardous spills. In both
cases, there is an urgent need for high quality video-based surveillance,
advanced specialized sensors and high bandwidth communications, which are
portable, secure, reconfigurable and offer high availability. Such sensor-
communication (SC) networks will be extensive, must be compatible with legacy
communication infrastructure, and must be able to transport large quantities of
data, which could involve Gb/s data flows from systems of high-resolution
cameras. They must be rapidly deployable, and provide in essence an instant
communications infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of free space laser
communication links, here called optical wireless, is emerging as an important
solution to this problem. It is their belief that autonomous optical wireless
communication nodes (locations where data are generated or relayed) have the
ability to meet the requirements of portability, security, reconfigurability and
availability. Will provide the data rates required, do not interfere with
existing RF mobile communications, and provide a bridge from where data are
generated to the nearest optical fiber connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal it describe research on optical wireless in conjunction with other
technologies to provide a robust, advanced SC network. A key focus is the
development of autonomous (solar-powered) optical wireless transceivers, which
have the ability to point and track, can handle continuous or bursty data, and
can function in a dynamic, self-configuring network environment (instantaneous
infrastructure). The ability of optical wireless communications to provide
bursty data communication allows downloading of buffered data from moving nodes,
mounted for example on rail cars, police vehicles, trucks, or barges. This
permits dynamic adjustment of traffic flow within the communication network by
intelligent exchange of detailed situation data between fixed and mobile
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Propose to (1) develop the hardware and software for
multiple-connected, reconfigurable, SC networks; and (2) test key concepts, in
real network demonstrations within a large existing development program, the
Capital Area Wireless Integrated Network (CapWIN), using interoperable data
communications systems now being implemented to support first responders in the
17 political jurisdictions surrounding the national
capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity. The
intellectual merit in this work lies both in the questions it raises through new
modeling, and by the solutions it provides. Advancement of knowledge through the
successful completion of this research will bring societal benefits in security,
disaster recovery, and extension of SC networks to critical infrastructure, and
it will pave the way for technology integrators to incorporate our innovations
into deployable systems. Have assembled a strong, multidisciplinary team of
electrical and civil engineers, and a computer scientist, with combined
expertise in optical and laser engineering, parallel and distributed algorithms,
transportation systems, communications, network operation and monitoring of
civil infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unaware of any technology that
allows autonomous reconfiguration of a dynamic network (topology control) using
optical wireless while maintaining assured connectivity. While an emerging
technology exists for switching between optical wireless point-to-point links,
there is no topology control in this internet-like context. The experiments in
reconfigurable optical wireless networks suggest that significant improvements
in data rate as well as autonomous reconfigurability of wireless networks are
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed activity. The
research proposed in SC networks for disaster recovery, and extensions of SC
networks to critical infrastructure has promise for broad impact on society.
This research will also make major contributions to the education of both
graduate and undergraduate students from diverse populations. The University of
Maryland is one of the most diverse of major American research universities. The
PI's and co-PI's have an outstanding record of involving women and minorities in
research. Both the Maryland Optics Group and the Maryland Transportation group
have among the highest concentrations of women and minority graduate students of
all graduate engineering programs within the University. Undergraduate students
are involved with the work of the groups every semester. The students are deeply
involved with all aspects of our research. Attend national and international
conferences and present papers there. Several of the team's previous Ph.D.
graduates have gone on to faculty positions and research positions in
prestigious laboratories. The team members have also been heavily involved in
the University of Maryland Gemstone Program, an NSF-funded program to involve
undergraduate students in long-term team-based research. This program has been
highly successful as a unique experiment in living/learning education.