* 0330328
* The Effects of Property Rights Security on Agricultural Output in Western Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Edwins Gwako, Guilford College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The question of how security of property rights affects farming performance is
an important element of the policy discussion about food security. This study
will test the relationship between the property rights security and agricultural
productivity of individual large scale and smallholder farmers in western Kenya.
Previous research found that the degree to which smallholder women farmers
controlled the fruits of the previous harvest on a given plot was a key
determinant of their efforts to ensure high agricultural output on the same plot
in the next season. Crop yields were also found to be higher only when
guaranteed control over plot-level produce was assigned to individual women
farmers, not when assigned to households. Statistical analysis revealed that the
correlation between property rights security and yields gets hidden when control
over produce is assigned to households. These results are important but we still
need to understand whether the pattern exists longitudinally in smallholder and
large scale farming contexts. This additional longitudinal research, using
multiple quantitative and qualitative methods combining in-depth interviews and
surveys, will further test hypotheses linking agricultural productivity to
property rights security in produce in two significantly different farming
settings located in western Kenya. &lt;br/&gt;This study will advance our
understanding of the nature and causes of productivity differences among
smallholder and large scale farmers and will further evaluate the degree to
which property rights theory can be applied in diverse farming systems in Sub-
Saharan Africa. The research should be of relevance to a wide range of students
and researchers interested in knowing and understanding how property rights
structure incentives for economic performance. The findings will also provide
insight into yield enhancing input utilization patterns, useful to policy makers
for improvement of extension service delivery in order to boost agricultural
productivity in Kenya. The broader impacts of this study will be important to
policy makers and other social actors concerned about enhancing agricultural
productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa. &lt;br/&gt;