* 0330630
* FSML: Renovation for Year-Round Use and Expansion of MDIBL's Dining Hall
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* David Evans, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2006
* USD 179,802.00

This award provides support to the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
(MDIBL) for expansion and winterization of its dining hall. MDIBL provides
access for visiting investigators to use marine species for the purpose of
investigating mechanisms of basic biological processes such as osmoregulation,
cell division, reproduction and the function of vertebrate systems. Educational
programs and training in research are offered to students ranging from high
school to postdoctoral. Aside from a role in providing meals to students and
staff resident at the lab, the facility is used by visitors who come to
participate in symposia, workshops and courses held at MDIBL. Use of the lab has
more than doubled in the last five years as the laboratory has added new labs,
dormitory space and a lecture hall that can be used during winter months. As a
result of a growth in summer and winter use, the facility is no longer able to
meet the needs of its users. The renovations supported through this award
include the doubling of interior dining space, the installation of new plumbing
and electrical service, the insulation of the entire building, the drilling a
new well for winter water supply, and the addition of a furnace and zone
heating. These improvements are expected to expand use of the lab's facilities
throughout the year.