* 0330203
* Sensors: Optimal Deployment of Wireless Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,997.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Optimal Deployment of Wireless Sensor
Networks&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. :
0330203&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This sensor proposal
focuses on finding optimal (or near-optimal) deployment strategies&lt;br/&gt;for
large-scale wireless sensor networks. With significant advancements in
device&lt;br/&gt;technologies, small, low-powered, low-cost sensors have become
feasible today. These&lt;br/&gt;devices can be deployed in large numbers to form
a dense networked environment, with the&lt;br/&gt;objective of gathering data
for various purposes. Therefore, even though an individual&lt;br/&gt;sensor
device is expected to be cheap, the sheer number of the sensors would make
the&lt;br/&gt;monetary cost of deployment significant. Hence the question of
cost-optimal deployment is&lt;br/&gt;of prime importance. In the proposed
project, we plan to investigate some fundamental&lt;br/&gt;theoretical questions
regarding optimal deployment of large-scale sensor networks,
and&lt;br/&gt;explore how our theoretical results can be applied to develop
effective deployment&lt;br/&gt;strategies in complex practical
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the primary goal of this
project is to develop sensor deployment&lt;br/&gt;strategies that minimize the
deployment cost while meeting desired objectives on&lt;br/&gt;connectivity,
coverage and network lifetime. This involves minimizing the number
of&lt;br/&gt;sensors used to monitor a given region while satisfying some
specified deployment&lt;br/&gt;criteria. We plan to consider different energy
usage scenarios, and various practical&lt;br/&gt;constraints on the placement of
the sensor nodes. The questions that we propose to&lt;br/&gt;investigate are
important and timely, and must be addressed before networks of
sensors&lt;br/&gt;start getting deployed at large scales. Since connectivity,
coverage and deployment&lt;br/&gt;problems arise in a very wide variety of real-
life scenarios, we believe that the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental questions that we
explore in this project could be relevant in areas other&lt;br/&gt;than sensor
networks as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are also fully committed towards
establishing links between research and education.&lt;br/&gt;Apart from
supervising graduate students, we plan to involve junior and senior
level&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates in developing a simulator, and carrying out large
scale experiments. We&lt;br/&gt;would also engage them in developing a software
(to be made available publicly) that&lt;br/&gt;incorporates our research ideas,
and can be used for solving sensor deployment problems&lt;br/&gt;in regions of
arbitrary shapes and sizes, through the use of a graphical user
interface.&lt;br/&gt;We plan to introduce a new course on optimization in
networking at the graduate level,&lt;br/&gt;and introduce several topics and
class projects related to ad-hoc and sensor networks in&lt;br/&gt;the senior
level introductory course on networking. We would make a special effort
to&lt;br/&gt;engage women and other under-represented groups in our research and
educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;