* 0330342
* SENSORS:  Collaborative Research:  Biochemical Sensors and Data Processing for Security Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Arye Nehorai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2006
* USD 540,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0330342&lt;br/&gt;Arye Nehorai&lt;br/&gt;U of Illinois,
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research -- Sensors:
Biochemical Sensors and Data Processing for Security&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses current concerns about possible biochemical attacks
threatening our national security. The investigators develop sensors and data
processing for detecting sources of biological agents or&lt;br/&gt;toxic
chemicals, and managing data-bases. This technology has further applications to
environmental monitoring, controlling pollution, detecting explosives, and other
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators develop three categories of sensors for
detecting bio-target molecules that bind to substrate-attached receptor
molecules. The first exploits the frequency shift of an optical resonator from
a&lt;br/&gt;change in its dielectric environment brought on by target
adsorption. The second exploits the sensitivity of optical resonators to detect
Raman spectra associated with the adsorbed targets. The third
involves&lt;br/&gt;attaching fluorescent labels to secondary recognition
molecules and detecting their light emissions when they bound to agents captured
by substrate receptor molecules. Arrays of probes are created to screen
for&lt;br/&gt;multiple targets, interacting with the signal processing.
Strategies for making continuous sensing are considered. The signal processing
part analyzes data from chemical sensor array networks, subject to resource
constraints. The researchers derive physical models for substance dispersion in
subway tunnels, shopping malls, city streets, airport bag screening, etc. Flux
density sensors are included. This project analyzes the algorithms performance
for optimally designing the arrays. To increase the functionality, the
investigators consider moving sensors (robots, autonomous vehicles) and develop
motion techniques while addressing other requirements (coverage, energy
minimization.) The study involves managing high data volumes and processing
power requirements that may arise from a large network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;