* 0330758
* Workshops to Develop a Research Plan for the Ecosystem Studies of Sub-Arctic Seas Program
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Edward Urban, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 04/30/2004
* USD 88,500.00

The sub-arctic seas, including the Bering Sea, the Barents Sea, the
Newfoundland/Labrador Shelf, and th Sea of Okhotsk, support some of the world's
most productive fisheries, most of which are based on cod or pollock. With the
exception of the Sea of Okhotsk, these seas also exchange water with the Arctic
Ocean and, in some cases, modify water and salts as they flow from the North
Pacific Ocean or North Atlantic Ocean to the Arctic Ocean. In recent years, it
has become evident that these seasonally ice-covered, sub-arctic seas are
subject not only to interannual variation but also to decadal-scale and secular
changes in climate. Thus, there is a need to assess how global change may affect
the marine ecosystems of these sub-arctic seas and their ability to support
productive fisheries. An international workshop to assess the potential for
developing a major research initiative that could focus on the most profitable
approaches to these questions was held in Laguna Beach, California, in early
September 2002. The participants in this workshop identified a need for an
interdisciplinary, comparative study of the sub-arctic seas and their ability to
support fisheries in the context of global change. We propose to convene two
workshops to develop a Science Plan for the comparative studies program
envisaged by the participants of the Laguna Beach Workshop. The goal of these
workshops is to identify and prioritize the most important research questions
concerning the potential effects of global change on these sub-arctic
ecosystems, and to identify innovative approaches to answering these questions.
An important prodcut of the workshops will be the development of a Science Plan
that could provide the basis for a Ecosystem Dynamics (GLOBEC) project. (The
sub-arctic seas are not currently included in th eGLOBEC project.) The Science
Plan will also provide a framework for integration of sub-arctic marine
ecosystem studies with the SEARCH (Study of Arctic Environmental Change)
program.