* 0330551
* Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer for Interdisciplinary Research in Marine Biology and Biogeochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 97,500.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Delaware, College of Marine
Science, under the direction of Dr. Robert Kirchman to purchase a flow
cytometer. This shared-use instrument will be available to ocean science
researchers for a wide range of research applications, for training of graduate
and undergraduate students, and possibly for shipboard use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow cytometry has emerged as a powerful, and in some
applications, an essential tool in biological oceanography and marine biology.
This instrument can be used to count, characterize and sort particles ranging
from viruses and bacteria to algae and invertebrate embryos. The instrument
proposed was chosen because of its ease of use, low maintenance costs, and
durability. It is also one of the few flow cytometers with an aerosol-free
sorting chamber, which is necessary for analyzing radioactive samples. The
capability to sort radioactive samples will make this facility unique in the
Mid-Atlantic region. Examples of potential uses include areas of: 1. marine
microbial ecology; 2. microbe characterization; 3. algal physiology and
phytoplankton oceanography; and 4. marine developmental biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate use of the requested instrument by both
undergraduate and graduate students, a new course on single-cell methods will be
offered that will expose students to the array of methods used for analyzing
marine organisms at the single cell level. This course will allow hands-on
training and use of the flow cytometer.&lt;br/&gt;