* 0330822
* MII:  Improving the Pipeline in Applied Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* R. Stephen Dannelly, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,350,000.00

This project, focusing on the interdisciplinary challenges of environmental
monitoring, environmental modeling and simulation, environmental information
systems, and coastal studies, aims at improving recruitment and stimulating
underrepresented minorities in the applied computer science pipeline. The work
entails several challenging problems (e.g., sensor platforms, data collection,
and forecasting), many related to climate research, some involving the
development of autonomous vehicles for collecting environmental data, as well as
developing tools for its analysis. The research, building on a real-time
decision support system built on cyber infrastructure concepts, presents an
opportunity to bring together CS, AI, GIS, visualization, data storage, data
mining, networking, wireless communication, etc. Two research centers will play
a major role in the research efforts, the Texas Coastal Ocean Observation
Network (TCOON) and the Harte Research Institute for the Gulf of Mexico Studies.
TCOON, a series of data gathering stations from Louisiana to the Mexico border,
samples data on precise water levels, wind speed and direction, atmospheric and
water temperatures, and barometric pressure. Measurement in turbidity, salinity,
and other water chemistry are transmitted to campus via line-of-sight packet
radio, cellular phones, via GOES satellite for storage in a real-time, on-line
database. Projects involve real-time automated data processing,
telecommunications/network protocols, tidal datum processing, web-based
visualization and manipulation of coastal data, specialized sensor and data
acquisition system development, and neural-network-based and mathematical
forecasts from real-time observations. The Harte Research Institute for the Gulf
of Mexico Studies will be dedicated to geographic information systems and
modeling. Sample projects include:&lt;br/&gt; Remote Controlled Shallow Draft
Vehicle, and&lt;br/&gt; South Texas Tide Modeling.&lt;br/&gt;The first,
involving human-centered sampling methods utilizes a remote-operated vessel for
performing transects of water quality parameters. Interdisciplinary challenges
such as remote navigation control, communication/networking, completely
automated navigation with GPD, sensor control/data collection/processing,
obstacle avoidance, fault tolerance/system recovery, real-time data display and
visualization, and integration with geographic information sciences. The second,
involving computational simulations and visualizations, is based on a criteria
of "goodness" to evaluate the quality of
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and outreach activities involve
seminars, faculty development, mentoring, curricular changes, and active
recruitment. The activities contain a clearly articulated plan for stimulating
the imagination and creativity to engage students to continue on to graduate
school and an innovative outreach program aimed at high schools to recruit
students. Moreover, the work promotes demonstrations such as a "Traveling Circus
of CS" to attract students. The project should contribute in the planning of
potential PhD program in CS that the university contemplates for the future.
&lt;br/&gt;