* 0330858
* Heterogeneous Consumer Search and Social Learning:  Empirical Studies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Alan Sorensen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2004
* USD 15,607.00

This pair of research projects explores two aspects of consumer demand that can
have important implications for market efficiency: heterogeneous consumer search
and social learning. Both projects make use of new datasets that are uniquely
well-suited for the questions to be addressed.&lt;br/&gt; The first project
examines the nature and intensity of consumer search in retail markets for
prescription drugs. Retail prices for prescription drugs vary widely across
pharmacies even within the same local market, and previous research has shown
that patterns in price dispersion are consistent with economic models of
consumer search: for instance, prices tend to be much less disperse for
medications that are purchased repeatedly (for which the incentives to price-
shop are strongest) than for one-time medications. This project will investigate
data on over 200,000 prescription purchases in two small cities. For each
transaction, the data identify the actual price and payment type (cash, third-
party insurance, or Medicaid) as well as prescription characteristics. Since
data are available on prices and quantities at all competing pharmacies,
information about the extent of consumer search is revealed in the observed
sensitivity of market shares to relative price differences. The research will
provide answers to important questions about price dispersion and consumer
search: How intense is consumer search in these markets (i.e., what fraction of
consumers chooses to price-shop before purchasing?) Is variation in search
intensity across drugs consistent with the predictions of economic theories of
consumer search? What do the estimated search intensities reveal about the
underlying distribution of search costs?&lt;br/&gt; The second project concerns
the impact of social learning on individuals' choices of health insurance plans.
Employees of large firms typically choose from a set of health insurance options
sponsored by their employer; since the choice of a health plan can be a complex
decision, individuals may attempt to learn about plans' relative qualities from
co-workers-either through direct communication or by drawing inferences based
observed choices. The causes and consequences of this kind of learning have been
formalized and discussed in the theoretical literature, but little effort has
been made to measure the importance of social learning empirically. This study
will use data on the health plan choices of the employees of a major university
to obtain quantitative estimates of the effects of social learning. Information
about employee demographics--and especially the departments in which they work-
will be used in identifying the communication channels through which learning
occurs. Stated very simply, if individuals' decisions are significantly more
similar within departments than they are across departments, this can be taken
as suggestive of a learning or "herding" effect. This is the basic idea
underlying the project's principal approach, which is to estimate an econometric
model of health plan choice that incorporates the influence of neighbors'
decisions on the decision of the individual. The empirical results will yield
important insights into the nature and extent of learning, the implications for
demand analysis and health plan competition, and the magnitude of potential
welfare losses due to imitative behavior.