* 0330604
* Dispersion in Capillary Electrophoresis Due to Sample Induced Modification of the Electroosmotic Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Sandip Ghosal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 01/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0330604&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: SANDIP
GHOSAL&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: NORTHWESTERN
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersion in Capillary
Electrophoresis due to sample induced modification of the Electroosmotic flow
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrophoresis is an important analytical tool in
biological research, second only to the microscope. Its most familiar
implementation is in "gel electrophoresis" where the sample migrates through a
porous medium in a strong electric field and separates into a series of bands
due to differences in the migration rates of its various components. Like a
snapshot of runners on a racetrack, this pattern of bands provides a signature
or fingerprint for identifying the chemical composition f the sample. If instead
of having the sample migrate through the micro pores of the gel, it is injected
at one end of a micro-capillary (10 to100 micron diameter), faster separation
can be achieved, at a higher resolution and using a much smaller quantity of the
sample, perhaps nanoliters. This technique is known as "capillary
electrophoresis" (CE). If the capillaries are micro-channels etched on a glass
or silicon wafer, entire biochemical protocols can be miniaturized into
'microfluidic chips'. This research is aimed at understanding how the
concentration distribution of the sample evolves as it moves down the
micochannel of a CE system, by using the basic equations of fluid flow and
diffusion. Just as the quality of a microscope is determined by the resolving
power of its optics, the figure of merit of a CE system is in the narrowness of
the concentration peaks of the sample constituents. Fundamental understanding of
the mechanisms of band broadening will result in the following: (1) suggest new
designs to "push the envelope" on the smallness of concentrations that can be
detected and subtleties in differences in molecular structure that can be
resolved, (2) quantify the best achievable resolution limits, and (3) evaluate
potential new designs using the predictive tools that this project seeks to
provide. The broader impacts include the training of a graduate student and
dissemination of results. In addition, the PI will collect and collate into an
electronic "Album of Fluid Motion" images illustrating fluid flow on a micro-
scale. This will be used by the PI in undergraduate and graduate level fluids
classes and would also be made available to the research and educational
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant was funded
under the NSF Math Sciences Priority Area.&lt;br/&gt;