* 0330466
* SENSORS: Collaborative Research: Self-configuring In Situ Wireless Sensor Networks For Prescribed Fire Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Richard Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2007
* USD 318,812.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for "SENSORS: Collaborative Research: Self-configuring In
Situ&lt;br/&gt;Wireless Sensor Networks For Prescribed Fire
Management":&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless sensor networks offer exciting new
technology with the&lt;br/&gt;potential to revolutionize the critical process of
fire management in&lt;br/&gt;forests and public lands. At present, wildland fire
management is&lt;br/&gt;limited by the coarse granularity of the collected
weather data&lt;br/&gt;received through the portable belt weather kits worn by
firefighters&lt;br/&gt;or through the sparsely scattered remote weather stations
placed in&lt;br/&gt;forests. Since weather is the most critical factor affecting
fire&lt;br/&gt;behavior and firefighter safety, then the deployment of fire
weather&lt;br/&gt;sensor networks offers the prospect of fine-granularity
weather data&lt;br/&gt;that can vastly improve decision-making and safety in the
fire management&lt;br/&gt;process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
solving the research challenges in designing,&lt;br/&gt;deploying, and testing a
self-configuring wireless fire weather sensor&lt;br/&gt;network to support fire
management in prescribed fire burns.&lt;br/&gt;Reliability, energy efficiency,
and connectivity in rugged terrain and&lt;br/&gt;tree cover pose key challenges.
Human interface requirements like&lt;br/&gt;real-time access, localization, and
dynamic reprogramming of sensor&lt;br/&gt;nodes add complexity to the problem.
Specific research objectives&lt;br/&gt;include: design and evaluation of self-
configuring wireless systems&lt;br/&gt;that are low maintenance, adaptive and
automatically self-organizing&lt;br/&gt;in terms of their network routing;
analysis of fault tolerant&lt;br/&gt;techniques like multipath routing to
facilitate persistent firefighter&lt;br/&gt;access to in situ sensor readings in
rugged terrain; testing of&lt;br/&gt;sustained low power operation through
transmit power control,&lt;br/&gt;time-synchronized duty cycles, and energy
harvesting techniques such&lt;br/&gt;as solar power; and development of software
that supports remote&lt;br/&gt;dynamic reprogramming of in situ sensor nodes.
The deployment and&lt;br/&gt;testing sequence progresses from a series of
laboratory and on-campus&lt;br/&gt;experiments to a prescribed fire at a partner
experimental forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research project in
terms of broader societal impact&lt;br/&gt;include the improvement of decision-
making and safety in the&lt;br/&gt;management of prescribed wildland fires, the
development of tools to&lt;br/&gt;enable real-time fire monitoring in rugged
terrain, the generation of&lt;br/&gt;scientific datasets to improve forecasting
of wildland fire behavior,&lt;br/&gt;the integration of research results into
the curricula of university&lt;br/&gt;courses, and increased public
understanding of fire behavior in&lt;br/&gt;wildlands through the release of
research results via the Web. This&lt;br/&gt;research effort arises from a
partnership between the University of&lt;br/&gt;Colorado at Boulder and the
University of Montana. The group's&lt;br/&gt;collective expertise in computer
science, electrical engineering,&lt;br/&gt;forestry, and fire intelligence
promotes the spirit of collaborative,&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary research in a
real-world setting, enhancing the&lt;br/&gt;creativity of students and faculty
alike.