* 0331222
* Exploring Visualization Strategies for Geoscience Education
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Paul Ruscher, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2005
* USD 209,656.00

Ruscher&lt;br/&gt;0331222&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EXPLORES! (EXPloring and Learning
the Operations and Resources of Environmental Satellites!) began with state of
Florida educational funding in 1992. Professors Paul Ruscher and Kevin Kloesel
(the latter now at the Oklahoma Climatological Survey) started the project with
30 teachers from Florida, who implemented the NOAA (National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration) Direct Readout program. This program involved the
installation of weather satellite receiving stations at schools, using hardware
(antenna, analog/digital converter, radio receiver, personal computer) and
software (satellite tracking, image processing), or a software-only option for
distribution of live satellite data via the World Wide Web (WWW). The program
was successful enough that by 2000, over 230 schools statewide now have active
weather satellite receiving stations, utilized across the curriculum. State
funding has continued on an annual basis through the present academic year. In
addition, selected teachers from other states (Georgia, Montana, Alaska,
Michigan) have also elected to participate in the program. After developing
frameworks within which new curricula could be developed and incorporated into
the Sunshine State (Florida) Science Standards (4S), some teachers began working
on implementation with the National Science Education Standards (NSES).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits &lt;br/&gt; With the expansion of
interest in computers, imagery, and real-time data in inquiry-based science
classrooms, the EXPLORES! project provides a unique combination of new
approaches with imagery-based applications that are suitable for expansion in a
national effort. This project leads the availability of EXPLORES! into the
nation's schools, and provides a complete curriculum unit for teachers which
follows state and national guidelines, and incorporates science in satellite and
tropical meteorology at University, NASA, and NOAA centers. The scope of the
project also includes space-based radar and satellite imagery beyond the weather
satellites, NOAA and GOES. A CD-ROM of curricula now in use in the EXPLORES!
program in Florida will be available through DLESE for nationwide use as part of
the effort, as is our entire updated history of the U. S. weather satellite
program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition, a cadre of twenty teachers from
Miami/Dade County, Florida has been recruited to participate in an online course
entitled "Using Geoscience Imagery in the Classroom", offered through the Office
of Distributed Distance Learning and Department of Meteorology at FSU to help
develop and test all new educational materials developed as part of our teacher
development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed Work &lt;br/&gt;
Educational materials will be developed based on imagery from the following
space-based platforms: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;- NOAA polar orbiting weather
satellites &lt;br/&gt;- GOES geostationary weather satellites &lt;br/&gt;-
Landsat earth resource satellites &lt;br/&gt;- MODIS aboard the Terra/Aqua earth
resource/atmosphere satellites &lt;br/&gt;- QuikSCAT aboard the SeaWinds
satellite &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Further, materials are being developed for
better comprehension of radar imagery from the array of NEXRADs, or WSR 88D
Doppler radars. All materials are being developed with utility of our
participating teachers in mind; however, we are also be cognizant of the need to
make them more widely available and relevant, and therefore all materials are
also being developed for submission to DLESE, for use by any middle and
secondary Earth science teacher.