* 0331764
* Workshop on Information Technology and the Environment, Washington, DC, Fall 2003
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Reid Lifset, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 06/30/2004
* USD 41,503.00

This grant proposes to fund a workshop in Washington, D.C. in Fall 2003 on the
relationships between information technology and the environment. The workshop
will be convened by the Center for Industrial Ecology at the Yale University
School of Forestry and Environmental Studies in association with the Woodrow
Wilson International Center for Scholars and the International Society for
Industrial Ecology and will deliberately build on a recent special issue of the
Journal of Industrial Ecology (JIE), AE-commerce, The Internet and the
Environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information technology has been heralded as
source of autonomous environmental improvement and decried as an energy hog that
will force society to Adig more coal. Emerging research is beginning to move
expert understanding beyond opposing assertions. That research is not widely
known and it poses new challenges and research needs. Using the research from
the special issue as a nucleus, the workshop will examine and update current
knowledge of topics such as the environmental implications of
Adematerialization" through increased use of electronic services; telecommuting;
e-commerce's impact on retailing; opportunities for catalyzing green markets via
the Internet and software agents; opportunities for improved product management
and recovery through product tagging; and better environmental intelligence from
distributed information systems using emerging wireless technologies. The
workshop will provide a means of continuing and updating the work catalyzed by
the special issue of the JIE. More broadly, the workshop will assess and extend
the emerging understanding of IT and the environment. It will also bring
together the researchers and key funding agencies to discuss and develop a set
of targeted research priorities. Presentations will be videotaped and used to
prepare an on-line learning module. The special issue of the JIE will be made
available on-line. A short paper on research priorities will be produced based
on the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;