* 0331325
* Vertical Integration and Institutional Constraints on Firm Behavior: The Case of the Garment Industry in Egypt
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Peter Murrell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 06/30/2005
* USD 17,000.00

High transaction cost- the cost associated with the completion of an economic
transaction-are detrimental to economic efficiency. Vertical integration
combines two or more stages of a production process under one firm, and
mitigates transaction costs. Yet data for both MENA (Middle East and North
Africa) and Egypt specifically suggest a predominance of small firms operating
in industries. This project focuses on the determinants of vertical integration
in the Egyptian garment industry, its link to economic efficiency and
competitiveness, and on special features of the Egyptian institutional
environment that lead to this lack of integration. The research framework, based
on the body of theory from institutional economics and industrial organization,
will be adapted to the Egyptian setting by taking into account locally-specific
features of the institutional environment, such as credit constraints locking
firms into small firm size, and the differential tax burden of small and large
firms. A survey will be carried out of about 200 firms in the garment industry.
Firms will be asked questions about the technology and organizational structure
of the industry, contractual arrangements, institutional constraints and
institutional substitutes. In addition to the model, case studies based on
detailed interviews are to be used. They are meant to provide valuable insights
into the institutional and policy environment in Egypt that econometric
techniques do not capture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a broader
impact in terms of both theory and policy relevance. On the academic front,
there are few empirical studies of vertical integration in developing countries.
From the policy side, understanding why different institutional governance
structures emerge is important for a wide variety of public policy decisions
such as privatization and industry restructuring policies; network industry
restructuring and deregulation policies; export market
penetration/competitiveness policies; ensuring a level playing field with
foreign owned firms or joint ventures. In terms of institutional design, it has
been widely shown that institutional reforms and innovations have been most
effective when they meet market-supporting institutional needs in ways that are
compatible with country specific conditions. &lt;br/&gt;