* 0331756
* On the Optimal Use of WSR-88D Doppler Radar Data for Variational Storm-Scale Data Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Jidong Gao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/2007
* USD 599,866.00

Three-dimensional variational data assimilation (3DVAR) is reaching a
considerable state of maturity, and is being used operationally at several
operational meteorological centers, though mainly in the context of large-scale
hydrostatic flows. Such techniques cannot directly be extended to nonhydrostatic
flows on the meso- and storm-scales for a variety of reasons (e.g., different
dynamic constraints, the lack of a similar balance among variables, and large
differences of weather phenomena). At the latter scales, and, especially for
intense buoyant convection that is both highly nonhydrostatic and intermittent,
the WSR-88D Doppler is the only operational instrument capable of providing high
spatial and temporal resolution observations. The assimilation of such data into
storm-resolving models, including the retrieval of quantities that cannot be
observed directly by radars, is quite challenging, yet of great practical
significance for the future of operational forecasting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the Principal Investigator will attack
three key aspects of radar data assimilation within a theoretical and
computational 3DVAR framework including eventual use by the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The primary objective is to
determine how WSR-88D radar data can best be used in 3DVAR, in combination with
other observations, for the prediction of convective phenomena. The Principal
Investigator will develop enhanced 3DVAR assimilation techniques which will
include the ability to retrieve unobserved variables such as wind, pressure, and
temperature fields. Two separate retrieval methods will be developed, the first
for obtaining wind and thermodynamic variables simultaneously, and the second in
a sequential mode. It is planned to develop a simple balance equation for
different analysis variables and explore a suitable data assimilation time
window for storm scale phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;2. In the context of specifying
background error, which is a critical element of variational data assimilation,
the Principal Investigator will investigate what improvements might be gained by
specifying the error in terms of displacement (phase) and amplitude. Because of
the intermittency of storm-scale structures, correction of the displacement
errors is critical, and thus a variational phase correction method will be
developed to ameliorate the background displacement error before it is used in
3DVAR analysis.&lt;br/&gt; 3. It is critical to have properly quality-controlled
radar data. In this context, velocity folding is a challenge in using WSR-88D
Doppler observations. The Principal investigator will develop a variational
algorithm in which de-aliasing is performed locally using wind gradient
information. The cost function will include the background wind field from a
previous data assimilation cycle, and/or a modified Velocity Azimuth Display
(VAD) technique; the gradient of observed radial velocity with respect to range
and azimuth; and a smoothness constraint to reduce errors caused by ground
clutter. The key to the method is that, by operating on gradients of velocity
rather than the velocity itself, aliasing ambiguities are readily identified and
eliminated. This methodology will be compared to several existing algorithms
applied to both idealized and real data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
findings will have a direct path to operations through the PI's involvement as
one of the lead scientists in developing the variational data assimilation
system for the new community-wide WRF model. Although some of the work to be
performed herein will use the CAPS Advanced Regional Prediction System owing to
its greater level maturity, emphasis will be placed on testing and development
using the WRF.&lt;br/&gt;