* 0331241
* Support for the Curation of Academic Research Cores, Samples, and Collections in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Scott Tinker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2006
* USD 284,000.00

Establishment of a Facility for Storage and Curation of &lt;br/&gt;Academic
Research Cores and Samples in the Geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scott W.
Tinker and Shirley Dutton&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0331241&lt;br/&gt;University of
Texas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of cores
and other rock material is critical for conducting much of the geologic research
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Division of Earth Sciences.
Because of the volume of material involved, long-term storage, preservation, and
curation of cores and other collections are beyond the resources of most NSF-
funded academic researchers. Most researchers have a place where cores, rock
samples, and fossils can be accessed during the initial stages of research and
sampling but lack an adequate facility where these materials can be permanently
preserved, accessed, and sampled/resampled as needed. &lt;br/&gt;At present no
facility exists for the permanent storage and curation of lithified ("hard-
rock") rock cores, samples, or paleontologic collections acquired during NSF-
funded research for continental-based projects. The Bureau of Economic Geology
of The University of Texas at Austin proposes to establish a facility at their
Houston Research Center (HRC) for long-term storage and curation of core and
rock samples and selected paleontologic collections that have been or will be
acquired by NSF research projects. The center would curate this material and
facilitate continued access to, and use of, the material by researchers in the
academic community. Laboratories and equipment needed for examining and sampling
the material will be provided for the use of visiting researchers. Sufficient
space is available at the Houston facility for the permanent storage and
curation of NSF rock cores and other collections.&lt;br/&gt;A geological
curator, a core handler, and a database manager will store and curate the core
and other samples, respond to requests by researchers for samples, assist
visiting researchers at the facility, and maintain the metadata associated with
the samples as part of the GeoInformatics system. An Advisory Committee
consisting of four to six members of the academic community who are experienced
in scientific curation will be established to review operations and policies and
advise the Bureau on curation of NSF cores at the HRC.&lt;br/&gt;