* 0331551
* University research & economic development track at SSTI's 7th annual conference
* O/D,EPS
* 05/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Daniel Berglund, State Science & Technology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 02/29/2004
* USD 24,944.00

The State Science and Technology Institute (SSTI) has held a series of
conferences with the goal of strengthening the partnership among higher
education and state, regional and local technology-based economic development
efforts. This year, the seventh annual conference will be held in Seattle
Washington in October 2003. The conference will involve federal, state, academic
and local policy makers and practitioners from across the country who are
associated with S&T policy development, implementation and evaluation. Many
state leaders are recognizing the important role of strong universities in
research, innovation and workforce development as they face the challenges of
current state fiscal constraints. As a result of these challenges, more
innovative partnerships must be fostered among academic and research
institutions, economic development practitioners and private sector businesses.
This conference provides an excellent venue to forge stronger government-
university-industry partnerships and discuss new strategies for encouraging
tech-based economic development and technology commercialization.

As part of the conference, a special "university track" will stimulate
discussions about state investments in universities and commercialization of
university research. The goals of this portion of the conference are to 1)
increase recognition and support for the important roles universities play in
building technology-based economies; 2) attract more university leadership and
research administrators to participate and foster stronger working relationships
with their state, local and regional economic development partners; 3) provide a
forum for universities to discuss shared challenges and issues in increasing
commercialization of university technology, building the research enterprise,
encouraging faculty entrepreneurship and preparing tomorrow's leaders and
workers; and 4) promote interstate and intrastate cooperation toward common
goals for research and economic development.

