* 0331858
* U.S.- Hungary Chemistry Research on Mechanism of the Reaction of Iron - Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) and Related Complexes with Hydrogen Peroxide
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Mary Sohn, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/29/2008
* USD 43,706.00

The goal of this U.S.-Hungarian research project between Virender Sharma of
Florida Institute of Technology and Zoltan Homonnay of Eotvos Lorand University
in Budapest is to investigate the reaction of ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA)
and related complexes of iron with hydrogen peroxide in an aqueous medium. Iron
binds strongly with EDTA, and hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant is involved in
numerous biological, industrial and environmental chemical reactions. The team
of U.S. and Hungarian researchers plans to study this reaction mechanism by
identifying oxidation states of iron and iron-containing complexes in the
reaction using Mossbauer spectroscopic techniques and by studying the kinetics
and the characteristics of oxidation products from the reaction. Results should
improve our understanding of the Fenton reaction, and other reactions involving
iron complexes. Since iron and iron speciation is important in biological
systems, a detailed understanding of iron and iron chemistry in aquatic systems
could produce fundamental advancements in inorganic chemistry and physical
chemistry that have potential applications in green synthesis, environmental
chemistry, and general redox reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
chemistry project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of a U.S.
graduate student to the international research community through work at the
Hungarian partner's institution and direct involvement in the project's novel
application of Mossbauer spectroscopic techniques.