* 0331992
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Early Preceramic Cultural Adaptation and Diversity on the North Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 8,350.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Tom D. Dillehay, Greg Maggard, A Ph.D. candidate at
the University of Kentucky, will conduct analyses of archaeological materials
recovered from the excavation of several Early Preceramic period sites located
in the Quebrada del Batan on the north desert coast of Peru. The Early
Preceramic period, which lasted from 11,200 - 9,000 years ago, represents the
initial human colonization in this region of western South America. The early
hunter-gatherer populations that are represented by the sites in the Quebrada
del Batan include several technological complexes (e.g., Fishtail, Paijan, and
unifacial). These complexes suggest diverse adaptations to different
environmental zones and distinct lifeways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distinct
cultural adaptations of the Early Preceramic period include different patterns
of site location, types of resources exploited, and stone tool technologies. It
is during this period that gradual adaptation to highly varied environmental
zones are believed to have fostered diverging strategies of movement between
early hunter-gatherer groups and to have set in motion important local and
regional processes. These processes, which continued and intensified throughout
later Preceramic periods in Peru, are believed to have given rise to early
social and organizational features such as the domestication of plants and
animals, sedentary life, population aggregation, and territorialism, which are
suggested to have laid the initial foundations for the appearance of later
Andean civilizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New archaeological data from ongoing
excavations is revealing clearer geological and spatial relationships between
the poorly understood Early Preceramic complexes of the north desert coast.
Additionally, for the first time we have the opportunity to examine plant
exploitation and past environmental data from different Early Preceramic sites.
The proposed study will conduct several specialized analyses of floral, faunal,
and radiocarbon samples collected during the survey and excavation of several
sites in the Quebrada del Batan. Specialized analysis of these materials will
provide an important opportunity to study: 1) organizational changes in the
movement, settlement, diet, and technology of these Early Preceramic complexes,
2) how these features relate to differing local and regional processes, and 3)
how they laid the socio-economic foundations for subsequent changes after the
last Ice Age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the change from a general hunting and
gathering pattern toward a more intensive, broad-spectrum economy occurred in
other parts of the world during the Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene period
(e.g., Levant, coastal California, Great Basin), this study will not only
provide increased understanding of the early inhabitants of western South
America, but will also provide an important comparative case for evaluating the
similarities and dissimilarities in the cultural and environmental contexts in
which local and regional processes occurred around the world. Results from these
investigations will be conveyed to the broader scientific community through
publication in refereed journals and presentations at professional conferences.
Lastly, this research is the principle focus of the graduate student's
dissertation and will provide integral training
andexperience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;