* 0331009
* The Impact of Financial System Design: International Patterns in Historical Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Caroline Fohlin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,058.00

The fundamental goal of this project is to help determine whether certain
corporate financing systems perform more efficiently or effectively than others.
Modern views of the benefits of universal, relationship banking arise largely
from observation of the successful industrialization and post-World War II
reconstruction of Germany. The German success story, and the supposed role of
the banking system in that success, has made a deep impression on many American
economists, economic historians, and policymakers. Recent work by the
investigator and others, however, casts doubt on the traditional view of the
universal banks as the linchpin of German industrialization. This project builds
on this foundation with new initiatives for data collection and empirical
analysis. NSF funding supports data collection, cleaning and translation as well
as international travel for collaborative work between the investigator and
German scholars. The investigator finalizes a database of financial information
for 400 German banks and firms between 1895 and 1912 that was largely collected
under a previous NSF grant. The project deepens the existing firm-level
information by comparing published financial data to firm records, creating new
measures of corporate governance and bank relationships, gathering stock market
data, compiling in-depth case studies on a subset of the database firms, and
gathering archival evidence on non-database firms. These new data augment the
published financial data and reveal more detailed pictures of individual firms.
The investigator uses the databases to investigate the economic impact of
universal and relationship banking. Relationships are investigated by comparing
bank-affiliated and independent firms within Germany-studying rates of return,
investment, liquidity constraints, capital structure, new securities issues,
managerial turnover, and concentration and collusion in industry. Universality
is addressed by comparing banking sector efficiency, firm financing costs, and
long-term patterns of growth and investment among three economies with varying
degrees of universality: Germany, Great Britain, and the United States.

The project includes funding for undergraduate researchers. Participating in
this project offers undergraduates a valuable opportunity to learn about the
many topics covered-corporate finance, banking, corporate governance, industrial
organization, economic growth, and German history-as well as to gain more
general knowledge of the methods of scholarly research. The investigator also
plans to collaborate with Thomas Gehrig, Professor of Economics at the
University of Freiburg, Germany, on several parts of the project. He is
concurrently applying for funding from the German government in order to permit
much more extensive data collection and analysis.