* 0331513
* The Solar Mass Ejection Imager (SMEI) Data- Space Weather and All-Sky Image Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Paul Hick, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 08/31/2009
* USD 872,217.00

The PI has developed a tomographic technique to study the heliosphere and solar
wind in three dimensions. This effort would provide photometric sky maps from
Solar Mass Ejection Imager (SMEI) data and continue to update the required data
processing techniques, so that the SMEI data could be used to map solar wind
structures in three dimensions. These sky maps, if sufficiently accurate, could
be used for forecasting and many other space weather projects, and the PI's team
would help provide calibrated data to users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed basic research effort would involve the analysis of SMEI
data (available in near real time) that indicates the density of heliospheric
plasma. The now operational USAF-UCSD-Birmingham UK Solar Mass Ejection Imager
(SMEI) provides these data every orbit. The PI's primary goal is the real time
three-dimensional reconstruction and visualization, using tomographic methods,
of plasma structures interacting with the Earth. These reconstructions would
help answer questions concerning the shape of solar wind structures in geospace
and their interaction with the ambient solar wind plasma. However, to do this,
the PI must develop new analysis techniques to deal with the SMEI image frame
data. These image frames must be combined into composite sky map images for use
photometrically. By doing this, the PI would determine the brightness of the sky
background to a never-before achieved accuracy at the SMEI orbital data-taking
cadence. This proposed effort requests funds to make these data available to
those who wish to use them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work
would have a broad impact on solar-terrestrial physics and astronomy. This SMEI
effort would render visible the region between Sun and Earth that has previously
been exceedingly difficult to depict and study. The composite images produced in
near real time could be directly understood by those not in the field of solar
physics, improving public outreach. These images would provide a valuable
educational tool, as well as a heliospheric forecast capability and a means to
study the global properties of interplanetary CMEs, co-rotating plasma
structures, and solar wind interactions. The PI would make the data archive (3D
volumes, composite images, and software needed to manipulate them) available to
the entire heliospheric and space weather community. Given that SMEI currently
images the solar atmosphere all around the Earth, this work would usher in a new
era for viewing space from Earth as a planet embedded within the heliosphere,
and for modeling and understanding solar-terrestrial connections. SMEI data
allow views of the sidereal sky around the Earth globally and photometrically,
providing point-source measurements of stars, galaxies, and star clusters with
unprecedented precision. The data set could also be used to study the brightness
changes, anomalous structure, and long-term stability of the zodiacal dust
cloud, which is of intrinsic interest to astronomers and particular interest to
those designing space-based optical sensors. The PI's team would provide SMEI
data access for academic, research, and non-profit purposes.