* 0331830
* SGER:  Feasibility Study of Nano-Electrochemical Machining Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2006
* USD 99,500.00

Extensive research in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in various fields such as
biology,&lt;br/&gt;optics, telecommunication, material and electronics promises
novel and sustainable&lt;br/&gt;technologies and products. To fulfill the
promise, a set of new manufacturing processes&lt;br/&gt;and manufacturing
paradigms are needed for industrial scale production. A
recently&lt;br/&gt;conducted NSF workshop on Nonomanufacturing and Processing
recommends bottom up&lt;br/&gt;(such as electroforming and assembly) and top
down (such as EDM, ECM, laser and&lt;br/&gt;etching) processes as potential
technologies for generating 1D, 2D, and 3D&lt;br/&gt;nanostructures and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;This SGER proposal seeks funding to study the feasibility of
developing a Nano-Electrochemical&lt;br/&gt;Machining (Nano-ECM) process.
Electrochemical machining (ECM)&lt;br/&gt;process, an anodic dissolution
process, selectively removes material atom by atom and&lt;br/&gt;thus avoids
post-processing operations. As ECM is a non-thermal and non-
mechanical&lt;br/&gt;contact process, it generates burr-free and stress-free
surfaces. Micro-ECM process has&lt;br/&gt;shown to be highly successful in
machining arbitrary 3D micro shapes. Therefore, ECM&lt;br/&gt;seems an ideal
candidate as one of the top down nanomachining processes.
However,&lt;br/&gt;many scientific and technical barriers and associated risks
must be considered and&lt;br/&gt;addressed for the realization of Nano-ECM
process.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This study will establish an
extensive and comprehensive knowledge base of the state-of-the&lt;br/&gt;art
research in electrochemical deposition and dissolution at nanoscale and
related&lt;br/&gt;scientific and technical barriers. An attempt will be made to
develop a mathematical&lt;br/&gt;model to describe Nano-ECM process by taking
into consideration mass transport&lt;br/&gt;process at a very small gap, coupled
modes of mass transport, coupling of Faradic&lt;br/&gt;processes and statistical
aspects of discrete events of reactions. A Nano-ECM cell will
be&lt;br/&gt;assembled using an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM).&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This study will initiate the establishment of an educational
and research infrastructure for&lt;br/&gt;Nanomanufacturing at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) that will be accessible&lt;br/&gt;to researchers from UNL
and other U.S. universities. The success of the project will lead&lt;br/&gt;to
the development of a new graduate/undergraduate course on Nanomanufacturing.
The&lt;br/&gt;project results will be demonstrated to high school teachers and
students on a regular&lt;br/&gt;basis. A collaborative research with researchers
at the Warsaw University of Technology&lt;br/&gt;will be planned by
simultaneously submitting proposals to US and EU research agencies.