* 0331531
* SGER: Dispersal Decisions and Social Reorganization of American Crows Following a West Nile Virus "Removal Experiment"
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Carolee Caffrey, National Audubon Society
* Standard Grant
* Jerry O. Wolff
* 06/30/2004
* USD 30,062.00

Dispersal Decisions and Social Reorganization of American Crows following a West
Nile Virus "Removal Experiment" Carolee Caffrey

For most animals, adult males and females do not associate with each other after
egg fertilization, and females lay eggs from which young hatch that do not
receive parental care; parents and offspring never meet. One or both parents in
some types of animals, e.g., birds, mammals, and some fish, do provide parental
care - they may incubate eggs, feed and/or guard young - but in most of these
cases the offspring leave "home" as soon as they are independent; not many
animals live in families. Yet the offspring of 2-3% of bird (and mammal) species
"delay dispersal" - they remain home with parents for extended periods rather
than disperse to live on their own - creating family groups. Because offspring
that have delayed dispersal often contribute to the subsequent breeding attempts
of their parents, species in which this occurs are said to "breed
cooperatively." Across cooperatively breeding species, most of the individuals
choosing to delay dispersal have also chosen to delay breeding, which has
stimulated much theorizing as to the possible factors associated with the
evolution of this seemingly nonadaptive behavioral strategy. Maturing individual
birds must assess the consequences of all behavioral options - to disperse, to
attempt to breed, or not - and subsequently behave in ways that maximize their
fitnesses. Individuals should disperse when acceptable breeding opportunities
are available, and should not disperse when options for independent reproduction
are of poor quality (independent breeding is "constrained" ecologically),
especially if the cost of delaying breeding is compensated via benefits
associated with remaining home as an "auxiliary." Under such conditions,
cooperative breeding groups should be unstable; individuals should remain as
auxiliaries when acceptable breeding opportunities are lacking, and they should
disperse to breed on their own as opportunities open up. Crow social
organization is variable across conspecific populations and can be quite
complex; that of a population of Eastern American Crows (Corvus brachyrhynchos
brachyrhynchos) in Stillwater, OK, is one of the most complex known. Crows in
this population have made highly variable dispersal decisions, with many
individuals of both sexes delaying dispersal for years, and many individuals
moving in with other families before attempting to breed independently. One
focus of recent research has been attempting to identify the various costs and
benefits associated with different dispersal strategies through marking and
following individual crows over years. In September 2002, West Nile virus
arrived in Stillwater, and within two months 40% of the population was dead or
missing. Individuals of both sexes and all age and status classes are gone; nine
breeders were widowed, and four entire families disappeared. All of a sudden,
for the members of this population, breeding opportunities are presumably wide
open. As the weather warms in 2003 and the West Nile virus cycle begins again,
more opportunities will continue to become available. Documenting the dispersal
responses of the survivors, and the fitness consequences thereof, will enable
the role played by "ecological constraints" on decisions to delay breeding and
dispersal in this population to be examined. Dispersal decisions, and their
consequences, in this first breeding season following the WNV "removal
experiment" will be compared to those made in past years. Examination of
potential relationships between those decisions and the many characteristics
that have been measured for individual crows (including genetic relatedness
among population members), will help to elucidate the evolutionary mechanisms
underlying the highly unusual social organization resulting from the highly
variable dispersal decisions being made by crows in this population.