* 0331660
* Information Technology Research (ITR):  ITR/ANIR 100 MB/SEC for 100 Million Households
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Lawrence Landweber, INTERNET2
* Cooperative Agreement
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2009
* USD 600,214.00

A national glass fiber network to serve 100 million households with two-
way&lt;br/&gt;symmetric data communications service at 100 Mb/sec per household
will&lt;br/&gt;inevitably be constructed during the next few years. The barriers
to the&lt;br/&gt;creation of such a network are not simply questions of
deployment issues or&lt;br/&gt;the cost of the network. Rather, fundamental
innovations will be required in&lt;br/&gt;the way networks are organized and
managed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a three pronged
approach to investigate the possibilities and&lt;br/&gt;technical consequences
of this once-in-a-century event.: (1) a holistic&lt;br/&gt;network architecture
designed from first principles, (2) interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
research that addresses the design of an economical, robust,&lt;br/&gt;secure
and scalable 100x100 network, and (3) proof-of-concept
network&lt;br/&gt;implementations to demonstrate how the network of the future
can be built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the project will take
several forms. First, the blueprint&lt;br/&gt;for the 100x100 network will offer
a coherent intellectual framework on how&lt;br/&gt;the next generation network
could be built. The resulting architecture and&lt;br/&gt;design can serve as a
compass to guide investment in network development, and&lt;br/&gt;will be
disseminated to government and industry through presentations
and&lt;br/&gt;partnerships. Second, in preparing the 100x100 blueprint,
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;research advances will be made in security, economics,
protocol design, switch&lt;br/&gt;architecture, and network management. These
will be disseminated through the&lt;br/&gt;research community. Third, the
physical testbeds created through the project&lt;br/&gt;can be used as a
platform for further studies, for example, the development
of&lt;br/&gt;applications demanding high bandwidth or social science research on
the impact&lt;br/&gt;of connectivity in the home. Forth, the software and tools
used to design and&lt;br/&gt;validate the 100x100 network, particularly the
emulation systems, will be used&lt;br/&gt;to create new curricula for network
education for two- and four-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;