* 0331157
* The Earth Exposed - Engaging the Public in the Art and Science of Earth Imagery
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Dan Barstow, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 92,220.00

The Earth Exposed: Engaging the Public in the Art and Science of Earth
Imagery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This very innovative project proposes to use
digital satellite images of the Earth as art objects in an art gallery in
Philadelphia that has a tradition of using a combination of art and science to
introduce the public and school children to scientific concepts. In addition,
web-based activities will extend the reach of the exhibit and provide access to
the materials through DLESE for schools in other cities. This project is a
powerful synergistic activity among science, education and art, where all
participants benefit from each other. Salem College provides imagery and
visualization research, TERC Inc. develops the learning activities and
interactive web site, and the Klein Gallery assists with the artistic nature of
the production, ensuring that the presentation meets gallery guidelines and
style as well as coordinating extensive in-gallery K-12 education for students
from the Philadelphia area. This exhibit will form an official part of the
centennial meeting and celebrations of the American Association of Geographers,
which will be held in Philadelphia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant also provides
the seed money for the project to expand on the preliminary interest expressed
by leading art galleries and museums throughout the country, such as the Boston
Museum of Science, the Art Institute of Chicago, the San Francisco
Exploratorium, and the Rhode Island School of Design. An exhibit of Earth
science imagery and interactive exhibits at these venues would potentially reach
and educate thousands of people about some of the most advanced tools that are
in use by geoscientists today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation will be carried
out through post-visit interviews with both adult and student gallery visitors,
and will include questions about aesthetic quality, scientific content,
understanding of concepts, and interest in geoscience. The web-based component
of the project will similarly be evaluated in the classroom, and more widely
through montoring site usage. &lt;br/&gt;