* 0331324
* QSB: Modeling and Design of Gene Switching Networks for Optimal Control of PHA nanostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* George Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 495,191.00

The design of genetic networks to control cellular function represents an
exciting and promising path for utilizing results from functional genomics to
control cellular physiology. However, before constructing complex genetic
architectures comprised of multiple, interconnected gene-switching blocks, it is
of great significance to investigate the dynamic coupling between simple,
isolated genetic networks, cellular metabolism and product formation.

The Principal Investigators (PIs) will address this exciting challenge through
the development, analysis and simulation of a comprehensive mathematical
modeling framework. The PIs will use polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) block copolymer
formation in recombinant E.coli cultures as a model system due to two reasons.
First, the controlled addition of different monomers for the bacterial
production of block copolymers inherently requires transient switching between
different metabolic pathways, thus providing a natural testbed for the
applicability of gene-switching networks. Second, the control of PHA structure
is in itself important, since it will lead to biodegradable products with novel
properties and, consequently, a wealth of potential applications in many diverse
areas. The proposed mathematical modeling framework will be used in conjunction
with exhaustive experimental studies to extract model parameter values that are
impossible to obtain through direct experimentation.