* 0331760
* Understanding the Causes of the Excessive Cold Tongue in the National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Climate System Model (NCAR CCSM)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2003,05/31/2007
* De-Zheng Sun, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2007
* USD 131,056.00

The equatorial Pacific cold-tongue plays a fundamental role in the heat and
carbon balance of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system. The processes and
feedbacks that control the cold tongue are not well understood and coupled
climate models, e.g., the Community Climate System Model (CCSM), do not properly
simulate it. The PI has hypothesized that the tendency for the coupled GCMs to
develop an excessive cold-tongue in the equatorial Pacific is at least in part
due to a weak regulating effect from the model atmosphere on SST changes in that
region. More specifically, the net atmospheric feedback (radiative plus
dynamical feedbacks) in the coupled models is less negative than in the
observations. The corresponding weaker constraining effect on the SST change by
the surface heating then results in an "over-expression" of the effect of ocean
dynamics, leading to the development of an excessive cold-tongue in the coupled
model. The PI will conduct a pilot project to test his hypothesis by checking
whether other (than CCSM) major coupled models that suffer from an excessive
cold-tongue also lack a sufficiently strong regulating effect from their
corresponding model atmosphere over the equatorial Pacific. This first step will
be achieved by the PI extending his feedback analysis to all the atmospheric
models participating with the Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP)
and by examining their corresponding coupled runs submitted to the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP). The broader impacts expected from this project
include, contributions to the learning, education, and training of interested
citizens as well as future scientists and improvements in climate prediction
models, which would be of value to society.