* 0331955
* iTEC - Information Technology Education Center Renewal
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Alex Kajstura, Daytona State College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,399,954.00

The Information Technology Education Center in Florida (iTEC) is an Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) Regional Center in Information Technology (IT).
Started in 2000, iTEC is a collaboration between Daytona Beach Community College
(DBCC) and Seminole Community College (SCC), promoting and providing Information
IT education to community college faculty throughout Florida and an estimated
40,000 IT workers in Central Florida.

iTEC made significant progress in its first three years with five stated goals:
1) Adapt, integrate, and develop information technology curricula; 2) Provide
seamless K-16 articulation with multiple occupational exit points; 3) Provide
training and professional development for community college IT faculty; 4)
Leverage industry partnerships to validate curricula through incumbent worker
training; and 5) Develop dissemination programs to recruit students with special
emphasis on under-represented populations.

To date, iTEC has enhanced skills for more than 300 community college IT
faculty, upgraded training laboratories and curricula, increased participation
among underrepresented populations, and created an approach that leverages
resources between SCC and DBCC to train IT workers. iTEC established a
collaborative and industry-centered foundation for developing IT workers and
created relationships between academic, government, and industry partners to
leverage community college resources for training IT professionals. Nationally
and regionally, the supply of skilled IT workers continues to fall behind demand
and iTEC is leveraging the resources and capabilities of community colleges to
fill the gap. The vision of iTEC is to have companies throughout Florida and
beyond recognize and use community colleges as primary, cost-effective, and
comprehensive resources for fulfilling IT education and development needs.

iTEC goals are to: 1) continue strengthening the foundation for training
community college IT faculty; 2) develop, assess, and propagate a Collaborative
Industry Education Model for leveraging community college resources to prepare
IT professionals; 3) continue to develop curriculum and programs at the
community colleges in response to industry needs; and 4) incorporate elements to
ensure more involvement and articulation of courses and programs by high schools
and four-year institutions (2+2+2 programs).

The proposed activities have intellectual merit by advancing knowledge and
industry-leading practices for community college faculty and IT professionals;
developing a comprehensive, creative approach for delivering IT education and
assessing impacts; building upon a model collaboration; addressing a national
need for proficient IT specialists; and helping college faculties remain current
with ever-changing IT skills and content.

Anticipated broader impacts include developing an approach for consistently
advancing community college faculty and IT worker skills that can be emulated by
academic and industry partners throughout America; broadening the participation
of underrepresented groups through focused outreach and joint initiatives with
industry and government partners; enhancing the infrastructure to deliver cost-
effective, comprehensive solutions to industry; enhancing curriculum and tools
for training IT specialists; and contributing to competitiveness of America and
technological stature in the IT arena.