* 0331188
* U.S.-New Zealand and Australia Collaboration on Research for Data Compression
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Amar Mukherjee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 02/28/2007
* USD 9,266.00

0331188&lt;br/&gt;Mukherjee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Professor
Amar Mukherjee of the University of Central Florida for visits to New Zealand,
where he will work with Professor Tim Bell of the University of Canterbury, and
to Australia, where he will work with Professor Alistair Moffat of the
University of Melbourne. A companion proposal (INT-0301896) supports his U.S.
colleague Daniel Adjeroh of West Virginia University for the same objectives.
These visits are intended to initiate a program of faculty exchange visits and
graduate student mentoring in the Computer Sciences. Their core research was
recently funded by NSF grant IIS-0312484, "Compressed Search and Retrieval for
Very Large Text and Image Repositories."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent
explosion in the amount of multimedia data typically available to an ordinary
computer user has made it crucial to find new ways to manage massive amounts of
data. These investigators are developing new methods for organizing, storing,
searching and retrieving data more efficiently. Their work involves a new
approach to data compression that uses "sorted contexts", which permits
searching for specific information within data files that are still compressed.
They are developing both new compression schemes and new search methodologies
for working with such compressed data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
have significant applications in both science and engineering research and in
societal needs such as electronic libraries, internet search engines, homeland
security, economic, environmental and medical data bases and many other forms of
text and image repositories. In addition, several graduate students are involved
in the project and will benefit from exposure to state-of-the-art research being
done outside of the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;