* 0331388
* ME: Collaborative Research: Metabolic Engineering of E. coli Sugar-Utilization Regulatory Systems for the Consumption of Plant Biomass Sugars
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Ramon Gonzalez, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 11/30/2005
* USD 336,537.00

The overall objective of this project is to metabolically engineer the E. coli
Sugar-Utilization Regulatory Systems (SURS) to utilize sugar mixtures obtained
from plant biomass. The Principal Investigators (PIs) will introduce specific
genetic modifications to the SURS and analyze the consequences of these changes
at the cellular level. The specific goals are to: (1) construct E. coli strains
with modified SURS and evaluate their capability to efficiently utilize sugar
mixtures (glucose, xylose and arabinose); (2) evaluate changes in the regulation
of gene expression at the genomic scale resulting from engineering E. coli SURS;
(3) identify functional metabolic pathways and quantify their fluxes in SURS
mutants and wild type strains by using a novel flux analysis technique based on
bondomer analysis of 2D NMR bond-labeling experiments; (4) integrate these
results using a novel genetic network-based metabolic flux analysis (MFA) model
that combines gene expression and metabolic flux data; and (5) propose further
genetic/environmental modification for improving the capacity of SURS mutants
for fermenting sugar mixtures. The benefits from this project will be two-fold.
First, from an applied standpoint, the project will provide a powerful tool for
designing of rational modifications of the SURS to obtain recombinant strains
capable of efficiently metabolizing sugar mixtures. Second, from a fundamental
standpoint, this project will contribute to a better understanding of the role
of SURS in regulating both sugar utilization and several other cellular
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;