* 0331533
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:The Ceramics of Ciudad Vieja, El Salvador: Culture Contact and Social Adaptation in Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews V, Jeb J. Card will analyze the
ceramic artifacts from the Spanish colonial site of Ciudad Vieja, El Salvador.
Ciudad Vieja, the original settlement of San Salvador, is located outside of the
modern metropolis. Historical documents place the occupation between 1528 - 1545
A.D., a very short period of time in archaeological terms. Ciudad Vieja was an
outpost of the Spanish Conquest, the process of unraveling and transforming
three thousand years of Mesoamerican civilization. Documentary information,
especially of indigenous culture, is minimal for these early years but suggests
that many of the socioeconomic patterns of the Spanish colonies, and later Latin
America, only begin to take familiar forms after Ciudad Vieja was abandoned.
Typically, archaeological study of this early Conquest period is hampered by
modern urbanization and lack of tight chronological control. Ciudad Vieja is a
rare Conquest-period Spanish center accessible to archaeological study.

Historical records focus on the literate and the powerful, but people of all
ethnicities and walks of life at Ciudad Vieja used and discarded pottery, the
most common artifact class at the site. The Ciudad Vieja project has recovered
ceramic vessels from a wide range of contexts including households humble and
opulent, blacksmith's workshops, military posts, and the town hall. The short
occupation means that all of these areas were in use at roughly the same time,
mirroring the once-living community. The vessels discarded in and around these
areas are forensic evidence of the day-to-day activities of one generation of
colonists and local inhabitants participating in the very foundations of
globalization. Patterning in these activities will reveal the socioeconomic
relationships that formed the basis of this multiethnic society. Analysis of
ceramic vessel construction techniques will probe economic production and
distribution within San Salvador. Cross-culturally, people communicate
information about themselves through the tableware they use to host guests. A
significant proportion of serving vessels used at Ciudad Vieja incorporated
local and European design ideas, reflecting the cultural interplay within early
colonial society. Analysis of the design and distribution of these vessels will
determine the scale of indigenous status display in the face of invasion and
forced acculturation.

The proposed research will have a broader impact on several levels. Card will
work with El Salvadoran students from the Universidad Tecnologica de El
Salvador, who will gain a solid background in laboratory and computer-aided
statistical analysis. The Salvadoran government is currently preparing Ciudad
Vieja as an archaeological park for the education of the Salvadoran and
international public, and the results of Card's research will help inform the
presentation of the site. As part of the Ciudad Vieja project, Card has
presented research results in American scientific meetings and in Spanish-
language publications in El Salvador, and the results of this study will be
published in Spanish and English, in a variety of formats including refereed
journals. Card will also be responsible for the design and growth of the Ciudad
Vieja web presence, opening up the project's research to a large audience.