* 0331337
* QSB:  Integrated Dynamics of Cell-cell Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* James Rawlings, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 596,967.00

PROJECT SUMMARY (JOHN YIN, 0331337)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Cell-cell communication plays a central role in the control of cell
growth, regulation of cell differentiation, defense against microbial invaders,
and unified function of tissues and organs. While progress has been made toward
identifying molecular mechanisms through which cells create and respond to
communication signals, it is less well understood how cell communication
networks function as integrated units. To address this need, we have devised an
experimental system that enables us to observe the dynamics of cell-cell
communication in vitro. Specifically, we track the progressive development of an
anti-viral state in cells as they respond to signals produced by virus-infected
cells. Our long term goal is to build an integrated molecular-level
understanding of this process. Toward this end, we propose here to formulate and
refine an initial model for the process. The model will incorporate and
integrate information at multiple levels using structured cell population
balances. At the intracellular level these balances will allow us to account for
the kinetics of virus growth, signal production, and the inhibitory effects of
signal on a single-cycle of virus growth. At the extracellular level, the
balances will account for the spatial spread by diffusion of signals and virus
progeny, the effects of signaling on resources in uninfected cells, and,
finally, the gradual attenuation of virus spatial propagation distributed over
many cycles of virus growth. The model will build primarily on established
molecular mechanisms drawn from the literature, and it will be refined by
experiments we perform on single-cycle virus growth and spatially spreading
virus infections. Our model will be used to identify parameters or groups to
parameters that govern the effects of cell-cell signaling on virus containment.
Further, it will serve as a foundation to identify novel anti-viral strategies
based on an integrated systems-level understanding of cell and virus dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This proposed study is highly
interdisciplinary. It will employ computer simulations to characterize the
intra- and extracellular dynamics of virus growth and cell-cell signaling. The
cross-disciplinary experience gained by students and co-workers who pursue this
research, as well as the textbook sections, refereed publications, technical
presentations and course materials that result from this work, will advance
research and education in cell-cell communication and, more broadly, in systems
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;