* 0331261
* Sustainability and Stewardship in Alaska (SSA)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Farzad Mahootian, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 161,884.00

0331261&lt;br/&gt;Gerlach&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The national need for meaningful
and effective science education at all stages of learning and development has
long been evident. One of the most urgent challenges facing humanity is to
understand how coupled human and natural systems interact to enhance or erode
the resilience of regional and global ecosystems, economies, and cultures. The
goals of this project are to merge social and natural science knowledge to
foster a better understanding of patterns of human activity and environmental
change, to address key environmental problems and opportunities unique to high
latitudes, and to develop new methods for framing and analyzing them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This undergraduate pilot
program, Sustainability and Stewardship in Alaska (SSA), is organized along
lines parallel to NSF's Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) program but focused on undergraduate education and research. SSA builds
upon the concepts and much of the operational structure of the University of
Alaska's IGERT program, Regional Resilience and Adaptation (RR&amp;A). The
project focus is on investigations of environmental, social and cultural impacts
of global change in Alaska within the broader context of sustainability and
stewardship in the circumpolar North. To leverage the strengths of the IGERT
program's institutional foundation at UAF, SSA maintains close connections and
interactions with the RR&amp;A program structure and personnel. SSA includes a
set of three advanced undergraduate courses, two summers of field research, and
UAF-funded research internships. SSA students join IGERT graduate students for a
program of seminars, workshops, and mentoring. SSA students also mentor students
in related precollege education summer programs at UAF. The program represents
an exploratory version of an undergraduate program that, if fully embodied,
would be a new degree program. The requirements and feasibility of SSA's full
embodiment is a key subject of investigation during the two-year grant
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The retention of Alaska
Native students in the University of Alaska at Fairbanks (UAF) science
departments is not exemplary. However, UAF's Department of Alaska Native and
Rural Development (DANRD) has the best record of retention of Alaska Native
students on campus. SSA works in close association with DANRD. In addition, the
PI and coordinator of the NSF-funded Alaska Native Science and Engineering
Program (ANSEP), as well as the local chapter of American Indian Science and
Engineering Society (AISES) collaborates to involve Alaska Native students in
the project. The latter programs provide tutors, social gatherings, and peer
mentoring to a cohort of Alaska Native students majoring in science in the
University of Alaska system. SSA has established partnerships with Alaska's
Globe program schools, Schoolyard LTER (Long-Term Ecological Research) project,
and the Global Change Education Using Western Science and Native Observations
program. The education and outreach PI of these K-12 programs, a UAF faculty
member, is working with SSA to the mutual advantage of the undergraduate and
precollege students in these programs. The partnership reinforces and enriches
these programs with the participation of undergraduates who are actively
involved in interdisciplinary research - research that is directly related to
what the school children are doing in their excellent, science education
standards-based programs.