* 0331996
* Structure and Function of the T-cell Receptor Zeta Chain Cytoplasmic Domain
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Lawrence Stern, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2005
* USD 486,320.00

Structure and Function of the T-cell Receptor Zeta Chain Cytoplasmic
Domain&lt;br/&gt;T cells are activated upon encounter with another cell that
carries on its surface a peptide antigen bound to an MHC protein, as part of the
process by which foreign material in the body is recognized and cleared by the
immune system. The interaction involves specific recognition of the MHC-peptide
complexes by clonotypic T-cell receptor (TCR) subunits, as well as antigen-
independent interactions between adhesion molecules and other cell surface
receptors from the T cell and the antigen presenting cell. Clustering of TCR
complexes at the T-cell surface using antibodies or multivalent antigens can
induce T cell processes characteristic of interaction with an antigen-presenting
cell, suggesting that clustering or aggregation of TCR components
is&lt;br/&gt;important for initiation of T-cell activation. Cytoplasmic domains
of the TCR gamma, delta, epsilon, and particularly zeta subunits are responsible
for transmitting extracellular binding signals into the T cell. Unlike other
cell surface receptor systems activated by oligomerization, TCR cytoplasmic
domains do not appear to carry intrinsic or associated enzymatic activities.
Membrane-bound and cytoplasmic kinases interact with TCR cytoplasmic domains
upon antigen engagement, triggering cytoplasmic signaling cascades. Despite
intensive study, the mechanism by which clustering of T-cell surface receptors
can leads to cytoplasmic signaling is not clear and is a major outstanding
problem in the field. In the proposed research, the structure and function of
the TCR zeta chain cytoplasmic domain will be investigated. Specifically, a
newly discovered lipid-binding activity will be characterized. Lipid binding
induces a structural alteration in the TCR zeta chain cytoplasmic domain, and
the conforynational change controls accessibility to src- family kinases in
vitro. Possible roles of this lipid binding activity and conformational change
in the T-cell activation pathway will be investigated. The specific objectives
or the proposed research are to determine the requirements for inducing the
lipid-dependent conforrnational change, to produce a detailed structural
description of the lipid-bound structure, to investigate the confon-national
change of cytoplasmic domain in the context of the full-length zeta subunit
protein, and to evaluate the importance of the conformational change in
signaling processes in vivo. These objectives will be pursued through a variety
of spectroscopic studies of purified receptor cytoplasmic domains in complex
with various detergents and lipids, and biochemical assays of signaling
processes in vitro and in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;