* 0331979
* Conference on Invasive Plants in Natural and Managed Systems: Linking Science and Management and 7th International Conference on Ecology and Management of Alien Plant Invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Clifford Duke, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 34,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is substantial current interest in the
global environmental problem of invasive non-native species. Concerns about the
ecology and management of invasive plants are shared by an array of scientific
disciplines and a spectrum of local, state, and federal resource management
agencies. Interest in invasive plant problems has been growing steadily over the
past decade, but only in the past three years, since the signing of Executive
Order 13112, has the problem received broad public recognition and government
attention. Previously, there has been little impetus or opportunity for
scientists and resource managers to communicate beyond the boundaries of their
specific disciplines and training. Now, with significant escalation in both
scientific inquiry and management activity occurring, it is an opportune time to
foster broad collaborations between&lt;br/&gt;scientific disciplines and between
scientists and resource managers. To address this need for communication and
collaboration, a number of scientific societies, non- governmental
organizations, academic institutions, and federal agencies are collaborating on
a major conference, Invasive Plants in Natural and Managed Systems: Linking
Science and Management, to be held in conjunction with the 7 th International
Conference on the Ecology and Management of Alien Plant Invasions. This
Conference, which is scheduled for November 3-7, 2003, in Fort Lauderdale,
Florida, will have regional, national and international significance. This award
is co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering. It is the
first conference of such magnitude to have a specific goal of bridging the
science-management gap to creatively address the environmental crisis caused by
invasive exotic species. Even as the problem is global in scope and origin, so
are the negative impacts acutely local, presenting challenges to resource
managers everywhere. Scientists want to understand the process; managers need to
stop it. They are charged with conserving native ecosystems or managing for a
harvestable product and the invasion process exacerbates these efforts. The
Conference is particularly timely with respect to both public awareness and
scientific development of the field of invasion biology. The three primary goals
of the Conference are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To promote interdisciplinary exchange of
scientific information among researchers working with harmful invasive plants in
both managed and natural ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;2) To enhance dialogue between
scientists and resource managers for the purpose of identifying research gaps
and of accelerating implementation of new science for the management of invasive
plants.&lt;br/&gt;3) To foster broad cooperation on the science and management
of invasive plants.&lt;br/&gt;To our knowledge previous meetings on invasion
biology have not approached the breadth or depth of the conference that is now
being planned. By and large, earlier meetings were limited in their scope of
science, geography or target audience. None have had the stated or apparent
objective of being a national/international meeting to integrate multiple
scientific disciplines or enhance dialogue between scientists and resource
managers.&lt;br/&gt;