* 0331515
* SGER: Flexible Thin Film Transistors Using Low Temperature Chemical Bath Deposited Inorganic Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Chih-hung Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 10/31/2004
* USD 70,000.00

The success of silicon technology over the last few decades has had an enormous
impact on our everyday life. Inexpensive and flexible electronic devices will
clearly add a new dimension to this continuing revolution. In the last few
years, researchers have been taking several routes to realize this dream.
Organic semiconductors with their inherent advantage of flexibility have been a
popular choice in the pursuit of flexible electronics. However, the low carrier
mobility in organic semiconductors is a main obstacle to this approach. On the
other hand, it is well known that most inorganic semiconductors have higher
carrier mobilities. Herein, we propose a program of research that exploits a
novel hybrid approach of using flexible (polymeric) substrates with thin film,
high mobility inorganic materials for the active devices. We propose to develop
a completely low temperature (&lt; 200 o C) process compatible with the low
melting temperatures of polymeric substrates. The thin film inorganic materials
will be deposited by low temperature chemical bath deposition (CBD). Several
novel device designs based on both MOSFETs and MESFETs that can be realized in
an all-low temperature process are proposed. This work will build on our
expertise of the successful fabrication of CdS thin film transistor (TFTs) on Si
substrates, which show very promising electrical performance. The main research
goals are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Fabricate flexible MOSFET using
Al2O3 / Ta2O5 as gate insulator;&lt;br/&gt;o Fabricate flexible Schottky gate
MESFETs;&lt;br/&gt;o Integrate microcontact printing with CBD for device
fabrication;&lt;br/&gt;o Develop a low cost transistor lab for educational
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal will be tightly
integrated with a significant educational component. The PI proposes to involve
undergraduate and high school students in this research program. Our proposed
device fabrication techniques using CBD and soft-lithography can be easily set
up even in a non-clean room high school chemistry laboratory. This would
motivate high school students towards advanced research as proposed here. The
current research program will be integrated into the outreach programs which are
currently in place at Oregon State University: (1) Summer Experience in Science
and Engineering for Youth (SESEY), and (2) Saturday Academy and Apprenticeships
in Science and Engineering (ASE) Program. Each of these programs has a somewhat
different focus, but share several common underlying themes: exposure of high
school students to careers in science and engineering through research
experiences. The PI strongly encourages minorities, women and members of under-
represented groups to participate. The PI also proposes to maintain an up-to-
date status of the accomplishments of the project on the world-wide-web for the
benefit of anyone interested in this field.&lt;br/&gt;