* 0331559
* Greater Philadelphia Region Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2010
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 04/30/2010
* USD 6,572,336.00

Drexel University, as a representative of the Greater Philadelphia Region Louis
Stokes Alliance for &lt;br/&gt;Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP), seeks
continued funding as an AMP Phase III project, to intensify its &lt;br/&gt;on-
going efforts to substantially increase the quantity and quality of African
American, Hispanic and Native &lt;br/&gt;American students receiving
baccalaureate degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM), &lt;br/&gt;and subsequently, entering graduate school to attain doctoral
degrees. Philadelphia AMP represents a diverse &lt;br/&gt;alliance of public and
private, 2- and 4-year, research and non-research, Historically Black Colleges
and Universities &lt;br/&gt;(HBCUs) and majority institutions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A salient feature of this proposal is the fundamental manner in which
the proposed AMP Phase III project &lt;br/&gt;rests on a solid foundation of
partnerships, resources, effective practices and experience derived from eight
years of &lt;br/&gt;collaboration, cooperation and concerted efforts focused on
minority student achievement under the current &lt;br/&gt;Philadelphia AMP Phase
II project. Over the past eight years of Philadelphia AMP.s existence, the
Alliance has &lt;br/&gt;contributed over $7.9 million in matching funds to the
project through the use of college/university, foundation, &lt;br/&gt;state
government, and corporate funds. As a result of Philadelphia AMP.s efforts, a
mechanism has been developed &lt;br/&gt;to catalyze changes in institutional,
departmental, and organizational culture and the practices that will result in
&lt;br/&gt;significant increases in recruitment, retention, STEM degree
production, and graduate school entry for all students. &lt;br/&gt;In support of
this AMP Phase III project, 170 tenured STEM faculty, academic department heads,
and senior &lt;br/&gt;administrative personnel from the 9 member institutions
will actively participate in recruiting, advising and &lt;br/&gt;mentoring AMP
students. In this proposal "minority" refers to African Americans, Hispanics and
Native Americans. &lt;br/&gt;