* 0332714
* Peoria NEXT: Creating and Sustaining Research, Innovation, and Commercialization in Central Illinois
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Richard Lister, Bradley University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

0332714 Liberty

This award is to Bradley University to support the activity described below for
36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include Bradley University (Lead Institution),

This project stresses leveraging the intellectual capital of the region to
create and nurture interdisciplinary and inter-institutional research and
development leading to commercialization, education and training for the
underemployed and under-trained workforce in the region, and development of
models to manage intellectual property.

Potential Economic Impact

Historically the economy of the region has been based on agriculture and
manufacturing of heavy equipment, which are waning. The growth of the economy
has lagged the rest of the state of Illinois and the nation. The region
possesses potential to exploit the research at the regional academic
institutions and to create a well-educated, technologically-literate workforce.
These activities will transform the economy, create new jobs and provide people
to fill the job opportunities.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in development of a multi-county R&D
partnership for a knowledge-based economy to provide greater innovation and
commercialization development projects in central Illinois. This effort
strengthens the focus on knowledge-based employment and moves away from the
region's traditional employment sectors of agriculture and mechanical based
economies. The activity includes development of complex models for intellectual
property management. The effort will lead to a knowledge-based economy in
support of innovation, science and engineering-based commercialization and
development of small businesses. Inclusion of a large urban school district and
regional government agencies will involve groups traditionally underrepresented
in science and technology.