* 0332350
* Handling Noise-Contaminated Data and Nonunique Identification Results in Wireless Sensor Networks for Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Jin-Song Pei, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 01/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Jin-Song Pei, University of Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SGER will
support exploratory research on wireless sensor networks for structural health
monitoring &lt;br/&gt;(SHM) with focus on handling noise-contaminated data
measurements and nonunique system &lt;br/&gt;identification results, the two
main issues that have been identified with the most critical and urgent needs
&lt;br/&gt;in the context of the rapidly growing sensor networks, especially
wireless sensor networks. Untested aggressive novel ideas are presented in the
proposal while analytical development as well as numerical and experimental
validation will be carried out in the project. Therefore, the project is
considered as exploratory and high risk. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
research will be undertaken through collaboration between the University of
Oklahoma (OU) &lt;br/&gt;and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The PI
at OU will advise a PhD student at MIT to conduct key parts of the research
efforts. Experimental study will be conducted at OU with the
&lt;br/&gt;participation of the PI's team and the student from MIT during each
summer while analytical and &lt;br/&gt;numerical work will be carried out
throughout the two academic years. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main research
ideas stem from the PI's successful PhD work at Columbia University on
transparent &lt;br/&gt;and engineered Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) with a
development plan expanded drastically in both &lt;br/&gt;breadth and depth.
Serving as a proof-of-concept for the PI's novel ideas on sensor network design
and &lt;br/&gt;data interpretation, the results will be used to build the PI's
academic credentials for her future &lt;br/&gt;submission for NSF CAREER grant
and participations in future major NSF solicitations such as .Sensors
&lt;br/&gt;and Sensor Networks.. As an individual member and an institution
alternate representative of OU at NEES Consortium, the PI will apply the ideas
and methods developed in this project not only to SHM but also to earthquake
engineering, especially those NSF NEES related activities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes advancing
knowledge on sensor technology and &lt;br/&gt;information technology for civil
infrastructure health monitoring. Central to this research is to handle real-
world situations and uncertainties, namely noise-contaminated data and nonunique
system &lt;br/&gt;identification results. The attempts are two folds: In terms
of data processing and interpretation, novel and &lt;br/&gt;ambitious ideas
including several types of transparent and engineered Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) &lt;br/&gt;and other techniques (such as improved ERA/OKID, demystified
HHT/EMD) will be tested to 1) &lt;br/&gt;identify structural nonlinearities, 2)
de-noise and 3) overcome nonuniqueness. In terms of sensors and sensor network
configurations, existing commercially available sensors will be compared in
terms of performance for civil engineering applications with the focus on
practical issues related to wireless MEMS sensors applications. New sensor
network design methodology will be developed with concentration on solving noise
contamination and nonuniqueness. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader
impacts, this SGER project will facilitate cross-institutional and cross-
regional &lt;br/&gt;communications and partnership by bringing together
researchers at OU and MIT. Research results will &lt;br/&gt;be disseminated
widely in publications and academic conferences. Development of algorithms will
be carried out in a generic form so that the research will impact a wide range
of applications involving data &lt;br/&gt;mining. The proposed research will
promote applications of state-of-the-art technologies to traditional fields such
as civil engineering. This research will help strengthen the safety of our
nation's civil infrastructures and improve preparedness for natural and man-made
hazards. &lt;br/&gt;