* 0332116
* The TeraGrid Proposal: Cyberinfrastructure for 21st Century Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Robert Pennington, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2005
* USD 6,000,000.00

The University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, in collaboration with University
of California, San Diego, is funded by a Cooperative Agreement from the Division
of Advanced Computational Infrastructure in the amount of $26,450,500 to
construct a Distributed Terascale Facility (DTF) that will span four
institutions: 1) National Center for Supercomputing Applications, 2) San Diego
Supercomputer Center, 3) Argonne National Laboratory and 4) California Institute
of Technology. In partnership with IBM, Intel, Myrinet, Qwest, Oracle and SUN,
they will construct a DTF based on multiple terascale Linux clusters, as well as
large-scale storage archives and data management software. A 40 gigabit/second
optical mesh will interconnect the DTF's components.

The DTF hardware will be integrated, using Globus middleware and other
Computational Grid technologies develop by the Partnerships for Advanced
Computational Infrastructure (PACI), to create a system with an aggregate of
11.6 TF of computing capability and 525 TB of disk storage to support terascale
computing (6.1 TF and 153 TB at NCSA), distributed data management (4.1 TF and
248 TB at SDSC), remote rendering and visualization (1 TF and 31 TB at Argonne),
and data-intensive scientific application analysis (0.4 TF and 93 TB at
Caltech). A unified Operations Center will coordinate management, user support,
and access.

The DTF TeraGrid will have broad impact on the computational science community
and will ultimately benefit society as a whole. First, the TeraGrid will advance
discovery and promote understanding by making available to academic researchers
next generation information technologies that are an order of magnitude more
capable than now generally available. Second, the TeraGrid will empower broad
scientific and engineering communities through its focus on commodity clusters,
common usage models and community codes. Third, experience gained through DTF
operation, insights and software from the TeraGrid will be packaged in a series
of software distributions for community use. This software packaging will extend
TeraGrid technologies to the broader national community, including Minority
Serving Institutions (MSI) and EPSCoR Institutions.