* 0332335
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Roger Brockett, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes a new more comprehensive approach to
the&lt;br/&gt;design of feedback controls for a wide variety of systems. The
basic &lt;br/&gt;idea is to replace the usual&lt;br/&gt;differential equation
description of the system being controlled by a
&lt;br/&gt;corresponding&lt;br/&gt;Louiville equation and to formulate an
optimization problem that takes &lt;br/&gt;into account a range of
initial&lt;br/&gt;conditions and the way in which the control depends on time
and state. &lt;br/&gt;The mathematical problems that&lt;br/&gt;arise do not seem
to have been explored up until now and so an important &lt;br/&gt;intellectual
challenge to&lt;br/&gt;be overcome in this research will be to develop methods
for solving the &lt;br/&gt;type of variational problems&lt;br/&gt;involving
partial differential equations that arise in these problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential for this work to benefit society rests on
two main lines &lt;br/&gt;of thought. First of all, control&lt;br/&gt;systems
are now found in almost all durable goods, including &lt;br/&gt;dishwashers,
heaters,&lt;br/&gt;toasters, automobiles, etc. and are becoming common in
building &lt;br/&gt;management involving lighting, heating
and&lt;br/&gt;security. The use of conventional optimal control often defines a
&lt;br/&gt;control law that is too expensive to&lt;br/&gt;implement and so that
ad hoc schemes are used that yield a performance &lt;br/&gt;level that is not
all that it&lt;br/&gt;could be. The ideas discussed here are directed toward
developing a &lt;br/&gt;methodology for finding less expensive,&lt;br/&gt;higher
performance solutions. Secondly, although biological systems are
&lt;br/&gt;replete with feedback control&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms, conventional
control theory has had only limited success in &lt;br/&gt;predicting and
explaining the&lt;br/&gt;structures identified so far. Arguing that living
systems, through &lt;br/&gt;evolution, are attempting to optimize
a&lt;br/&gt;trade-off between the performance of the system and its complexity,
we &lt;br/&gt;make the case that better&lt;br/&gt;success will be had in
explaining biological phenomena using theories of &lt;br/&gt;the type proposed
here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer has a long history of educating students
at both the &lt;br/&gt;graduate and undergraduate level. For&lt;br/&gt;example,
this spring one of his undergraduate students received one of &lt;br/&gt;only
three ``Fay" prizes&lt;br/&gt; given to graduating seniors for research work.
The student designed &lt;br/&gt;and fabricated a VLSI
chip&lt;br/&gt;implementing a very sophisticated motor controller. This is the
second &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate student of his in&lt;br/&gt;the last two years
that has received University wide recognition for &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
research. The funds&lt;br/&gt;requested are absolutely essential if he is to
make these kinds of &lt;br/&gt;opportunities available to
tomorrow's&lt;br/&gt;students, both at the graduate and undergraduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;