* 0332081
* Collaborative Research: Global Climate Model Simulations of Extreme Cold-Air Outbreaks
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,05/31/2006
* John Walsh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2006
* USD 190,499.00

This project has two primary objectives. The first is a determination of the
capabilities and limitations of global climate models with respect to their
simulation of cold wave characteristics. The second is the use of climate models
(a) for the diagnosis of the variability of extreme cold outbreaks in terms of
dynamical and physical processes and (b) as a basis for projecting future
changes in the characteristics (e.g., frequency, intensity, geographical
distribution) of cold air outbreaks over the decade-to-century timescale. The
research is motivated by the fact that the impacts of changes in the
characteristics of extreme events, of which cold outbreaks are prime examples,
are likely to be at least as important as associated changes of climatic
averages.

The project will utilize a suite of state-of-the-art global climate models,
including several versions of the National Center for Atmospheric Research's
(NCAR) Community Climate System Model, as well as the National Centers for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP)/NCAR global reanalysis. The PIs will test
several hypotheses: 1). That enhanced resolution permits more successful
simulations of the shallow cold outbreaks that sometimes occur over North
America; 2). That both dynamic and thermodynamic processes are important and
necessary for the penetration of extreme cold-air outbreaks into middle
latitudes; 3). That future changes of cold outbreaks under greenhouse forcing
will be determined at least as much by changes in the large-scale circulation as
by thermodynamic warming.

Finally, the research will seek to determine how Eurasian cold outbreaks differ
from those in North America, in both present-day and greenhouse simulations.

Broader impacts will be achieved through two expected outcomes: (1) improvement
in operational medium- and long-range predictability of cold outbreaks based on
antecedent pressure and ocean temperature conditions, and (2) the first
assessment of the future behavior of cold outbreaks in a greenhouse-forced
climate. The ability to anticipate shifts in the frequencies and/or intensities
of cold air outbreaks can have large and beneficial impacts on planning and
policy. Additional broader impacts will be the incorporation of the research
results: into undergraduate teaching at both the University of Illinois and
Beloit College; into a second edition of an introductory-level undergraduate
textbook; and into a publicly accessible website on extreme cold outbreaks.