* 0332075
* U.S.- Hungary Research on Social Networks as Evolving Complex Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Peter Erdi, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 16,050.00

The goal of this U.S.-Hungarian research project between Jan Tobochnik of
Kalamazoo College and George Kampis of Eotvos University, in Budapest, is to
study the structure and dynamics of social networks. They will begin with a
simple model for the formation and growth of a social network that includes
individual nodes with properties or traits that influence how they connect with
other nodes. In turn, the researchers will compare their abstract model with
empirical data from friendship networks created through surveys of students. The
model and survey results will be compared to determine if the probability of
forming a connection is proportional to a function of similarity between two
nodes. Results should improve the definition of properties of emerging networks,
especially the clustering and the hierarchical structure of networks, through
observations of certain physical properties such as phase transition from many
clusters to a single cluster as a function of control parameters. The effects of
removing random nodes and some game-based observations of efficiency measures
will be considered as well. Overall, the novel interdisciplinary approach should
strengthen current social science work on networks through US-Hungarian expert
contributions in systems modeling, mechanisms of cognition, and computational
mathematics. Results are expected to improve present methods for examining
relationships between real entities such as people, organizations and
communities.

This research on evolving complex networks fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts also include the
introduction of U.S. students to interdisciplinary science and to the
international research community through work at Hungarian institutions and
direct involvement with the project's central network survey.