* 0332366
* 2003 Gordon Research Conference on Ion Containing Polymers;  Holyoke, MA;  July 13-18, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Kenneth Mauritz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2004
* USD 3,000.00

This proposal requests funding from the National Science Foundation in the
amount of $3000 to assist in the conference fees/travel expenses of worthy and
relevant graduate students and postdoctorals to the 2003 Gordon Research
Conference on Ion Containing Polymers. This conference will be held July 13-18
at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts. Conference co-
chairpersons are Dr. Kenneth A. Mauritz, Professor. Department of Polymer
Science, University of Southern Mississippi, and Dr. Claudine E. Williams,
Laboratoire des Fluides Organis s, Coll ge de France. The sessions will include
fundamental scientific presentations by a diverse collection of outstanding
international scientists over the following range of topics: nanoscopically
heterogeneous ionomers having tailored transport properties, polyelectrolytes
having hydrophobic/hydrophilic sub-structuting and micelles, polyelectrolyte
multilayers and brushes, amphiphilic copolymers, charged macromolecular self-
assembly and supramolecular complexes. This request to the NSF is particularly
for financial assistance that will be applied toward the conference fees and/or
travel expenses of appropriate needy postdoctoral associates, or senior graduate
students, in the amount of approximately $500 each. The goal of this assistance
is to provide an educational forum and opportunily for the professional
development of young researchers in higher education who are pursuing scientific
careers in the important arena of ion containing polymers.