* 0332923
* New Methods for Maintaining Good Stereoscopic Viewing During Interaction with Large-Scale Head-Tracked Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 03/10/2003,07/31/2004
* Larry Hodges, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 70,729.00

Virtual reality (VR) aims to perceptually place the user in an artificial world
through computer-generated sight and sound. VR thus offers a new human-computer
interaction paradigm which can improve the user's understanding of and
interaction with 3D information spaces in diverse applications domains such as
design, data visualization, training, education, and medicine. Stereoscopic VR
systems generate imagery by presenting a separate perspective image to each eye.
As a result, the user perceives a single, true 3D image that appears to exist in
front of and behind the physical display surface. While stereoscopic display is
an important and common feature in VR systems, further research is needed
because stereoscopic viewing raises concerns beyond those raised in monoscopic
VR systems as the user travels through and manipulates the virtual environment.
This is especially true for extended virtual environments where the scene
contains rendered geometric detail at scales covering several orders of
magnitude. In such environments, users need to zoom in and out to move between
detailed and global views. This project will investigate techniques for
maintaining good stereoscopic viewing conditions under such conditions. The PIs
will focus on stereoscopic Head-Tracked Display systems such as the virtual
workbench (as distinguished from head-mounted displays in which the display
surface is mounted on the user's head). The expected impact of this project will
be better understanding and implementations of head-tracked displays based on a
thorough geometric and analytic analysis of false eye separation and head-
tracking distortions; new and improved techniques for automatic view optics
adjustments and automatic view position adjustments to maintain good
stereoscopic viewing conditions; and a systematic study of the compatibility
between the above methods and the relevant geometric attributes of VR
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;