* 0332594
* Initiating and Sustaining Industrial Renaissance through Innovative Partnerships (ISIRP)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Larry Benefield, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

0332594&lt;br/&gt;Benefield&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Auburn
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Auburn University (Lead Institution), Wayne State University, NASA,
Alabama Power Company, Alabama Development Office, City of Auburn, Bessemer
Chamber of Commerce, Montgomery Chamber of Commerce, Renascens Company, Resource
Innovations, United States Steel Corporation, Golden Flake Snack Food Company,
Southern Sales &amp; Marketing Group, BOWATER Company, Capitol Vial, GTI,
McPherson Oil Products, Southern Ductile, American Cast Iron Pipe Company,
Barber's Dairies, Citation Foam Casting Company, Foundry Coatings, Haldex
Friction, Jenkins Brick, Mason Corporation, Neptune Technology Group, Riverside
Refractories, Sloss Industries, SMC South, Southern Foundry Products, Southern
Foundry Resins, Specialty Wood Products, Teksid Aluminum Components, U.S. Pipe,
Vulcan Materials, and Wayne Industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this partnership is to facilitate the transformation of knowledge
into innovations that will create new wealth and strengthen the regional economy
in the area. A Knowledge Sharing System based on the latest information
technology will be developed to expedite technology transfer. Students, faculty,
and county technology outreach agents will use this new system to transfer
knowledge from academic and federal research laboratories to regional industry
in a systematic and efficacious manner. A diverse technologically literate
workforce will be trained in modern manufacturing technologies and processes.
Educational outreach in the form of short courses will be available to keep
industrial partners at the state-of-the-art in
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Alabama
has lost over 48,000 jobs from over 273 plant layoffs and closings since 1998.
The state has a very poor record of technology transfer and commercialization,
especially for manufacturing companies. The state sees diversified manufacturing
as being very significant in their economic future. The proposed effort of
knowledge transfer, workforce education and training, and establishment of a
strong enabling infrastructure for sustainable innovation will provide jobs and
a workforce to perform those jobs. This will result in economic and societal
well being in the state. The effort will improve the competitiveness of the
existing manufacturing sector and bring new manufacturing companies into the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity lies in
advances in knowledge through fundamental research in engineering in general and
manufacturing in particular and in establishing a model for technology transfer
and industrial outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
activity include educational diversity, educational outreach to industry, and
regional economic development to ensure long-term sustainability of economic and
societal well-being. Underrepresented groups will be represented in the
activities of the award.&lt;br/&gt;