* 0332597
* An Industry-State-University Partnership for Southeast Massachusetts Economic Development  Through  Innovation in Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Farhad Azadivar, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

0332597&lt;br/&gt;Azadivar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of Massachusetts Dartmouth to support the activity described below for 24
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include the
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (Lead Institution), Massachusetts Office
of Environmental Affairs Massachusetts Department of Transportation, Naval
Undersea Warfare Center, plus 27 regional companies. At least 10 of these
companies have agreed to commit $50,000 each to the project. More are being
recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives for the project
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Create a business-like environment where products,
processes, and systems are developed by university faculty, students, and
professional staff for individual private sector partners to
commercialize.&lt;br/&gt;2. Make the university-developed technology available
and affordable to a broader sector of the regional economy, especial small to
medium sized companies.&lt;br/&gt;3. Enhance the economic development of the
region by serving the industry by providing technology and a workforce to
exploit it.&lt;br/&gt;4. Provide a learning environment for students to
supplement their classroom education with experiences in the business
world.&lt;br/&gt;5. Integrate research, education and innovation to provide
economic development and service to the community via the
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;6. Disseminate the model and the experience to other
institutions of higher learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;This region of Massachusetts has been left behind in
technology-based economic growth. Southeast Massachusetts was once one of the
most prosperous regions in the nation due to whaling and textile industries. The
region has been suffering economic hardship as both industries have left the
area. Today, the economic strength of the region lags behind the rest of the
United States, and the employment in high technology industry. The region has
begun to change that situation. Electronics, environment, biomedicine,
telecommunications, intelligent materials, and fibers are being inserted into
the industrial base in the region. This proposed effort provides a university-
lead partnership with government and industry to facilitate technology transfer,
technology support, and a technologically literate workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity lies in a
significant number of innovative technologies developed and commercialized into
products, processes, systems and services, and the workforce needed to enable
these innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is excellent in terms of
Broader Impacts. The project will educate professionals and provide employment
opportunities for a diverse group of underrepresented groups in the region. The
technology-based economic well-being that will result in the region will serve
as a model for other regions that have experienced similar economic downturn
from departing industries.&lt;br/&gt;