* 0332404
* Housing Research Agenda Workshop
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Michael Mullens, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2004
* USD 35,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Housing is one of the most basic needs of human
beings. Providing affordable, durable and&lt;br/&gt;quality homes has always
been one of the greatest challenges faced by society. Over the&lt;br/&gt;years,
a fair amount of research efforts have taken place to help meet the challenge
of&lt;br/&gt;providing adequate housing. In recent years, there has been a
renewed emphasis on housing&lt;br/&gt;technology research due to the PATH
(Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing)&lt;br/&gt;program
initiatives at the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and
the ational Science Foundation (NSF).&lt;br/&gt;The overall purpose of the
proposed workshop is twofold (1) to compile State of the&lt;br/&gt;Art of the
housing technology research by summarizing recently completed and on-
going&lt;br/&gt;NSF-PATH and other related research efforts, and (2) to develop
future research directions&lt;br/&gt;in major areas of housing technology. The
workshop will focus on five major areas (1)&lt;br/&gt;Construction Management
and Production, (2) Structural Design and Materials, (3) Building Enclosures,
Utilities and Energy Systems, (4) Community and Economic Impacts of Housing
Technology, and (5) Systems Interactions and Whole House Approach.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed workshop will serve as an important step in advancing knowledge in the
field&lt;br/&gt;of housing technology, as well as in the broader housing
research arena. In order to&lt;br/&gt;ensure a broader impact of the proposed
workshop, groups that are underrepresented in&lt;br/&gt;science and engineering
fields will be given special consideration when
selecting&lt;br/&gt;participants. In addition, the focus area leaders and
participants will be encouraged to&lt;br/&gt;include examples of integrated
research and education activities as part of their research&lt;br/&gt;agenda
position papers.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is scheduled to be held on February
12-14, 2004 at the University of Central&lt;br/&gt;Florida campus in Orlando,
Florida. The funding is requested for August 16, 2003 -August&lt;br/&gt;15,
2004, based on the overall schedule.&lt;br/&gt;