* 0332490
* Partnership for Broadband Wireless Innovations, Development and Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Moeness Amin, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

0332490&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Villanova
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Villanova University (Lead Institution), Widener University, Ben
Franklin Fund, Air Force Research Laboratory, Naval Surface Warfare Center,
Bucks County Community College, Montgomery County Community College, North Penn
High School, Ablaze Systems, BAE Systems, Boeing Company, InterDigital
Communications Corporation, Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries, Lucent Technologies,
Motorola, Rajant Corporation, and VerdaSee Solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this partnership is to facilitate the transformation of
knowledge into innovations that will create new wealth and strengthen the
regional economy in the area of broadband wireless technology. The activities of
the partners include research and development in wireless science and
technology, educational diversification (including university, community
college, high school, and outreach in engineering to industrial partners), and
commercialization of the technologies developed. The partnership creates new
knowledge in the area of broadband wireless communications via research,
transfers knowledge to industrial partners, educates the technologically-
literate workforce, and establishes the entrepreneurial infrastructure to
sustain innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The effort will increase the competitiveness of the partners in
broadband wireless technology resulting in new jobs and will produce a
technologically literate workforce to fill those jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the activity lies in advances in knowledge through
fundamental research on smart antennas, low-profile antennas, and thermal
management for broadband wireless technology and in development of a model for
innovation in this industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
activity include educational diversity, educational outreach to industry, and
regional economic development to ensure long-term sustainability of economic and
societal well-being.&lt;br/&gt;