* 0332909
* CONFERENCE: 2003 Gordon Research Conference on Plant Cell Walls; Summer 2003, Meriden, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Daniel Cosgrove, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 08/31/2004
* USD 8,000.00

Plant cell walls are one of the key distinguishing features of plant life and
profoundly influence plant growth, development, and structural mechanics. Of the
40 or so cell types that plants make, almost all of them can be identified by
unique features of their cell walls. It is estimated that about 2500 genes are
involved in cell wall biogenesis during cell growth and differentiation. Plant
cell walls are the primary raw materials used in the timber, textile and paper
industries and provide a rich source of polymers for food products, films,
thickeners and many other materials. Because cell walls are an important source
of raw materials for multiple industries, we anticipate that many of the cell
wall-related genes now under study will be of economic importance via genetic
modification of cell wall characteristics in plants. Examples include the
modification of pectin cross-linking to increase shelf life of fruits and
vegetables, the enhancement of dietary fiber contents of cereals, the
improvement of yield and quality of fibers, and the relative allocation of
carbon to wall biomass for biofuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is
timely and important because of recent progress in many aspects of cell wall
biology and genomics. This is especially so as molecular, genetic, and genomic
approaches are yielding major advances in our understanding of the composition
and architecture of plant cell walls and their dynamics during growth, and are
identifying the genes that encode the machinery needed to make their biogenesis
possible. This meeting will bring together international scientists from
academia, industry and government labs to share the latest breakthroughs and
perspectives on polysaccharide biosynthesis, wood formation, wall modification,
expansion and interaction with other organisms, and genomic &amp; evolutionary
analyses of wall-related genes, as well as to discuss recent nanotechnological
advances that take wall analysis to the level of a single cell.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Conferences are designed to be relatively small
meetings with ample opportunity for group discussions as well as one-on-one
exchanges between scientists with diverse approaches to the topic. NSF Funds
will be used for partial support of conference fees and/or travel of
participants, with a special effort to ensure representation by young
scientists, women and members of underrepresented groups, as well as speakers
with limited grant support and those coming from greater
distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;