* 0332219
* Neuroimaging of Neurotransmitter Release in Humans During Cognitive and Behavioral Tasks
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* David Zald, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 537,332.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Zald
and colleagues will conduct a three-year project aimed at developing a novel
program of research that fuses cognitive neuroimaging techniques with
neuroimaging of neurotransmitter release. A wealth of neuropharmacological
evidence indicates that dopamine (DA) exerts a profound influence on affective,
motor, and cognitive processes. A full understanding of DA.s influence on
neurobehavioral systems requires knowledge of how and when DA is released.
Recent advances in PET imaging make it possible to safely measure DA release in
humans during different cognitive or behavioral tasks. Such data provide novel
insights into the functions of DA, and allows assessment of DA during cognitive
functions for which animal models are lacking. However, because of the
interdisciplinary nature of such studies, few cognitive neuroscientists have
exploited these techniques. The project includes: 1) a learning component to
facilitate the acquisition of the methodological skills necessary to perform
studies of DA release using [11C]raclopride PET; 2) a program of studies aimed
at testing specific hypotheses about when endogenous DA is released; and 3)
continuing development of teaching skills, including the development of a course
on the cognitive neuroscience of emotion. Specific studies focus on 1) the
influence of task response demands and reward contingencies on DA release, 2)
the impact of novelty on DA release, 3) whether DA is released during tasks
involving set shifting (which is disrupted by DA depletions), and 4) the
relationship between BOLD fMRI responses and DA release in striatal subregions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal establishes collaborations between two major
academic centers that will allow the exchange of ideas and technical
developments in this emerging field. Because the field is in its infancy,
dissemination of these ideas and techniques at meetings and symposium is likely
to have substantial effects in guiding how others approach this area. Moreover,
the interdisciplinary nature of the work allows for the integration of ideas
across different fields of neuroscience. The grant also provides the opportunity
to facilitate training at the graduate level including participation of minority
M.D. trainees through the Vanderbilt-Meharry Medical college alliance. At the
institutional level, it furthers the department of psychology's goal of becoming
a leader in cognitive neuroimaging and will facilitate the expansion of the
types of PET studies performed at Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;