* 0332223
* Redesign of the AP Biology Course, Examination, and Teacher Professional Development Experience
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Robert Cannon, The College Board
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 02/28/2006
* USD 249,006.00

The College Board is launching a major initiative aimed at dramatically
improving the quality of learning and teaching in Advanced Placement (AP)
science courses. This work is being undertaken in response to a recent report on
advanced studies from the National Research Council (NRC, 2002) that recommends
specific changes in advanced study in the sciences.

Phase I of this long-term initiative includes the establishment of an ongoing
dialogue with scientists and educators across the nation in order to inform the
process by which the College Board will redesign the course, exam and teacher
professional development experiences for its AP Biology course. The information
acquired from Phase I will lead to Phase II of the program: the development,
field-testing and evaluation of new AP Biology curricular materials, assessments
and teacher professional development experiences. Work during Phase I will also
inform the process by which the College Board redesigns its AP Chemistry, AP
Physics and AP Environmental Science courses.

Intellectual Merit Repeated calls that the content of science education focus on
big ideas and be pared down to essential learnings have been prominent in recent
years. This is no easy task, however, given that the available body of important
scientific knowledge does not remain stable but rather unceasingly grows and
diversifies at a breathtaking rate. This work builds on recent studies and
analyses by the National Research Council, draws on the College Board network of
AP science teachers and university faculty, and is underpinned by the latest
research on the principles of learning with the aim of increasing learning with
understanding in AP science courses.

Broader Impact The project is led by the College Board, a not-for-profit
membership association of more than 4,300 schools, colleges and universities,
and education associations. The College Board sponsors and administers the AP
Program. The experiences gained from this initial phase of work can serve as a
model for the re-design of all AP science courses, and for the enhancement of
any advanced level courses in the sciences, including those offered in both high
school and at the university level. The College Board will quickly disseminate
the results of this effort through its network of more than 15,000 AP science
teachers across the nation and through the science faculty at its member
institutions.