* 0332872
* A Digital Rich Media Library of Animal Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Jack Bradbury, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* V. Celeste Carter
* 10/31/2007
* USD 921,701.00

This collections project brings the unique resources of the Macaulay Library
online as a new part of the NSDL. The Macaulay Library, a division of the
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, is the world's largest open repository of
recordings of animal behavior and natural history. Animal behavior is a topic
that is intrinsically interesting to people worldwide and is easily recruited
into initiatives that enrich, entertain, enlighten, and educate a broad and
multifaceted audience. It is also a key focus of current research, conservation,
and public awareness programs. Because sound and video recordings typically
contain multiple events and objects of interest, users of traditional long-
format archives must spend hours previewing recordings before finding the
specific examples they want. In addition to the reasons listed above, the
intellectual merit of this project involves the development of: a) the
interfaces linking the Macaulay Library to the NSDL, b) online annotation tools
that allow remote experts to log into our metadata each event and object within
a recording, and c) query tools that allow users to search the annotated and
authenticated database, move directly to those portions of a recording that fit
their query, and then edit and assemble suitable segments of recordings for
delivery. The annotation and query tool sets both include novel new
visualization and interactive mapping features that greatly enhance the
accessibility of the collection to even novice users. Broader Impact: This new
NSDL collection promotes increased discovery (since searches that move directly
to a given location inside a recording are much faster than previewing entire
film clips), understanding (since specific and authenticated examples are
immediately accessible for any behavioral topic), teaching (since educators can
quickly produce customized media sets online), conservation (since wildlife
management staff worldwide can obtain exemplars for training or biodiversity
assessment), research (since scientists can rapidly and at low cost access
sample sizes that have hitherto been impossible), the general public (since the
media can obtain authenticated examples for stories quickly), and infrastructure
(since the technology proposed here has very broad applications to other rich
media collections). This unique project makes all of those goals easier, faster,
and effective from any location in the world. It adds a whole new dimension to
the NSDL, and it does so in a way that maximizes its utility and access by our
diverse users. This project integrates the internationally respected animal
behavior, natural history museum, education, bioacoustics, and computer science
communities at Cornell University. It also builds on the long history of NSDL
involvement by Cornell University staff and faculty, and follows a long
tradition of collaboration between Cornell and industry, in this case through
partnerships with the EMC 2 Corporation, Apple Computer, and VideoBank. These
histories, plus the unique economic sustainability afforded by being part of the
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, make the Macaulay Library uniquely positioned
to undertake this task.