* 0332202
* An Application of Airborne Global Positioning System (GPS) Measurements to Studies of Atmospheric Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Thomas Parish, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 224,676.00

The most fundamental forcing term in the equation of motion that governs
atmospheric dynamics is the horizontal component of the pressure gradient force.
It represents the primary forcing mechanism for atmospheric motion. Knowledge of
the horizontal pressure gradient force (PGF) also allows the atmospheric flow to
be separated in terms of geostrophic and ageostrophic components. The
ageostrophic component, while generally much smaller than the geostrophic
component, represents the divergent component of motion and is critical to the
forcing of vertical motion and hence development of significant weather events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this research is to employ the
University of Wyoming King Air research aircraft (KA) as a means to evaluate the
potential of Global Positioning System (GPS) derived measurements in making an
accurate determination of the PGF. Research flight legs will consist of straight
paths using the autopilot to remain at constant pressure. Small deviations of
the aircraft from the isobaric surface will be corrected assuming hydrostatic
conditions since the pressure and temperature are known with high precision.
Prior to May 2000 the most significant bias error in the GPS position estimate
was due to Selective Availability, an intentional degradation of the GPS signals
that significantly reduced the accuracy of the navigation solution. Selective
Availability was inactivated in May 2000, thereby providing for nearly an order
of magnitude improvement in position determination. It is estimated that
vertical position estimates within 3-m are possible with the current GPS
instruments. Refinements in navigation solution techniques will be explored
using differential corrections from stationary GPS measurements and from the L1
and L2 GPS codes that allow for precise positioning. Radar altimetry will be
used to provide independent checks on the GPS-derived PGF
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A field experiment will be conducted during
June 2004 to study the lower atmosphere offshore from Cape Mendocino along the
north central California coast as a means to test the PGF strategy and to
elucidate key features of the summertime marine boundary layer. The Cape
Mendocino coastal region exhibits a persistent coastal low-level jet during
summer. Local enhancements to the coastal jet are frequently observed to the lee
of Cape Mendocino. An examination as to the diurnal variations in the wind and
temperature profiles and associated PGF surrounding Cape Mendocino during
episodes of the coastal jet will be made. The dynamics of the coastal
environment will be studied and the role of hydraulic features such as expansion
fans and hydraulic jumps will be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
GPS detection of the PGF will become a routine measurement on airborne platforms
and become standard for the KA platform to be used by the atmospheric science
community. This will provide a significant enhancement for future studies in
atmospheric dynamics since the fundamental forcing term can be directly
measured. Currently only the kinematics of atmospheric motions can be studied.
Successful application of this GPS technology will also enable a host of new
measurement opportunities, such as refinements in airborne wind measurements,
understanding the temporal and spatial variations in dynamics associated with
mesoscale circulations, and dynamical processes over irregular terrain, to name
just a few.