* 0333572
* Quality Analysis of Metadata Records in the NSDL Metadata Repository
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Marcia Zeng, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 11/30/2006
* USD 150,784.00

The National Science Digital Library (NSDL; http://nsdl.org) is a growing
digital library of heterogeneous resource collections, organized in support of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education at all levels. A key
component of the NSDL is its Metadata Repository. The metadata in the NSDL
Metadata Repository enables users to discover, explore, and retrieve resources
and to assess whether the resources are relevant or suitable for particular
educational objectives. The NSDL Metadata Repository takes a new approach to
metadata that supports the reuse of metadata, encourages open sources, and
simplifies the process of metadata creation. The NSDL Metadata Repository is
composed of metadata records created according to heterogeneous metadata
standards and submitted by different voluntarily contributing units. For the
NSDL to maintain a central role in science education, it is imperative that
metadata in the NSDL Metadata Repository be of the highest possible quality.

This Targeted Research project is performing a quality assessment and analysis
of metadata records in the NSDL Metadata Repository. The project's objectives
are (1) to assess the metadata quality of the NSDL Metadata Repository through a
systematic quality analysis of individual records and record sets, as well as
the quality of selected metadata records from contributing collections; (2) to
classify the quality problems evident in the collection, providing evidence of
their origins and recommending quality assurance solutions; (3) to explicate the
relationships between metadata quality and the design principles that underlie
the metadata services of the NSDL Metadata Repository; and (4) to provide an
empirical basis for an NSDL metadata quality assurance program.

This study is the first to address issues of quality assessment, quality
assurance, and quality control using the NSDL Metadata Repository. The results
of the research will be useful to the NSDL Core Integration team and to
developers of NSDL collections and services. Quality issues need to be assessed
and addressed at the current early stage of the NSDL Metadata Repository so that
quality assurance systems can be developed and implemented before the collection
reaches a point at which rectification of quality problems becomes difficult or
impossible.