* 0333133
* Collaborative Research: WCR:  Incorporation of Model Bias and Uncertainty in Land Surface Hydrologic Flux Prediction Using a Data Assimilation Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Steven Margulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2007
* USD 212,829.00

0333133 Margulis

A major weakness of current data assimilation algorithms is that they typically
do not account for model errors or assume that the model errors are unbiased.
However biases are inevitably introduced in the models due to poorly specified
forcing and parameters. Understanding the variance and memory of these errors is
key to properly including their representation in data assimilation frameworks
and will ultimately lead to improving our ability to predict variations in
hydrologic fluxes.

In this project we will focus on incorporating biases and other errors that can
occur as a result of erroneous forcing and parameterizations in a data
assimilation framework. The first tasks in our proposed research project will
consist of numerical simulations to characterize the types of errors that are
specific to land surface hydrologic modeling. The goal is to develop
parsimonious probabilistic error models (that account for biases and other model
errors) that are necessary inputs to data assimilation algorithms. Variational
data assimilation experiments will then be performed to design an observing
system that can ultimately be incorporated into a real-time data assimilation
framework and is capable of including these parameterizations of model biases
and errors. The final set of research tasks will be to incorporate the error
models and observing system into a real-time (operational) data assimilation
framework using the Ensemble Kalman Filter.

The expected results of this study include the characterization of those errors
that are caused by the inevitable misspecification of surface forcing and model
parameters and incorporate them into land data assimilation systems.