* 0333537
* A high-speed network connection for genomics research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Steven Salzberg, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 164,732.00

This project proposes to establish a dark fiber high-performance connection from
the Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) to the MidAtlantic Crossroads GigaPoP
(MAX) in College Park, MD and then to the Abilene network. The fiber will be
leased through FiberGate, Inc. and will provide both high performance and
redundancy. Additionally, the Abilene/Internet2 connection will be shared with
three affiliate organizations located within a one-kilometer radius of TIGR.
These include the Joint Technology Center, The Center for the Advancement of
Genomics and the Institute for Biological Energy Alternatives. Positive aspects
of this proposal include

TIGR is a major contributor of scientific data on the microbial organisms that
it sequences. TIGR's work in sequencing microbial genomes has aided homeland
defense initiatives and supported investigations into bio-terrorist activities.
TIGR has sequenced the anthrax bacterium and has been cataloging genetic
differences between strains. This connection will further enable this work. A
high-performance connection will enable an increased exchange of scientific data
and enable potential new bioinformatics applications. TIGR has built numerous
research applications that are used by scientist around the world to conduct
genomics research. The connection will support several major initiatives for
genomics-based analysis involving collaborators across the United States: 1. an
effort to build a comprehensive public database of genetic variation in the
bacterium Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax; 2. the NSF Tree of
Life project, and multi-institutional effort to sequence and study the genomes
of species representing many divergent branches of the evolutionary tree; 3. a
large-scale collaboration between TIGR and five other universities and
laboratories to link genes to function on a genomics scale in order to
facilitate investigations in physiological and pathophysiological mechanisms
underlying heart, lung, blood, and sleep function and disease; and 4. ongoing
and growing effort to share all genomics data with the scientific community,
through web-based databases and through submissions to other public archives.