* 0333525
* Structure and Evolution of Intermountain Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 344,254.00

Weather systems and their accompanying precipitation are often profoundly
affected by complex terrain. Knowledge of the influence of orography is somewhat
limited, partially because observations in these regions are difficult to
obtain. The Principal Investigator will investigate the processes contributing
to the development and evolution of intermountain cyclones and associated winter
storms. Intermountain cyclones typically develop or intensify to the lee of the
Sierra Nevada, a region of frequent cyclogenesis, and can produce damaging winds
and snowfall over Nevada, Utah, and adjoining states. They are also precursors
for Colorado cyclogenesis, and ultimately affect the evolution of fronts and
precipitation to the lee of the Rockies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
the research are to determine (1) how synoptic scale, orographic, and diabatic
processes influence the development and evolution of intermountain cyclones, (2)
how major mountain barriers like the Sierra Nevada modify frontal structure and
dynamics, and (3) how moisture transport and downstream orographic precipitation
are impacted by air mass transformation over upstream mountain
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve observational analysis
and numerical modeling. High-density surface observations from the MesoWest
cooperative networks, radar observations from the WSR 88D radar network, and
wind profiler data from California, Nevada, Idaho, and Utah will be used to
describe the observed mesoscale structure and evolution of selected
intermountain cyclones. Idealized and real-data simulations by the MM5 and
Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) models will be used to examine large-scale,
orographic, and diabatic contributions to cyclogenesis, determine how the Sierra
Nevada and Great Basin ranges alter the structure and dynamics of fronts, and
quantify water vapor fluxes, sources, and sinks during airflow over major
topographic barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents the first
comprehensive study of intermountain cyclone evolution to employ high-density
surface observations and high-resolution numerical simulations. The relevance of
previously developed orographically modified cyclogenesis theories will be
evaluated in a region that is markedly different from the lee of the Alps and
Rockies, where most prior studies have been focused. Also for the first time,
the impact of the Sierra Nevada on downstream frontal evolution and moisture
transport will be described. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include
improved weather and climate prediction over the intermountain west, integration
of research results into undergraduate and graduate education, and the mentoring
of graduate students.