* 0333172
* Hermitian Geometry of Non-Kahler Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Gueo Grantcharov, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2007
* USD 50,387.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0209306.&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gueo Grantcharov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to study three problems of the Hermitian geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;compact non-Kaehler complex manifolds: The geometry of Hermitian
manifolds admitting&lt;br/&gt;totally non-degenerate torus action, Hermitian
structures on Riemannian manifolds&lt;br/&gt;admitting many compatible complex
structures and geometry of hypercomplex manifolds&lt;br/&gt;and connections with
totally antisymmetric torsion. The methods of investigation&lt;br/&gt;include:
Kodaira-Spencer-Kuranishi deformation theory, Lichnerowicz formulas for
&lt;br/&gt;Dirac operators and vanishing theorems, twistor correspondence,
Kaehler orbifolds, &lt;br/&gt;nilpotent Lie groups, moment maps for various
spaces with geometric structures, &lt;br/&gt;harmonic maps and others. If the
project is successful, it is expected a new examples &lt;br/&gt;of Einstein
Hermitian manifolds to be obtained, the existence problem of HKT structure
&lt;br/&gt;on arbitrary hypercomplex manifold to be solved (negatively) and some
characterization &lt;br/&gt;or rigidity type results for manifolds with many
complex structures to be found.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of the
abstract spaces constructed from the complex numbers in
the&lt;br/&gt;theoretical foundations of quantum mechanics is significant. It
increases in the&lt;br/&gt;development of quantum mechanic to the theory of
quantum fields. A more recent&lt;br/&gt;investigations in the theoretical
physics are directed toward a unification of the&lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanics and
general relativity. This, yet hypothetical theory, is called &lt;br/&gt;string
theory and for a long time the Kaehler geometry of the complex spaces has served
as its mathematical&lt;br/&gt;foundation. In mathematics little is known about
the structure of&lt;br/&gt;a general non-Kaehler complex spaces. However, in the
fast-growing development&lt;br/&gt;of the string theory an abstract models based
on the non-Kaehler geometry appeared&lt;br/&gt;in the last years. Such spaces
have also additional geometrical properties&lt;br/&gt;which makes the study of
their mathematical structure more tractable. The&lt;br/&gt;investigation on the
project will contribute to the understanding of some of the
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems related to these physical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;