* 0333526
* Enabling Large-Scale Coherency Among Mathematical Texts in the NSDL
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Robert Constable, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 10/31/2005
* USD 460,000.00

Mathematical and program-code text is unique because significant portions of it
can be anchored to counterparts in formal logical theories that are implemented
by computer systems. These systems check formal proofs for correctness and trace
logical dependencies among assertions. When elements of expository text, such as
definitions and theorems, are formally linked to their implemented counterparts,
the texts are said to be "semantically anchored." Such texts exhibit
considerable depth and authority.

This Targeted Research project is extending common authoring tools (text
editors, as opposed to formal proof development tools) so that they can easily
produce semantically anchored documents suitable for the National Science
Digital Library (NSDL; http://nsdl.org). The investigators are solving technical
problems associated with creating large-scale coherent collections of
authoritative mathematical texts; exploring a new method for using computers to
assure precise common reference among the texts; and providing economical means
of authoring semantically anchored texts and improving static text-based
resources by anchoring them. The resulting tools will enable authors to create
semantically anchored documents by drawing on a large, already existing and
growing, collection of formal material.

Semantically anchored documents enable interconnected collections, where the
computers support exact common reference among concepts. By designing methods
and tools for generating anchored documents, this research will greatly
facilitate collaborative contributions to the NSDL. The project is contributing
sample documents to the NSDL and exploring ways of promoting their use in
education, scientific communication, and research.

This research leverages substantial investments made by governments, research
laboratories, corporations, and universities in creating large collections of
computer-checked and interactively generated formal mathematics. Through this
project, these collections are being made accessible to an extended community of
authors, researchers, students, and teachers involved with mathematics.