* 0333453
* IGERT: Graduate Training in Optical Sciences and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2010
* Dana Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 10/31/2010
* USD 3,851,637.00

Faculty in three departments and one institute on campus have received a renewed
IGERT investment to implement a new kind of graduate training through a
multidisciplinary optical science and engineering program (OSEP). Optics is both
a science and a technology, and it is inherently interdisciplinary-a fact that
is well reflected by the University of Colorado's (CU's) own faculty and other
researchers who span several departments and institutes. Indeed many technical
fields are increasingly dependent on optical technology for communication,
measurement, entertainment, displays and production, to name a few, hence the
global motivation for a multidisciplinary training program in optics. The field
of optics is furthermore a natural one for CU to cultivate. From Bose-Einstein
condensation in JILA, to the development of liquid crystal displays in
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE), to optical information processing in
Physics, to controlled chemical reactions in Chemistry, optics permeates CU's
research and technology. This strength spanning several departments has been
enhanced by this coordinated effort in graduate training. The IGERT training
program is designed from a bottom-up philosophy: Give students a very solid
scientific and technical training in optics and they will be well prepared for
subsequent employment in a wide variety of disciplines and industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSEP takes students from three home departments,
Chemistry, ECE, and Physics, and augments their traditional training with a
rigorous foundation in optical science and engineering. OSEP encompasses three
major research thrusts: (1) Optical control and manipulation, which includes,
for example Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC) for which CU physicists (who are
also participants in this proposal) were recently awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics; (2) Optical metrology, which is undergoing a technical revolution
thanks to advances in ultrafast lasers on the one hand and structured optical
fibers on the other; and (3) Optical processing, in which combined microwave and
optical holographic techniques have led to a new paradigm for processing
wireless communications, astronomical, and radar signals. The intellectual
merits of these research pursuits are reflected in the substantial impact that
they have already had on the recent trends in science and engineering and more
so in their potential impact on future technology. BEC, for example, is
recognized as the atom analog of the laser. Roughly speaking we are where laser
research was in the 1960's shortly after its invention, yet research within this
program has already targeted integrated atom optics as a technology that can do
for atom optics what integrated optical technology has already done for
conventional light optics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSEP seeks a broader impact
with its focus on the student as national and international citizen: its goal is
to provide students not only with in-depth technical training, but also to
provide career awareness and a global perspective of science and society. Their
training includes three laboratory rotations, one of which must not be in their
home department, and they may choose to carry out a rotation in a laboratory
abroad to gain an international perspective. Students also undergo a three-month
industrial internship, which can be carried out locally, nationally or abroad.
The program includes an Industrial Advisory Board whose members interact with
the students, recruit for internships and future employment, and provide
feedback to the program administration. OSEP also incorporates a weekly seminar
with contributions by members of academia and industry as well as by the
students themselves. Skills and technical courses are complemented by courses on
ethics, communication, and business to provide a balanced training to prepare
students as responsible and effective contributors to society. OSEP prepares
students exceptionally well for jobs in industry; moreover, Ph.D.s with the
broad education provided by OSEP are precisely the kind of individuals we hope
to see as next-generation faculty. These are the individuals that can change the
culture of our universities: those who see their science as part of the greater
society, who raze the walls of the ivory tower and level the barriers to
interdisciplinary education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education
and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;