* 0333246
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Gene Discovery and Mapping Tools for Ichthyophthirius: A Complementary DNA Resource
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Lee Pratt, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2006
* USD 499,755.00

In this project, an archive of full-length cDNAs representing the preponderance
of genes expressed during the life cycle of the parasitic ciliate
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis will be sequenced. Ichthyophthirius (known commonly
as Ich) is a major pathogen of freshwater fish and has substantial impact on
aquaculture in this country and abroad. At the same time, it represents an
extremely interesting biological system with respect to its taxonomy and life
style. Over the past 50 years, the ciliates have contributed enormously to our
understanding of cellular and molecular biology. Despite this, a paucity of
genomic sequence data exists for the phylum as a whole. High-throughput
sequencing efforts are currently slated for 3 free-living species (namely,
Tetrahymena thermophila, Paramecium tetraurelia and Oxytricha trifallax), and
the work undertaken in this project should lend to a more complete understanding
of ciliate biology and evolution. In addition, the project is expected to yield
fundamental insights into the nature of virulence and parasitism in I.
multifiliis leading ultimately to more effective treatments against disease.
Finally, the project will be conducted entirely within an academic setting and
will include the training of undergraduate students in a range of disciplines
that spans bioinformatics, computational biology and molecular genetics.