* 0333366
* IGERT - Program in Nonlinear Systems
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* John Guckenheimer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2010
* USD 3,468,400.00

The Cornell University IGERT Program in Nonlinear Systems supports graduate
education and research in the area of complex nonlinear systems. The research
component of the program will be organized around interdisciplinary groups
(IRTG) comprising faculty with expertise in theoretical, computational and
empirical science, who will jointly mentor graduate student fellow projects. The
research areas of the initial IRTG, including areas of applications, are (i)
networks (social networks, gene networks, internet, electric power grid); (ii)
gene regulation (cell signaling and gene expression networks); (iii) moving
machines and organisms (manual dexterity and control of locomotion); and (iv)
biological pattern formation (cardiac
electrophysiology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear science has been a role model
for interdisciplinary research. Principles arising from dynamical systems theory
have revealed common features in seemingly unrelated phenomena across the
breadth of science and engineering. The intellectual merit of this project lies
in the extension of successful strategies employed in nonlinear dynamics to
confront increasingly complex systems. A primary goal of the research is to
understand how systems, especially those arising in the life sciences, can be
more than the sum of their parts. For example, legged locomotion and manual
dexterity will be studied through a combination of mechanical devices,
observation of human and animal behavior and computer models. The broader
impacts of this research will be in improving the performance of robots and the
treatment of physical injuries. Another theme that will be explored is how
network architecture influences dynamics of a system. The concept of small world
networks, developed by the founder of this IGERT Program, Steve Strogatz and his
students, has already influenced research on biological, social and
communication networks. Applied to the internet, the results of this research
facilitate efficient web searches. In general, the program will have broad
impact in developing methods to predict the dynamics of complex systems, taking
full account of underlying network structures and making extensive use of
experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary mechanism of the IGERT
program is the engagement of Ph.D. students in nonlinear systems research early
in their studies. The program involves students in the conceptual phases of
research, and it encourages faculty to develop long term collaborations,
stimulated by their joint mentorship of students in the IRTG. The most direct
impact of the program is in training a new generation of scientists with broad
interests and expertise. In the words of a former IGERT fellow, "graduate
students who go through the IGERT program learn to speak the language of two or
more fields with considerable fluency, and all students are introduced to a
common mathematical foundation so that even those who do not share the language
of a specific field can interact meaningfully."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an
NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year
of the program, awards are being made to institutions for programs that
collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;