* 0333294
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Sequencing and Analysis of the Syntrophus Aciditrophicus Genome
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Robert Gunsalus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2006
* USD 449,779.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Robert P. Gunsalus, University of California,
Los Angeles and Michael J. McInerney, University of Oklahoma to obtain and
analyze the genome sequence the bacterium, Syntrophus aciditrophicus. This
microorganism represents an understudied class of anaerobic bacteria (microbes
that thrive only in the absence of oxygen) that serve essential roles in the
anaerobic food chains in natural and man-made environments. It functions in
symbiotic partnership with other anaerobic microorganisms to degrade a variety
of aromatic and aliphatic compounds to inorganic materials, thus completing the
carbon and nitrogen cycles on earth. The goals of this project consist of four
parts. The first is to generate a roughly assembled genome sequence of S.
aciditrophicus using state of the art DNA sequencing methods. Gaps in sequences
will then be closed to provide a completed DNA molecule. The genes contained
therein will be identified and annotated for their function(s) using a
combination of automated and hand-editing methods. Finally, the genomic
information will be further analyzed with the final aim to reconstruct the
metabolic pathways encoded in the S. aciditrophicus genome.

The S. aciditrophicus genome sequence and associated gene annotations will be
made available to the scientific community and general public to help address a
variety of issues of societal importance, and in the process, will also be used
to train graduate students in microbial genome analysis. It is anticipated that
these will include the ability to identify new and novel aspects of microbial
biochemistry and physiology related to anaerobic decomposition of natural as
well as man-made compounds in the environment. The information will reveal
previously unknown pathways in these microorganisms and how they are used in
essential and complex anaerobic ecosystems. Since this information should have a
wide impact on our understanding how these microbes function, it should allow us
to improve the productivity and sustainability of agricultural, industrial, and
natural resources. Lastly, the S. aciditrophicus genome analysis should provide
unique insight into the content and evolution of this essential class of
microorganisms.