* 0333705
* Mobilizing Enduring NSDL Resources in Plate Tectonics Research for Earth Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* John Helly, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 09/30/2008
* USD 608,795.00

This project is developing a data-oriented digital library collection on
education in plate tectonics, the central earth science paradigm. The effort
brings together earth scientists with their expertise in research concepts and
data access and educators with their expertise in methods and practice of
teaching and their knowledge of how to enhance scientific literacy. The host
institution, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), has a hundred year
rich history in oceanographic research and is one of four key institutions that
developed plate tectonics in the 1960's. A current NSDL grant supports a
collection of marine geological and geophysical data and documents along with
information technology tools that help "bridge the gap" between science data
archives and libraries. Items in the plate tectonics collection are being linked
to the historic and modern marine geological and geophysical data in support of
inquiry-based teaching methods. To combine these collections in a coherent and
systematic way, a method of semantic resolution across collection-specific
metadata is being developed, thus enriching the metadata content provided to the
NSDL globally. The project is also enabling the professional development of
teachers through interactions with a local school district and 40 teachers
nationwide who are attending two intensive summer workshops. This is followed up
through mentoring during the subsequent implementation of the resources of the
plate tectonics collection in the classroom.