* 0334769
* US-France International Research Experiences for Graduate Students: Vanderbilt University Department of Mathematics and INRIA-Sophia Antipolis Exchange Program
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2009
* Mary Ann Horn, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 11/30/2009
* USD 90,000.00

0334769&lt;br/&gt;Saff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-France exchange
program between Vanderbilt University and the French National Institute for
Research in Information and Automation (INRIA) at Sophia-Antipolis supports
vertically, integrated international research and education experiences for
mathematics graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. The project is
directed by Edward Saff at Vanderbilt University's Center for Constructive
Approximation and Laurent Baratchart at INRIA-Sophia-Antipolis. An average of
three Vanderbilt graduate students per year will spend five months in team
research at INRIA and INRIA graduate students and/or postdoctoral fellows will
be hosted by the Department of Mathematics at Vanderbilt, where they will
cooperate with researchers and attend graduate level mathematics courses.
Research topics include: (1) scientific computing, modeling and numerical
analysis; (2) modeling and control of renewable resources; (3) medical imaging
and robotics; (4) geometry, algebra, algorithms, and mathematics; and (5)
computing in automatic control and optimization. The benefits are increased
international visibility for research activities at Vanderbilt, increased
opportunities for U.S. students to participate in international research and to
establish cooperative research links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science
Foundation will cover the costs of the visits by U.S. graduate students to INRIA
and INRIA will provide support to French graduates and postdoctoral researchers
for their visits to Vanderbilt University.&lt;br/&gt;