* 0334061
* STI:      Effective Diagnostic Strategies for Wide Area Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Peter O'Neil, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 900,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;A critical missing piece of the end-to-end network performance puzzle
stems from the fact that current network diagnostic strategies do not adequately
take into account the effects of path delay. This is a proposal to develop
extensions to existing diagnostic tools which will take path delay into
consideration effectively, compensate for a variety of delay times, and test the
effects of these new diagnostic tools with network users and operators using
actual high performance applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;End-to-end Internet
diagnosis is such a difficult problem because the symptoms of nearly all flaws
scale with path delay and the symptoms that scale with delay cause classical
diagnostic strategies to yield misleading results. Classical diagnostic tools
and strategies yield confusing results because merely changing the path delay
changes the symptoms of the flaws, even though the flaws are not in the
additional part of the path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new diagnostic
methodology uses several different techniques to compensate for the effects of
path delay on diagnostic results: Emulated Delay, which uses specialized
software to buffer and delay packets as though they traverse a long path,
Parametric Model Scaling, a method of verifying that a short path can support
TCP bulk transport over a long path by verifying that the short path implements
the required properties for TCP to meet the end-to-end performance objective,
and "Scenic" Virtual Private Networks, where packets can be delayed by using
various IP tunnels or virtual private networks to send them on long "scenic"
alternate routes. These techniques will be used in conjunction with existing
diagnostic tools and strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
a suite of enhanced diagnostic tools that compensate for the effects of path
delay. This suite will be targeted at several different audiences: true end
users, application developers, network administrators and diagnostic experts or
tool developers. The suite will be built from a small kit of core components
that implement the previously described techniques that compensate for path
delay, in conjunction with some simple diagnostic applications. A prototype
diagnostic infrastructure consisting of diagnostic servers and test targets
placed in the network will be deployed. The prototype diagnostic infrastructure
will be deployed in and around the Pittsburgh and the Front Range GigaPoPs,
selected directly connected campuses, as well as at a few other key sites near
collaborators. The prototype diagnostic infrastructure will be used to validate
our diagnostic suite by recruiting real end users, application designers and
network administrators to field test our tools. This effort will be patterned
after the "early adopter" effort of the Web100 project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
In summary, there are a vast number of performance problems in the greater
Internet that remain hidden because they do not exhibit any symptoms when tested
on short, low delay, paths. The goal here is to revolutionize Internet
performance diagnosis by properly compensating for delay and eliminating false
positive diagnostic results for short paths, resulting in effective diagnostic
strategies for Wide Area Networks. &lt;br/&gt;