* 0334391
* SGER:  Neural Networked Finite Element Methodology for Health Monitored Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Hayder Rasheed, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 07/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Yacoub M. Najjar &amp; Hayder A. Rasheed; Kansas State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposed research is to transplant a
Neural Network algorithm within a finite element analysis procedure to take over
the function of its heart after a small jumpstart. The Neural Network will adapt
to the internal functionality needed to re-produce the overall response of the
body or the system, initially known from some external health monitoring
measurements, through self-adjusting/learning analysis trials. This will build
the memory and intelligence necessary to deal with similar analysis situations
pretty much the same way the human mind and body interact and inter-respond
without an interpreter. The specific objective of this research proposal is to
develop, formulate, and implement a proof-of-concept for an innovative Neural
Network-Finite Element (NN-FE) self-training approach. This approach can be used
to accurately characterize the internal mechanical behavior of health monitored
engineering systems such as buildings, bridges, offshore platforms, airplanes,
space shuttles and other structures. Pre-generated finite element-based data-
rich results simulating monitored 2D structures will be used to develop and
validate the NN-FE technique. Accordingly, each database containing load and
displacement history at some health monitoring/control points of the system
could be used to generate the NN-FE internal behavior characterization model.
The developed scheme will operate in two distinctive-alternating modes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, it will operate in a predictor analysis mode to
capture approximate stresses and strains at the integration points.
Subsequently, and based on deviations between predictions and actual
displacement values at the health monitoring points, the NN-FE self-adapting
algorithm will operate &lt;br/&gt;in a training mode in order to reduce these
deviations. As the algorithm is repeatedly applied in &lt;br/&gt;analysis and
training modes to eliminate such deviations, it develops self-learning
artificial intelligence and becomes smarter at making more accurate predictions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research addresses the
important issue of the self-sufficient and reliable internal characterization of
the mechanical response of health monitored structural systems. Success of this
research will lead to better assessment of current and future structures.
Accordingly, this will lead to more economical designs, protect the national
investments, and ensure higher safety measures to the public. More importantly,
by integrating anticipated future development in non-contact measurements, this
work is envisioned to pave the way to a new era of analysis in which computer
systems can remotely scan objects for response data and use them to analyze the
structural system by incorporating the self-training Neural Networked finite
element procedure. This is expected to impact all aspects of engineering,
science and life on the planet Earth, including aerospace, manufacturing, civil,
mechanical, and chemical engineering fields. Furthermore, it may be extended for
utilization in aeronautics and astronautics within man's quest to conquer the
outer space. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project.s broader
impacts include the following aspects: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Full involvement
of a PhD graduate student. Therefore, providing the student with intensive
&lt;br/&gt;training/research experience to address similar complex engineering
systems. &lt;br/&gt;2) The proposed exploratory integrated research will most
likely re-shape the interacting &lt;br/&gt;information technology-structural
engineering mechanics educational curriculum. This will definitely intrigue the
future engineering leaders to address other issues in similar integrated and
systematic &lt;br/&gt;way. Moreover, it will help mature the young graduates
into scholars with hands-on experience to tackle complex health monitored
structural engineering systems. &lt;br/&gt;