* 0334764
* US-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  XML-Based Web Services Static Analysis and Computational Aspects
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Victor Vianu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 11/30/2006
* USD 36,000.00

0334764&lt;br/&gt;Vianu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
cooperative research between the database group led by Victor Vianu at the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering of the University of California,
San Diego and the GEMO database group, led by Serge Abiteboul, at INRIA (French
National Institute for Research in Informatics and Automation). They propose to
collaborate on issues related to XML (Extended Markup Language) technology, the
standard for data exchange on the Worldwide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased
interaction of databases, XML and Web services raises new challenges in database
research. One central issue, addressed in this project, is the development of
static analysis techniques to increase confidence in the robustness and
correctness of complex Web services, and to enhance function and efficiency. The
objective of this project is to cooperate with the French group on new static
analysis and algorithmic techniques for XML-based Web services. They will apply
these techniques to various Web services and investigate aspects related to
repositories with incomplete information about XML documents, and query
processing on streaming XML documents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The French GEMO
team is recognized for pioneering work in the area of semi-structured data and
XML. Their work resulted in the formation of Xyleme, a European spin-off, start-
up company, focusing on XML technology. Their expertise complements the U.S.
team's theoretical research. Their joint efforts will further understanding of
XML technology and its application in web-based services and database
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;