* 0334847
* Workshop to Foster Academic Development of Women in Geotechnical Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Sarah Gassman, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2004
* USD 25,149.00

The Fourth USUCGER National Workshop scheduled for October 2003 provides a
unique opportunity to foster the academic development of women in the
geotechnical engineering academic community. This award funds for a one day
workshop to be held the day prior to the National Workshop to discuss academic
career issues in geotechnical engineering, including diversity, research,
teaching and service. Women who attend this workshop are expected to also attend
the National Workshop thereby increasing the representation of women in USUCGER
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is designed to foster technical,
intellectual and personal exchange among women in the geotechnical academic
community. Participants will be women faculty currently holding geotechnical
academic positions at U.S. Universities. These will include women from academic
research institutions, as well as predominately undergraduate teaching
institutions. Participants will represent all stages of an academic career, and
a broad range of technical expertise and geographic location. The intent of the
workshop is to instill in its participants a sense of belonging within the
geotechnical community in which they must ultimately succeed as academics, and
to which their contributions are essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will consist of roundtable discussions, informal presentations and a guest
speaker. It will be a somewhat intense event that will foster exchanges between
the participants. It is an excellent opportunity to trade notes, identify common
interests and issues, and develop collaborative efforts within the geotechnical
community. The outcome will be the development of a list of action items and a
set of recommended strategies for the action items. Follow-up surveys will be
conducted to document the benefits of the workshop and a web page will be
created to serve as a USUCGER resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this workshop include both short- and long-term benefits. The short-term
benefits include development of an active network of mentors and peers for women
within the geotechnical community, increased awareness of research and funding
opportunities/ collaborations, and increased participation of women at the
Fourth USUCGER National Workshop. The long-term benefits include increased
retention of women as active researchers, educators and mentors within
geotechnical engineering and increased diversity within geotechnical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;