* 0334400
* Collaborative Research: M-I Coupling: A New Euler Potential Based Magnetospheric Convection Model
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Richard Wolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 11/30/2006
* USD 210,001.00

The dynamic effects of the magnetosphere on electric fields in the low- and mid-
latitude ionosphere constitute a crucial area of magnetosphere-ionosphere
coupling that has received relatively little attention from researchers. During
magnetic storms, electric fields generated in the magnetosphere penetrate
promptly to low latitudes. These electric fields then play a major role in
storm-associated disruptions of the ionosphere, including large-scale changes in
ionospheric structures and equatorial Spread F. An understanding of longitudinal
and seasonal effects is central to developing the ability to forecast these
conditions, which have major space weather effects. Developed as a
magnetospheric model, the Rice Convection Model (RCM) assumes that the magnetic
field in the ionosphere is a dipole that is aligned with the rotation axis, so
it cannot presently be used to treat longitudinal or seasonal effects. On the
other hand, the Prairie View Dynamo Code (PVDC), which is used to model the
ionosphere, uses Euler potentials and treats ionospheric currents using the full
International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) magnetic field model. Although
the PVDC does not treat the magnetosphere, it is presently capable of treating
wind-driven electric fields and currents, including seasonal and longitudinal
effects. The central task of this project is to produce a new version of the RCM
and a corresponding new version of the PVDC, that are both based on the same
Euler-potential formalism. The new version of the RCM will be compatible with
the IGRF or other realistic models of the Earth's magnetic field. Use of the
same formalism in both codes will facilitate collaboration and data exchange.
Once the new RCM is developed and tested, it will be applied to the study of
prompt-penetration electric fields in large storms, with particular emphasis on
longitudinal and seasonal effects. The new RCM computational machinery will be
available for incorporation into the large space weather codes that include
coupled full-physics models of the thermosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere.
The improved PVDC will investigate the longitudinal variation of the quiet-time
electric field. Prairie View A&M University is an HBCU with 95% black students
enrolment. Carrying out this proposal would strengthen the University's research
ability, and encourage more black students, who are underrepresented in the
field of space science, to participate in the proposed project.