* 0334392
* WORKSHOP: UIST 2003 Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Scott Hudson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2004
* USD 12,600.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 8 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad,
along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take place in
conjunction with the ACM 2003 Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST 2003), to be held November 3-5 in Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada, and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special
Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The UIST conference is
the premiere forum for presenting research results and innovations in the
software and technology of human computer interaction. It brings together
researchers and practitioners from diverse areas that include traditional
graphical user interfaces, virtual and augmented reality, multimedia, new input
and output devices, CSCW, ubiquitous computing and others. UIST is a long
standing annual conference which will be meeting for the 16th time in November,
but this workshop will be the first doctoral research symposium associated with
the conference. The three goals of the workshop are to increase the exposure and
visibility of the participants' work within the community, to help establish a
sense of community among this next generation of researchers, and to help foster
their research efforts by providing substantive feedback and guidance from a
group of senior researchers in the area in a supportive and interactive
environment. Student participants will make formal presentations of their work
during the workshop, and will receive feedback from a faculty panel. The
feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work
is positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Student position papers will be published in the UIST Conference Companion, and
the students will also present posters relating to their work at a special
session the first night of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The doctoral symposium will help expand the participation of young researchers
pursuing graduate studies in this field, by providing them an opportunity to
gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work and to obtain
feedback and guidance from senior members of the research community. It will
further help foster a sense of community among these young researchers, by
allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Because the
students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions,
including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the students' horizons
are broadened to the future benefit of the field.&lt;br/&gt;