* 0334948
* AToL: Building the Dipteran Tree: Cooperative Research in Phylogenetics and Bioinformatics of True Flies (Insecta: Diptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Gregory Courtney, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,413,311.00

With an estimated 150,000 described species, the insect order Diptera (the true
flies) is one of the most diverse branches on the Tree of Life. The evolutionary
relationships between the main branches of the fly tree are still largely
unknown or controversial. Understanding the history of flies is critically
important in biology and medicine because flies are model organisms for
comparative research in genomics, development, neurobiology, and behavior (e.g.,
fruit flies, mosquitoes, house flies, medfly). Comparative research on flies
depends on having a reliable estimate of their phylogenetic tree. We will
reconstruct the fly tree in detail from an unprecedentedly large sample of
comparative genetic and anatomical data. We will also integrate information from
the exceptional fossil record of Diptera, from emerging genomic and
developmental databases, from new and existing specimen data, and from
previously published phylogenetic trees. The project involves a collaborative
effort among a large, international team with extensive research expertise in
fly biodiversity, genetics, and behaviour. The research team will also develop
web-based bioinformatics tools for natural history information about flies,
their biology, and impact on other fields of research. The task will be mastered
in a three-tier approach. In the first tier, we reconstruct a backbone tree
based on the first comprehensive morphological character matrix and large
genomic data set for 42 species representing all major dipteran lineages and
incorporating important model organisms. The second-tier analysis will use a
more comprehensive species sample comprising at least one species for all fly
families, more morphological characters, and a reduced amount of molecular data.
In this tier we will also incorporate characters from well-preserved fossil
species. The third tier will rely on the backbone trees reconstructed in the
first two tiers for building a meta-analysis-based supertree for 1500-2000
species. Using these data within each tier of the project, we explore multiple
comparative analytical approaches and sampling strategies for reconstructing the
phylogenies of megadiverse taxa. &lt;br/&gt;A more exactly specified Tree of
Life for Diptera will provide a major organizing framework for the astounding
diversity of flies and guide research in other areas of biodiversity. Molecular
and morphological character systems and genes explored in this project should be
extremely useful in resolving similar questions in other insect groups.
Ultimately a comprehensive new phylogeny for all of Diptera will provide a
valuable framework for testing evolutionary hypotheses critical in comparative
studies of dipteran development, behavior, genomics, and neurobiology. The
research team includes educational and research training experiences for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as extensive research and career-
building opportunities for several postdoctoral researchers. In order to
efficiently communicate our results, we will build the 'Diptera Web.' This
website will be the central hub for information on Diptera and present our
trees, contain important electronic catalogs, genomic databases, a comprehensive
anatomy atlas, interactive keys, and links to collection homepages. This
resource will greatly expand the accessibility of primary information on flies
to the research community, educators, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;