* 0334339
* ASM Conference on Integrating Metabolism and Genomics (IMAGE), to be held in Montreal, Canada, Spring 2004
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Robert Larossa, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This project will support attendance of young researchers in the ASM Conference
on Integrating Metabolism and Genomics (IMAGE) to be held in Montreal, Canada
from April 30 - May 3, 2004. In recent years significant new tools for studies
of bacterial metabolism have been developed. Included among these are the
complete sequencing of many microbial genomes, the ability to comprehensively
monitor gene expression at the transcript and polypeptide level and measure
outputs of such expression including the flux of metabolites through the
biochemical networks and wide varieties of phenotypes. This systems-level
biology holds great promise. Technological advances have changed how the
molecular biologist approaches metabolic problems in profound ways and have led
to an influx of scientists and engineers neither constrained nor necessarily
conversant with the classical views. Thus this proposed conference serves an
important purpose, to ensure that diverse researchers interested in
understanding bacterial metabolism have a forum for initiating and fostering
interactions.

Broader Impacts: Once the province of biochemists the field of microbial
metabolism is now occupied by a diverse set of theoreticians, informaticians,
mathematicians and engineers as well as by the more traditional genetics,
molecular biology and biochemistry communities. The purpose of this conference
is to foster an ongoing dialog between these communities at multiple levels
ranging from the established investigator to students that are midway through
obtaining their advanced degrees. Considering the emerging nature of the field,
the conference will have a substantial educational impact on the training of
young researchers.