* 0334558
* SGER: The Emerging Role of Bioinformatics in Plant Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* James Moore, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 07/31/2005
* USD 43,660.00

The goal of this project is to develop a prototype educational module for
introducing advanced high school and beginning college or university students,
as well as their instructors, to the rapidly growing importance of informatics
in biology. The immediate objective is to test a novel approach for achieving
this ultimate goal. The product will be an animated description of how one
assembles from messenger RNA (mRNA) a collection of complementary DNA (cDNA)
clones, each representing a different gene. Even though this exploratory project
is designed to eventually form part of a much larger tool, it is also designed
to stand alone. A scientific illustrator will use professional animation
software with guidance from biologists and informaticians, in order to present
the information in an accurate and engaging fashion. Where possible and
appropriate, actual video footage will be included, utilizing first- and second-
year university students from under-represented groups in an effort to encourage
other such students to consider bioinformatics as a career objective. The final
product, which will include an audio track, will be distributed in CD and/or DVD
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The justification of support for this project by a
Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is that the training materials to be
developed venture into an emerging area, that of bioinformatics training in high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Many, if not most,
biologists inadequately appreciate the rapidly advancing and changing use of
informatics in biology. This project therefore is important with respect to
communicating the nature and increasing importance of this new approach in
biology. Communicating the role of bioinformatics to younger students will
attract many of them to this emerging area in biology. To achieve this
objective, a team has been assembled consisting of a professional scientific
illustrator, two molecular biologists with previous experience in developing
similar animations, and three biologists/bioinformaticians actively conducting
research in the subject matter to be covered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This project is dedicated to the creation of a
teaching/training resource, aimed at advanced high school and beginning college
or university students. Its product will be distributed worldwide, thereby
serving a geographically broad area and a diverse audience. The use of younger
students from under represented groups in all video segments is intended to
encourage other such students to consider bioinformatics as a career option. The
level at which this scientific animation is targeted has been selected in order
to enhance scientific and technological understanding of this emerging research
area among the broadest possible audience. The entire focus of this project is
on issues relating to its broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;