* 0334413
* Olfaction in Olfactory Bulbectomized Rats
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Burton Slotnick, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 08/31/2004
* USD 54,352.00

Sensory cells in the nose respond to odors and send signals back to the
olfactory bulb of the brain. These cells live for only a few weeks and, when
they die, they are replaced by maturing cells from a germinal cell layer in the
olfactory tissue. The maturing cells extend their axons into the olfactory bulb
where they replace the contacts made by the axons of the dying neuron. The
ability of the olfactory receptor epithelium to reconstitute itself in this
fashion is unique because neurons in other sensory systems are not replaced if
they die. Of particular interest is the fact that if the olfactory bulb is
removed, the axons of maturing sensory neurons will continue to grow until they
reach brain tissue. They will then make synaptic contact with neurons that do
not normally receive inputs from olfactory receptor cells.&lt;br/&gt; While this
remarkable example of neural plasticity has been demonstrated in
anatomical&lt;br/&gt;studies, it remains unclear whether these new synaptic
contacts can be used by the brain to support the sense of smell. We propose to
examine this issue by removing the olfactory bulb in neonatal rats and testing
their ability to detect and discriminate odors when they are adults. Operated
rats will be trained in a precision olfactometer device to determine their odor
sensitivity and whether they can discriminate among odors. Behavioral results
will be correlated with an anatomical analysis of forebrain connections
originating from the olfactory bulb. A positive outcome would provide evidence
for a hitherto unrecognized ability of the brain to utilize novel information
and translate it into conscious sensory signal&lt;br/&gt;