* 0334177
* STI:     A Security Architecture for IP Telephony
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Dipak Ghosal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 158,531.00

IP telephony is a complex application involving multiple layers of the protocols
stack and interactions among multiple network devices. The complexity is
exacerbated by two additional factors . 1) the requirement that IP telephony
interoperate with the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) and 2) the
requirement that IP telephony functions with existing network middle-boxes such
as network address translators (NATs) and firewalls. These complexities
introduce vulnerabilities that are prone to both known and perhaps, new forms of
attacks. The goals of this proposed focused research are 1) to perform a
comprehensive vulnerability analysis of IP telephony and 2) to design a security
architecture to counter various types of denial-of-service (DoS) attacks in IP
telephony.

The work will proceed as follows: first carry out a detailed vulnerability
analysis of IP telephony using a property driven approach. In this approach,
define a set of properties that an IP telephony application must satisfy for a
specific type of deployment. Then the vulnerabilities will be then enumerated
and classified as potential ways to violate these properties using a
corresponding attack. This vulnerability analysis will form the basis for
designing the security architecture. In developing the security architecture,
our focus will be in the design and analysis of sensors to detect and control
DoS attacks. While DoS attacks have been studied, IP telephony presents
significant new challenges. Next will be an investigation of both signature-
based and statistical anomaly detection algorithms. The detection algorithms are
complex because the attacks can occur at multiple layers involving multiple
network devices and attack both the control and data plane of the protocol
architecture. Finally, in a converged network, an attack to the IP telephony
system can be made from both the Internet as well as the PSTN. Recovery
algorithms that can quickly recover once the attack has ceased will be designed.
The overall architecture will involve cross-layer introspection, i.e., the data
from the various sensors at the different protocol layers and at the different
network elements will have to correlated to determine the type of attack and
hence the desired response.