* 0334168
* STI:     The Strategic Technology Astronomy Research Team (START) Collaboratory:      Broadening Participation in Authentic Astronomy Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Carlton Pennypacker, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 607,500.00

The START Collaboratory will provide portals to data archives and analysis
tools, observation tools and resources, a collaborative framework that
encourages interactive online research communities, and the training and support
infrastructure needed for participants to effectively apply tools, resources and
techniques. The START Collaboratory will bring authentic, cutting-edge
scientific research to classrooms across the country, allowing students to
contribute genuine results to the astronomy research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Strategic Technology Astronomy Research Team (START)
brings together three current projects, each of which has created well tested,
extensively used Web-based tools. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey / National
Virtual Observatory offers Web-based archive research tools, Hands-On Universe
has extensive experience helping and supporting high school teachers and
students become involved in authentic astronomy research, and the Collaboratory
Project provides a Web-based collaborative-learning environment. All partners
have extensive experience working with students and teachers, and with
developing training programs and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the
planned tools exist now in a limited way as part of START.s partner projects,
and others will be written during the term of this grant. These tools, developed
by the START partners, can easily be scaled up and adapted into tools for the
research community with the advent of the NVO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
START Collaboratory, students will search massive archives of real astronomy
data, will request and obtain time on a worldwide network of telescopes, and
will collaborate with fellow student researchers and professional scientists as
they evaluate problems to pursue, coordinate research, analyze data, and report
their results to a worldwide community. The START Collaboratory will provide
lasting benefits to both students and the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;