* 0334846
* AToL: Collaborative Research: AmphibiaTree--An Integrated Phylogenetic and Bioinformatics Approach to the Tree of Amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* James Hanken, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 239,496.00

0334846&lt;br/&gt;Hanken &lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Hanken
at Harvard University, as part of a four-institution collaboration, to study
phylogenetic relationships of the living amphibians and their close fossil
relatives. Living Amphibians are a prominent part of the Earth's vertebrate
fauna and include three orders: the caecilians (Gymnophiona), salamanders
(Caudata), and frogs and toads (Anura). Despite recent advances in discovering
and describing their diversity, many critical questions in amphibian evolution
remain unresolved and a fresh analysis of evolutionary relationships is needed
to take new discoveries into account. Furthermore, the recent decline and
apparent extinction of amphibians from many environments makes it urgent that we
discover and classify the diversity present today. A team of seven investigators
from diverse institutions (University of Texas at Austin, University of
California at Berkeley, Harvard University, and the University of Kansas) and
their colleagues will collaborate to resolve modern amphibian relationships.
Field sampling in biodiversity hotspots will provide materials of new or
previously unsampled lineages. Anatomical and morphological data from living and
fossil forms will be combined with DNA sequences from a set of defined
mitochondrial and nuclear genes for as many species as possible, and will be
integrated with existing data sets. Analysis of these large data sets will be
used to gain insight into such questions as repeated patterns of evolution,
geographic patterns, and rates of evolution. Dr. Hanken and his students and
colleagues will focus on morphological and anatomical studies of African frogs
and on select groups of Neotropical plethodontid salamanders, as well as
contributing to the overall integration of molecular and morphological datasets
for phylogenetic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary history of
modern amphibians is critical for developing conservation strategies for
amphibians as well as completing the vertebrate portion of the tree of life. The
project will involve extensive student training and interaction with US and
international colleagues. Communication with the public will utilize web
resources, especially AmphibiaWeb, an existing site that will be expanded and
further developed to provide information on all species of amphibians for
professionals and the public at large. AmphibiaWeb will also provide training
opportunities for students and senior professionals to enable them more
effectively to communicate their findings.&lt;br/&gt;