* 0334013
* Symposium: Multidisciplinary Approaches to the Science of Face Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* James Haxby, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2004
* USD 21,598.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Haxby and colleagues will hold a
symposium that will bring together investigators who are working on models of
face perception within different disciplines and provide a forum for them to
interact through presentations, discussions, and informal interactions. The aim
of this symposium is to facilitate interdisciplinary transfer of ideas and
fostering collaborative research projects. The symposium will include speakers
with backgrounds in cognitive and computational models of face perception,
neuropsychology, non-human primate neurophysiology, functional neuroimaging, and
social psychology. These researchers are working on inter-related problems
concerning how faces are perceived and represented. All faculty participants are
asked to bring a graduate student or postdoctoral fellow from their laboratories
with them. These students and fellows will be asked to present posters at the
symposium. The inclusion of these younger investigators is expected to enhance
the impact of this symposium on future interdisciplinary collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt; Proceedings of this meeting will be published on a web-site. The
talks will be available as PowerPoint files with auditory and video recordings,
and will include the discussion. By publishing the proceedings as a web-site
with streaming media, the information will be disseminated much sooner than
would be the case with a published volume. The talks will also then be available
for instructional purposes to everyone. &lt;br/&gt; The invited participants
include most of the investigators who have made the study of face perception a
scientific endeavor. The symposium is both broad in terms of the number of
disciplines that are represented, but is also focused on a specific domain of
inquiry. Recent advances in computational models for artificial intelligence
systems that can recognize face identity and interpret face action can
potentially be integrated with functional neuroimaging and social cognitive
investigations of face perception. Conversely, better understanding of how face
perception is implemented in the human brain can provide new ideas that could be
incorporated in a computational system. Better understanding of neural and
computational systems may provide new insights for investigating social
cognition and disorders of social cognition. Bringing investigators from various
disciplines together in this symposium should provide a forum to transfer
information among these disciplines and opportunities for establishing new
collaborative relationships. &lt;br/&gt; This symposium will provide a
multidisciplinary synthesis of state-of-the-art knowledge about computational
and neural systems for representing and interpreting faces. Fostering new
collaborative relationships will advance the field in all of the disciplines
represented at the meeting. The inclusion of students and fellows will help to
educate the next generation of investigators in this area. In addition, we will
encourage graduate students at Princeton University who have an interest in face
perception to attend the symposium and present posters on their research.