* 0334330
* NanoForum US-CH 2003 US-Swiss-Forum on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: With a focus on Nanomechanics and Single Molecule Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Rodney Ruoff, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/2005
* USD 53,345.00

Abstract. &lt;br/&gt;The US-Swiss 2003: Nano Mechanics and its Application and
Single Molecule Research Forum, third in a series of collaborative forums with
the Swiss National Science Foundation, is proposed to be held on the campus of
the University Basel in Switzerland from the 13th to the 15th of October, 2003.
This Forum focuses on the role of nanoscience in mechanics of materials and in
single molecule studies.&lt;br/&gt;The Forum will bring together leading
scientists from the US and Switzerland who are working in the fields of
nanomechanics and single molecule research. Younger researchers (postdoctoral
research associates and assistant professors) have been encouraged to attend
this exceptional meeting. The format of the meeting will include lectures by
leading scientists in the areas of nanomechanics and single molecule research
and posters covering on-going research from both US and Swiss research groups.
Arrangements for impromptu discussions among participants and opportunities for
forming new collaborative networks will be provided. &lt;br/&gt;Rodney S. Ruoff,
Professor and Director, NU BIMat Center, Northwestern University, is the US
organizer. Hans Leuenberger, Professor of Pharmaceutical Technology, University
of Basel, and Vice President of the Swiss Academy of Engineering Sciences, is
representing the Swiss contingent. All Swiss participants will be supported by
SNF program funds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;