* 0334088
* STI:      Viable Network Defense for Scientific Research Institutions
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2007
* USD 900,000.00

Modern science makes heavy use of the Internet for collaborations that draw upon
the network in ways far beyond simple uses such as email for discussion and Web
access for sharing data in some cases several hundred distinct services. This
access also opens the doors to incessant network attacks and research institutes
find themselves under growing pressure to place significant restrictions on such
access in the form of firewalls, limited permitted applications, and mandatory
proxies. These issues threaten to diminish the effectiveness of how modern
science is conducted across a broad range of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A key tool to maintain openness is intrusion detection: detecting in
real-time that an attack is underway and, if warranted, initiating a response in
order to thwart it. However, there is a world of difference between detecting
attackers in a small-scale environment such as a researcher's LAN and doing so
at a large scale such as for an entire open site. Both the much higher required
performance and the greatly increased traffic diversity present major
challenges. But intrusion detection for large, open sites also sees very little
in the way of academic research, because of the great difficulties many
researchers face in acquiring the necessary access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
of this proposal, however, is in a unique position for developing and validating
network intrusion detection research at such sites, by virtue of his joint
appointment at ICSI and LBNL. LBNL's operational cyber security is centered
around use of BRO- the intrusion detection system developed by the PI. The PI
has full monitoring access to the Laboratory's network traffic, and
participation in the realities of network security at a large institute. In
addition, BRO is used operationally at the University of California, Berkeley,
where the PI likewise has full monitoring access. The proposed efforts will be
firmly grounded in the realities of defending large research institutions. The
work will not be abstract; it will validate mechanisms developed against actual
in situ attacks and actual operational needs, avoiding the pitfall of devising
attractive solutions that fail in practice when actually deployed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be spanning a number of areas: (i)
developing new ways of detecting attacks (detecting network "triggers" used by
automated exploit software and by worms; attempting to "finger print" users by
their keystroke timing; drawing upon LBNL's immense archive of TCP connection
summaries to devise robust anomaly detection algorithms); (ii) addressing
challenges in monitoring very high-speed, high volume links (distributing
monitoring across multiple machines; coordinating monitors with border routers
that will "shunt" a portion of the traffic to the monitor and cut through the
rest; devising robust mechanisms for dealing with massive traffic floods); and
(iii) addressing the realities of managing large-scale security policies
(understanding the relationship between individual alerts and the complex
policies that lead to them; automatically locating "stale" policy elements no
longer relevant). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will advance development in two
key areas: (iv) refining and applying the trace anonymization framework
developed in earlier in order to address the major shortcoming in network
intrusion detection research of a complete lack of traffic traces that include
packet contents; and (v) bringing the BRO software system up to the level of
support necessary for it to become the open-source monitoring system of choice
for operational deployment at large scientific research institutes. &lt;br/&gt;