* 0334506
* M-I Coupling: An Observational and Modeling Study Under Conditions of Extreme Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Chin Lin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 02/29/2008
* USD 222,009.00

The investigators will study magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling through
coordinated observational and modeling of the effects of the imposition of large
polar-cap electric potentials on the M-I system. The focus will be on very large
storms, i.e. superstorms, which exhibit highly unusual electrodynamic behavior.
The evolution of the system and dissipation of energy are central to an
understanding of how the coupled system proceeds from a highly energized state
back to equilibrium. Previous studies have revealed during a detailed event
study of a superstorm, that the observed Region 1 and 2 field-aligned currents
(FACs), conductances and particle precipitation provided many surprises: the
Region 2 FACs were amongst the largest ever observed in the ionosphere yet there
was little magnetic signature on the ground; the conductances were many times
larger than that predicted, and the measured precipitating electron flux
consisted entirely of low-energy (E&lt;200eV) particles. Similar behavior was
manifest during other superstorms, which occurred during the recent solar
maximum period. It is clear that the realm of behavior demonstrated during
superstorms is beyond current understanding of M-I coupling. The investigators
will study a series of superstorms in order to develop a qualitative and
quantitative description of the electrodynamic properties of the ionosphere
under conditions of unusually large polar-cap potential distributions. They will
determine the evolution of electric fields, field-aligned currents and
conductances during the course of several superstorms through direct
observations of the plasma drifts, particle precipitation and magnetic
perturbations. They will extend the database of observed plasma and magnetic
measurements by using a global data-driven model of the ionosphere. They will
also use a simplified version of the Rice Convection Model to consider the
effect of the imposed polar-cap potential on magnetospheric convection. Guided
by a model for magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, the observations of the
coupling currents and fields will provide a unified picture of the temporal and
spatial evolution of the electrodynamic processes at work during the superstorm.
Observations of plasmas and magnetic fields made by DMSP at 840 km altitude are
limited to the local times sampled by the satellites, which are approximately
06-18 LT and 09-21 LT. While the sun-synchronous orbits allow continuous
monitoring of these local time sectors, information on other local times and
altitudes is lacking. Investigators will supplement the DMSP observations with
global modeling of the ionosphere under conditions of extreme forcing. This
research will lead to an improved understanding of M-I coupling processes, in
particular the effects of large polar-cap potentials imposed on the ionosphere.
It will yield quantitative ranges for electric fields, FACs, conductances and
particle precipitation, which have never been reported systematically for
magnetic storms. These parameters are essential for any detailed model of the
evolution of the M-I system after the commencement of large magnetic activity.
The study will be significant in modeling of energy balance and dissipation, the
loci and time scales for these processes, all of which are central to the
problem of M-I coupling.