* 0334426
* GEM Postdoc: Alfven Wave Coupling of Auroral Ionosphere with Magnetospheric Disturbances
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Li-Jen Chen, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 02/28/2006
* USD 156,577.00

Dispersive Alfven waves are known to be one of the most important processes by
which the magnetosphere and ionosphere are coupled. However the mechanisms by
which shear and compressional modes are driven by equatorial processes is not
well known. This project will develop a simulation model based on a reduced two-
fluid MHD formulation (referred to as the four-field model) which incorporates
parallel ion flow and compressibility to study the MI coupling via dispersive
Alfven waves. The proposed research has two main targets: 1) to implement a
nonlinear four-field model in computer simulation for Earth's magnetic field
configuration to investigate effects of magnetospheric disturbances to the
auroral ionosphere and 2) to develop the code in a highly modularized manner so
that it can be coupled to other simulation models such as models for magnetic
reconnection and ballooning instabilities. The four field model includes
parallel ion flow in the formulation, and hence makes it possible to investigate
MI coupling in the forms of mass and momentum transport in addition to transport
of energy by Alfven wave Poynting flux. The code will be made into distributions
(a package including the code itself, manual, change log, and other necessary
information) so that researchers who would like to use it can download it and
compile on their own platforms. The magnetospheric disturbances which are
drivers of the simulation code can be taken from the output of magnetotail
simulation models or satellite observations of the nightside magnetosphere. The
code is expected to be eventually integrated into a Geospace General Circulation
Model (GGCM). The tool can be equally useful in planetary sciences to study
similar physical processes for other magnetized planets such as Jupiter. The
proposal opens a venue for observers to contribute directly to numerical models
by letting the observers run the code themselves so that they can provide input
on how the model can be improved to better predict our geophysical environment.
The open-usage policy has educational impacts because it will allow students new
to the computer modeling of plasma processes a chance to look at the code
themselves and modify the code to suit their own needs.