* 0334411
* Exploring the Deepest Depths: A Novel Light-Tethered Hybrid ROV for Global Science in Extreme Enviroments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2012
* Andrew Bowen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Midson
* 03/31/2012
* USD 6,401,295.00

The world's oceans below 6,500 meters are presently virtually unexplored.
These&lt;br/&gt;diverse and inaccessible tectonic regimes pose significant
questions about a wide range of fundamental problems in the earth and ocean
sciences. These regimes include deep areas of active continental margins where
major earthquakes are generated and hydrologic exchange occurs between subducted
oceanic lithosphere and island arc complexes. Deep access to the seafloor in
areas of ultra-slow spreading mid ocean ridges, primarily found in geographic
regions of inhospitable weather or ice covered ocean (e.g. Arctic), would be a
primary use for such a vehicle. The capability to routinely access the deepest
ocean depths also has important implications for a broad range of science and
engineering associated with ocean observatory and event response research that
will explore 3D and 4D multidisciplinary problems for decades to come. Hybrid
ROVs will enable the scientific community to quickly react to ocean floor
volcanic and hydrothermal events from a wide range of UNOLS vessels, whereby
follow-on experiments&lt;br/&gt;can be designed and implemented based on
detailed, first-order mapping and sampling conducted by the 11,000 meter HROV.
Moreover, the HROV will provide the United States with fully global capability
for search, survey, and recovery missions of national strategic
importance.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;