* 0335113
* Collaborative Research: A Markov Chain Approach to Classical Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Han Hong, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2004
* USD 86,948.00

This project develops the statistical properties of a class of new estimators,
called quasi-Bayesian (QBE) or Laplacian estimators. These estimators are
applicable to highly nonlinear classical M estimation problems, and to many non-
smooth semiparametric estimation problems. They use the latest development in
Monte Carlo Markov Chain simulations in Bayesian statistics to overcome the
computational difficulty of many nonlinear classical estimators. The results of
this research project contribute to the understanding of computation and
inference in general nonlinear econometric models. Computation and inference are
two inseparable essential parts of any econometric model. The proposed
estimators address both issues and can potentially be used extensively in
empirical work. &lt;br/&gt;Many parametric and semiparametric estimators involve
non-convex and nonsmooth objective functions. This not only makes proving large
sample statistical properties difficult, but also makes the estimators
difficult, if possible, to compute in practice. The first part of this project
defines quasi-Bayesian estimators that aim at overcoming these two prominent
issues, and studies their regular consistency and asymptotic normality
properties. When the underlying objective function is an actual log likelihood
function of the data, the QBEs reduce to the usual Bayesian approach. The second
part studies the properties of likelihood based inferences, including Bayesian
and maximum likelihood estimators, in a class of nonregular structural
econometric models, in which the support of the dependent variable can depend on
both the model parameters and the independent covariates. These models arise
naturally in the context of structural auction models, empirical equilibrium job
search models and frontier production analysis. This part of the project
provides a unified treatment of likelihood based estimation and inference in
these models. &lt;br/&gt;The first two parts apply to finite dimensional
parameters. The third part extends the quasi-Bayesian approach to estimate
finite and infinite dimensional parameters simultaneously, in which the infinite
dimensional parameter is approximated by a sieve space. The quasi-Bayesian
estimator overcomes the computational obstacle of sieve semiparametric models.
The fourth project analyzes the properties of QBEs when the parameters are on
the boundary of the parameter space, which can be defined through linear or
nonlinear constraints on the parameters. While the properties of M estimators
have been extensively analyzed in the literature, they do not share the
optimality properties of M estimators when the parameter is in the interior of
the parameter space. QBEs provide useful alternative optimal estimators, and
enjoy tractable computational and inference properties. &lt;br/&gt;The fifth
part focuses on the computational properties of QBEs and the implementation
details for a range of specific problems. It studies convergence criteria that
are used to monitor the computation of QBEs and improvements to the popular
generic optimization algorithm simulated annealing, by replacing the generic
Metropolis step with other Gibbs sampling algorithms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;