* 0335520
* Workshop on Future Directions in Catalysis; June 19-20, 2003; Arlington, VA
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Mark Davis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 05/31/2006
* USD 66,200.00

On June 19-20, 2003, a leading group of engineers and scientists from academia
and industry will meet at the National Science Foundation for a visionary
workshop on future directions in catalysis research. Catalysts and the multitude
of products prepared through their use constitute a major portion of the US GNP.
Undoubtedly, catalysts are the most successful application of nanotechnology in
the modern economy. The ability to design and control catalyst structure at the
nanometer scale is directly related to key catalytic properties, such as
activity, selectivity, and stability. Recent advances now promise to
revolutionize catalysis research: Synthetic techniques can now control assembly
at the nano-scale, analytical methodologies can identify and probe structure to
verify synthesis methodology, and predictive capabilities can provide guiding
principles for structure/property relationships. Unprecedented control of the
preparation of new nano-scale catalysts is on the near
horizon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This workshop will also address the role of
catalysis within the framework of national inititatives in nanoscience and
engineering. NSF's Mihail Roco, chair of the U.S. National Science and
Technology Council's Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and
Technology (NSET), will present an overview of U.S. government efforts in
nanotechnology research and development. Professor Mark E. Davis of the
California Institute of Technology, who received the Alan T. Waterman Award,
from the National Science Foundation in 1990, will present the charge and goals
for the workshop. Plenary talks will be given on seven key topics explored by
the workshop:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Professor Don Tilley, University of
California-Berkeley - Molecular Precursors to Catalytic
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Professor Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
- Perspective on the Relationationship to Other Nanoscience and Engineering
Programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Dr. E. Mark Davis, ExxonMobil - Perspective on
Catalysis and Assembly at the Nanoscale by Industry &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
Professor Robert Schlogl, Fritz Haber Institute, Berlin - Perspective On
Heterogeneous Catalysis at the Nanoscale from Europe &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
Professor Henry Foley, Pennsylvania State University - Use of Catalysis for
Nanoscale Materials Fabrication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Professor Raul Lobo,
University of Delaware - Characterization Methods for Nanoscale
Catalysts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Professor Matt Neurock, University of Virginia
- Computation and Modeling for Nanoscale Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop
participants will discuss these topics and develop a visionary plan for future
NSF research in this aspect of catalysis. The results of the workshop will be
released in a report following the meeting, and a web site will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;