* 0335818
* Coupled Carbon Cycle-Climate Model Intercomparison Project (C4MIP) Workshop; September, 2003
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This grant provides partial support for a workshop on the behavior of the
coupled land - atmosphere system over the 20th century, in the context of the
international Coupled Carbon Cycle Climate Model Intercomparison Project
(C4MIP). Phase 1 of C4MIP is now underway, and the workshop, to take place in
September 2003, is to compare research results through analyzes of the
simulations conducted to-date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will analyze
the simulations performed for phase 1, with the following 3 goals:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Compare the sensitivities of the coupled atmosphere-terrestrial biosphere models
to historical forcing and determine how much of the range in overall sensitivity
of the 'future' response can be seen in the historical period.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Decompose model sensitivity into (a) climatic responses to CO2 and SST forcing
and (b) terrestrial carbon cycle responses to climate and CO2
changes&lt;br/&gt;3. Compare elements of the simulated carbon flux and
atmospheric concentration fields with available historical
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the results of Phase 1, a second
phase will be outlined at the workshop, in order to build on what has been
learned to date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;Human
influences on the Earth's carbon cycle, primarily through fossil fuel burning
and land use changes, is affecting the world climate. This project strives to
help develop the understanding and predictive modeling capabilities that will
help provide sound scientific information on this issue to those who make
environmental/energy policy. This is a potentially large benefit to human
societies.