* 0335765
* NNIN: National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2004,12/31/2015
* Roger Howe, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2015
* USD 179,802,150.00

NATIONAL NANOTECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORK (NNIN)

The National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN) is a partnership of 13
institutions (Cornell University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Harvard
University, Howard University, North Carolina State University (affiliate),
Pennsylvania State University, Stanford University, University of California at
Santa Barbara, University of Michigan, University of Minnesota, University of
New Mexico, University of Texas at Austin, and University of Washington) that
provides multi-faceted, interdisciplinary, and broadly-accessible infrastructure
supporting both near-term and long-term needs identified in the National
Nanotechnology Initiative. The partnering facilities are open laboratories
providing outstanding service to the external user, comprehensive training and
staff support, and support of interdisciplinary and emerging areas of research,
with openness to new materials, techniques, and applications. Some of the key
scientific, educational, and societal needs supported by the network are: Easy
implementation of nanotechnology experiments through integration of knowledge
and coordination of large numbers of different types of patterning and
processing steps, together with the complex tasks of synthesis and assembly at
the molecular scale Specialized techniques for characterization and metrology at
the atomic scale Support of advanced and robust modeling and simulation through
software and hardware resources with strong technical support Technology
transfer and the sharing of new techniques through in-person and web-based
interactions Education and technical training of new users who will be the
leaders in nanotechnology Public education about the opportunities and
challenges of nanotechnology Promotion of research in the social sciences so
that future developments lead to the greatest possible societal benefits, and
societal and ethical studies that focus on research, infrastructure, and the
impacts of nanotechnology. Nation-wide outreach across age groups and technical
interests, with special efforts to reach non-traditional users and under-
represented groups. Active coordination and knowledge dissemination on safety,
environment and health benefits and risks of nanotechnology

Specifically, the network provides: Infrastructure for Research: The network
provides on-site and remote access for users, from academia, small and large
industry, and government, to advanced top-down patterning and processing and
bottom-up synthesis and self-assembly, comprehensive integration capabilities
for multi-step processes, state-of-the-art characterization for hard and soft
materials, the development of tools and techniques, and a comprehensive web and
computation infrastructure in support of nanotechnology. The network has easy
user access that enables a diversity of projects efficiently and at low cost:
e.g., molecular-scale electronic contacts; use of functionalized nanotubes;
integrated mechanical, electronic, fluidic, and bio-systems; advanced types of
microscopy; and a large ensemble of other projects. The network also develops
tools in support of future research and nano-manufacturing, including imprint
and soft-lithography with applications in electronics, microfluidics, and
nanobiotechnology. Infrastructure for Network Web and Computation: The network's
computation and web-based infrastructure provides a centralized resource for
organizing and distributing the rapidly-growing knowledge base at the foundation
of nanoscience and engineering. It includes training in tools, processing, and
synthesis techniques; classes; discussion groups; an open text-book with links
to the technical resources and data-bases; and technical support for robust
computational tools for design, simulation, and modeling. The web-based
infrastructure also comprehensively links our initiatives in education,
outreach, and societal and ethical studies in order to provide nation-wide
access. Collaboration and External Interactions: The network employs connections
and extensive collaborations with national and industrial laboratories, and with
foreign institutions. Through these partnerships and joint meetings and
workshops, we share expertise and perspectives, provide specialized training
opportunities, coordinate access to unique instrumentation, and transfer newly
developed technologies. Infrastructure for Education, Human Resource
Development, Outreach, and Societal and Ethical Studies: Education, human
development, outreach, and societal and ethical studies components are
thoroughly integrated throughout the network. Our goals are to spread the
benefits of nanotechnology to new disciplines, to educate a dynamic workforce in
advanced technology, and to become a teaching resource in nanotechnology for
people of all ages and educational backgrounds. Network-based education and
information tools and comprehensive local hands-on activities towards these
goals include: development of a hyper-linked Open Textbook for advanced
students, web-based education and virtual research with introductory material
for "K-to-gray" distance learning, outreach to 2- and 4-year colleges, a web-
based magazine (a mini Scientific American/New Scientist) to interest 6-10 year
olds in science, modular teaching packages for nanoscience and for laboratory
experimentation in schools, experience-providing programs for undergraduates and
teachers, and specialized programs for outreach to women, African-Americans, and
Hispanics. The network also supports an infrastructure and research environment
to promote consideration of the societal and ethical consequences of
nanotechnology, covering economic, political, educational, environmental,
health, safety, legal, security, and cultural implications. A network of
scholars in these fields are embedded within the NNIN, with coordinated efforts
to foster exchange and discussion, development of web-based resources for
research and education, public outreach through the media, and an online archive
of technical documents, analysis, transcripts and policy recommendations. The
research orientation of the effort explores issues of ethics, communication,
workforce change, industrial innovation, and other social implications of
nanotechnology.

