* 0335853
* The Institutional Dimensions of Global Environmental Change International Program Office
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Oran Young, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 12/31/2004
* USD 89,691.00

Research on the complex interactions among human and natural components of the
integrated Earth system have highlighted the need to understand both individual
and collective perceptions and actions of human beings, because people operate
both as individuals and as members of groups and institutions. Institutions
figure prominently both as causes of large-scale environmental changes and
through direct response and through establishment of the frameworks of responses
to changing environmental conditions. This award provides renewed support for
the International Project Office (IPO) of the Institutional Dimensions of Global
Environmental Change (IDGEC) project. IDGEC is one of four major core projects
of the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change
Programme (IHDP), which is an international collaborative research program
overseen by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), with
cooperation from the International Social Science Council (ISSC). IDGEC seeks to
understand the roles that institutions play in causing and confronting a range
of environmental changes. IDGEC provides a framework for a series of
collaborative research activities conducted by social scientists from a broad
range of nations. That framework focuses on three major sets of issues: (1)
Causality (How much of the variance in the condition of ecosystems is
attributable to human institutions?); (2) Performance (Why are some
institutional responses to environmental problems more successful than others?);
and (3) Design (How should institutions be structured to maximize their
performance?). The IDGEC-IPO plays a critical role in the success of this
research project by catalyzing and coordinating a global network of scientists
pursuing a common research agenda. Through continued support for the IPO, the
infrastructure for the conduct of current and future international
collaborations focusing on this important set of problems will be strengthened,
and the U.S. will give a positive signal to other nations regarding the value
and utility of major international collaborative efforts.