* 0335406
* Student Travel Support for 19TH ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles (SOSP); Lake George, NY; October 19-22, 2003
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 01/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

The Nineteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles will be held at
Bolton's&lt;br/&gt;Landing, Lake George, New York, October 19-22, 2003. For over
30 years SOSP has been the&lt;br/&gt;leading forum for innovative research in
operating systems. Like its predecessors, SOSP&lt;br/&gt;2003 will bring
together researchers from around the world to present and discuss
the&lt;br/&gt;latest results. In addition to such traditional topics as the
performance, functionality,&lt;br/&gt;and security of kernels, file systems, and
networks, this year's conference will place&lt;br/&gt;increasing attention on
such emerging topics as ubiquitous and mobile computing,
sensor&lt;br/&gt;networks, overlay and peer-to-peer communications, and power
management. Particularly&lt;br/&gt;noteworthy papers will be forwarded to ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems for possible&lt;br/&gt;journal publication.
There will also be poster and work-in-progress sessions for
the&lt;br/&gt;presentation of promising preliminary work.&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal requests funding to support the attendance of 20 US-based graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;Participation in leading conferences is an extremely
important part of the graduate&lt;br/&gt;school experience, providing the
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers and&lt;br/&gt;to be exposed
to leading edge work. The support requested in this proposal will
make&lt;br/&gt;possible the participation of students who would otherwise be
unable to attend.