* 0335735
* Symposium: The Evolution of Thermal Reaction Norms for Growth Rate and Body Size in Ectotherms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Michael Angilletta, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 10/31/2004
* USD 14,858.00

Symposium: The Evolution of Thermal Reaction Norms for&lt;br/&gt;Growth Rate and
Body Size in Ectotherms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael J. Angilletta Jr. and
Michael W. Sears&lt;br/&gt;Indiana State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, a major goal of evolutionary biologists has been to understand how
spatial and temporal variation in the environment impacts the evolution of
traits. In particular, a resurgence of interest in the relationship between
environmental temperature and organismal body size has occurred. Biologists have
documented a pervasive trend within ectotherms: in general, individuals in
colder environments attain larger body sizes at adulthood than individuals in
warmer environments. Underlying this widespread relationship between temperature
and body size are behavioral and physiological mechanisms that govern the rates
of growth and maturation. Recent studies have revealed that these mechanisms can
evolve rapidly in response to variation in the thermal environment. These
empirical findings have triggered a burst of activity by theorists who are
trying to explain the evolution of temperature-size relationships. Yet, in spite
of the renewed interest in this area of research, empirical and theoretical
efforts are still largely unsynchronized. Consequently, evolutionary
explanations remain elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund a
symposium that unites researchers investigating the causes of relationships
among temperature, growth rate, and body size. The goals of the symposium are
threefold: 1) to identify the tradeoffs and constraints that influence the
evolution of growth rate and body size in different thermal environments, 2) to
determine if the factors that influence temperature-size relationships in well-
studied species can be generalized to other species, and 3) to discuss how these
factors can be incorporated into existing theories. Through this symposium, a
new paradigm for understanding the evolution of traits in variable environments
will be developed, and links between researchers from different disciplines that
are necessary to advance this paradigm will be established. The participants
include theorists and empiricists who are taking different approaches to the
study of evolution in diverse organisms. Moreover, these participants range from
some of the most promising postdoctoral fellows to well-established leaders in
the field of evolutionary biology. Given the sharp focus of the symposium and
the diversity of participants, the symposium should spark a synthesis of ideas
about the evolution of reactions norms that can diffuse rapidly throughout the
relevant branches of the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;