* 0335780
* Designing Tomorrow's Category-Level Object Recognition Systems: An International Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Jean Ponce, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 06/30/2004
* USD 20,000.00

Despite 40 years of research, however, today's recognition systems are still
largely unable to handle the extraordinarily wide range of appearances assumed
by common objects in typical images. Our tenet is that fundamental new advances
in the design and implementation of automated object recognition systems can be
achieved by integrating the sophisticated geometric and physical image formation
models developed in the computer vision community with the effective models of
data distribution and classification procedures developed in the statistical
learning theory and theoretical computer science communities. We propose to hold
a three-day workshop that will bring together prominent computer vision, machine
learning, and computational geometry researchers interested in the fundamental
and applicative aspects of object recognition, as well as representatives of
industry and funding agencies. Its goals are (1) to promote the creation of an
international object recognition community, with common datasets and evaluation
procedures, (2) to map the state of the art and identify the main open problems,
design issues, and interdisciplinary research opportunities, and (3) to
articulate the industrial and societal needs for object recognition technology
worldwide. The workshop will be held in Taormina, Sicily, in September 2003. NSF
support is sought to partially fund the travel of 25 US academic researchers to
the workshop. Additional funds have been solicited from industry and INRIA
(France) to support non-US participants and the rest of the workshop expenses.
Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts: The proposed workshop is intended to set
the stage for the development of (a) unified design principles for visual object
recognition systems, leading to a completely new set of capabilities, (b)
fundamental advances in machine learning and computational geometry in a setting
---somewhat unusual for these disciplines---where the geometric and physical
origins of the input data are well understood, but an appropriate catalog of
features for representing them remains elusive, and (c) the successful
deployment and evaluation of the developed technology in high-impact application
domains. In particular, the workshop will address fundamental scientific issues
that are directly relevant to (1) industrial needs in areas as diverse as
biomedical imaging, human-computer interface, telecommunications, and
transportation, and (2) applications of strategic national interest such as
surveillance and security, target recognition, and monitoring. A concrete
outcome of the workshop will be a report outlining its conclusions and available
to the community at large via the World Wide Web.