* 0335523
* Alternate Routes to Teacher Certification in Missouri:
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Motoko Akiba, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/2007
* USD 894,744.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funds to evaluate alternate routes to teacher
certification in Missouri. The policy dilemma that drives the study is: How to
address teacher shortages in secondary mathematics and science, without
sacrificing high teacher quality. The proposal is designed to provide a
knowledge base from which to consider policy options. Methodology includes
clarification of alternative routes to certification, examination of classroom
practices of teachers in the programs, and comparison of characteristics and
program outcomes of teachers in the different certification patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The application of a theory-
based approach in this field is unique and will provide valuable new information
to the field. A general model of ATCPs has been developed to guide instrument
development or adaptation. The goals and general strategy for addressing this
important problem is a multi-measure multi-method study focusing on the
alternative certification programs preparing the greatest number of mathematics
and science teachers. Both case studies and comparative outcome research studies
are planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The study has local
practical importance but also has potential for generating guidelines for
practice and hypotheses for further study. The use of an external group of
scholars to address the study outcomes in an invited forum is one of many
dissemination approaches that combine critical analysis with informing a broader
audience of the contemporary findings. The combination of deep description with
comparative analyses provides the kind of knowledge that can inform practice in
different settings. &lt;br/&gt;