* 0335839
* Robert Noyce Scholarships at LSU
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2013
* David Kirshner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2013
* USD 599,559.00

This project addresses the serious shortage of qualified mathematics and science
teachers in the State of Louisiana. In response to this problem LSU is piloting
a new teacher certification program that relocates the preparation of secondary
school teachers from the College of Education to the arts and sciences
departments. The centerpiece of the new program is a series of four professional
practice seminars comprised of disciplinary and education courses scheduled in
adjacent time slots and co-taught by arts and sciences and education faculty.
The Departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics each
offer 6 credit hours of course work in the discipline designed to be especially
relevant to future secondary school teachers, and to be taught in conjunction
with College of Education course work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in STEM
subject areas can obtain a major in their mathematics or science discipline and
meet all state requirements for secondary school teacher certification within
four years. Alternatively, students completing their undergraduate STEM major
without choosing the teacher education concentration can enroll in the LSU
Holmes style graduate level teacher certification program. The objective of the
new program is to nearly triple production of STEM secondary school teachers
from about 30 per year to about 80 per year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Robert
Noyce Scholarships raise the profile of these programs and provide incentives
for the most talented STEM undergraduates to opt for teacher certification. The
intellectual merit of the project is the powerful re-conceptualization of STEM
teacher preparation founded on current research findings on what can be done to
cultivate a competent, stable teaching force. The broader impact of the program
lies in its potential to serve as an exemplary model for secondary teacher
programs at other state institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;