* 0335543
* Symposium on Polymer Chemistry in Nanotechnology, Fall ACS Meeting, September 7-11, 2003, New York, N.Y
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Douglas Gin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 3,000.00

This proposal requests $3000 from the NSF for speaker travel assistance for a
POLY/PMSE symposium titled "Polymer Chemistry in Nanotechnology", to be held at
the Fall 2003 National ACS Meeting in New York City, NY (September 7-11, 2003).
The co-organizers of this symposium are the PI (CU Boulder) and Prof. C. Allan
Guymon from the University of Iowa. The symposium will focus on how polymer
chemistry can be applied to both academia and industry across many disciplines,
and it is also currently a national science and technology initiative. Given
this broad interest and the fact that polymer chemistry and nanotechnology are
both important research and education objectives within NSF, we believe this
symposium would be an ideal candidate for NSF conference
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of intellectual merit, this symposium
will provide an interdisciplinary forum for the presentation and discussion of
new and previously unpublished results on how polymer chemistry can be used to
achieve functional nanostructured materials, devices, and systems with relevant
and interesting properties. The successful development of nanotechnology relies
on the interdisciplinary cooperation of chemists, polymer chemists, materials
scientists, physicists, and chemical engineers to create and understand new
physical principle operating on the nanometer-scale size regime. Polymers are
expected to play a pivotal role in the development of nanostructured materials
and devices, because they offer a convenient, lightweight platform for chemical
modification and device fabrication. This symposium will act as a vehicle to
help keep members of ACS at the forefront of research at the intersection of
polymer science and nanotechnology, so that even more important advances can be
realized via a higher degree of participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impact, this symposium will be a convenient, high profile venue for the
presentation of academic and industrial research in the area of polymer-based
nanotechnology. The talks, posters, and preprints associated with this symposium
can be used to educate not only ACS members but also the general scientific
public on the relevance of polymers in nantechnology. This symposium will also
serve as an important platform for allowing young scientists 9i.e., graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows) to participate in and learn about the
exciting opportunities at the intersection of polymer chemistry and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;