* 0335346
* A Laboratory Study of Wave-Affected Turbulence in a Flexible Canopy: Transport in a Giant Kelp Forest
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 03/31/2008
* USD 340,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0335346&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: JEFFREY R.
KOSEFF&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: STANFORD UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
LABORATORY STUDY OF WAVE-AFFECTED TURBULENCE IN A GIANT KELP
FOREST&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are to study fluid dynamics and
transport associated with the rich ecosytstem environment of kelp forests in the
ocean. Within these systems, hydrodynamics govern nutrient availability to macro
algae, the delivery of food particles to invertebrates, the uptake of dissolved
gases, nutrients and organic carbon by the kelp forest community, the dispersal
of planktonic spores within the kelp communities, and their settlement in the
coastal zone. This study will augment an ongoing field program with a set of
critically needed laboratory experiments focusing on problems that cannot be
adequately resolved in the field. A variety of optical diagnostic techniques
will be employed to investigate the flow field in a model kelp forest in the
presence of waves and current. These techniques will allow direct measurement of
velocities and scalar fluxes, enabling characterization of mixing processes,
investigation of the spatial variability of the flow and examination of the
dependence of mixing rates and turbulence intensity on kelp forest structure.
This flow configuration presents an excellent opportunity to not only understand
how kelp canopies affect the momentum and energy transfer from waves into
turbulence in the water column, but also to further explore wave-bottom boundary
interactions in the presence of articulating roughness elements which
potentially generate turbulence in the water column itself. The project will
provide research training for students in an interdisciplinary research project
involving fluid mechanics and physical oceanography. The investigators will
continue their practice of involving undergraduates in the research through
Stanford's REU program, which has been successful in recruiting diverse students
from different majors and underrepresented groups to participate in research.
This research program will enhance the infrastructure for research, by further
developing the laboratory facility for studying wavy flows; and for education,
by using these facilities for hands-on experimentation in classes in fluid
mechanics and physical oceanography. The investigators already work with the
media and science writers to convey research discoveries to the public, and plan
to continue such outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;