* 0335045
* Understanding Hole Pattern Formation During Microstructured Optical Fiber Draw
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Wilson K. S. Chiu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 09/30/2007
* USD 305,000.00

This proposal was submitted and funded in response to solicitation NSF 03-537
High Speed Optical Communications and
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microstructured fibers, also known as holey or
photonic crystal fibers, have strong potential as a critical enabling technology
for ultra-high capacity optical communications. For example, air-cored fibers
have dispersion and loss figures that are orders of magnitude below that of
standard single mode fiber. However, current microstructured fibers are limited
by high optical attenuation (&gt;1 dB/km) caused by uneven hole size and hole
patterns in the fiber. This proposal focuses on understanding the hole pattern
distribution of microstructured optical fiber being drawn from a preform. This
fundamental understanding is achieved by establishing a relationship between the
preform's temperature distribution, viscoelastic and surface tension effects
that dictate the fiber's hollow microstructure. Since glass viscosity is
exponentially dependent on temperature, slight temperature variations can
significantly change hole size, placement, and stability, resulting in high
optical loss and performance degradation. This proposal will study the neck down
and stability of a hollow fused silica rod. This simplified&lt;br/&gt;model will
provide necessary fundamental insight to pursue this program's long-term goals,
which are to explore new methods and conditions for hole pattern formation,
placement and control, and to provide the fiber-optics community with robust
mathematical modeling tools to enable accurate simulation of microstructured
fiber devices and systems. In this study, we will: (1) Measure and expand
currently limited infrared optical properties of high temperature fused silica
glass at OFS Laboratories; (2) Develop a comprehensive radiation heat transfer
model for hollow collapsing cylinders that participate in thermal radiation
transport; (3) Develop a comprehensive neck down&lt;br/&gt;model capable of
predicting the temperature distribution, hole formation and stability during
draw; and (4) Extensively validate predictions with draw experiments performed
at OFS Labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is being jointly sponsored by the
Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division and the GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry) Program of the Design, Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;