* 0335718
* SGER:     Critical Appraisal of Research Needs for SMF Connections in Steel Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Linda Hanagan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,337.00

SGER: Critical Appraisal of Research Needs for SMF Connections in Steel
Buildings; CMS proposal 0335718 PI: Linda Hanagan, Penn State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the 1994 Northridge earthquake,
unexpected damage was discovered in steel moment connections. To address this
substantial safety issue, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) funded
the SAC Joint Venture, which produced the FEMA 350-series guideline documents,
state of the art reports and other publications. Subsequently, theses findings
have been incorporated into the building code requirements for new buildings.
Since the publication of these guideline documents, the American Institute of
Steel Construction (AISC) has formalized as requirements many of the
recommendations made for steel building design and construction through the
ongoing development of the consensus standard Seismic Provisions for Structural
Steel Buildings (AISC, 2002). In this way, work is ongoing to incorporate the
lessons learned from the Northridge earthquake into the building code
requirements for new buildings.&lt;br/&gt;Because the FEMA 350-series documents
are not consensus standards, the recommendations contained therein must undergo
an adoption process. Presently, the Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel
Buildings (AISC, 2002) define the beam-to-column connection requirements for
classification as a special moment frame. The essence of these requirements is
to provide not only adequate strength, but also adequate ductility. Conformance
with this requirement can be satisfied in one of two ways: by testing or by
using a connection "prequalified" in accordance with Appendix P of the Seismic
Provisions. To alleviate the need for project based testing, AISC, through its
Connections Prequalification Review Panel (CPRP), is in the process of
developing a consensus standard. This standard is expected to be modeled after
FEMA 350 in that it will outline design, detailing, and fabrication procedures
for several connections that are considered prequalified without further
testing. The premise is that adequate testing and evaluation has been conducted
for a range of typical connections such that they can be included in the
consensus standard. In fact, the hope was that the recommendations of FEMA 350
could be adopted in their entirety with some minor modification. Since the
publication of FEMA 350, many of the recommendations contained therein have been
brought into question by the Structural Engineers Association of California
(SEAOC) and others. With the exception of RBS connection, every other connection
(WUF-W, FF, WFP, BFP) have received an unfavorable rating in the SEAOC
Commentary. The CPRP will seriously consider the concerns raised by SEAOC and
others. Currently, task groups within the CPRP are reviewing the FEMA 350
recommendations and the supporting data for conformance with prequalification
requirements set forth in the Seismic Provisions (AISC 2002). Without immediate
investigation into some of the critical concerns, it is very possible that the
first edition of the prequalified connections standard, which will effectively
govern all steel moment frame construction in seismic areas, will contain only
the RBS connection. After so many resources were dedicated to this topic, this
would be a very unfortunate and unnecessary result for the building
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSED RESEARCH&lt;br/&gt;Because most of the
SAC Joint Venture research was done in parallel, the research on individual
connections did not have the benefit of retrospective analysis. With some
exploratory funding the PI's role as a CPRP member can be extended to accomplish
three additional objectives: 1) Review existing literature and test data for the
possibility of extrapolating connection specific results to other connections.
Accomplishing this objective may have the result of more connections being
included in the AISC connection prequalification standard. 2) Develop a set of
current research needs as identified through the work of the CPRP and the PI. As
one of the members of the CPRP, the PI is in a somewhat unique position to
identify research required to expand the AISC standard to include more of the
FEMA 350 recommended connections. 3) Formulate a research proposal, to be
submitted under the NEES Consortium program, to address some of the critical
research needs identified under goal #2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER
JUSTIFICATION&lt;br/&gt;This research can be characterized as having "severe
urgency" in that accomplishing the objectives is dependant on the deliberations
of the CPRP, which have already begun. It is expected that the work conducted
under the proposed research initiative will have a nearly immediate impact on
the development of the AISC prequalification standard. Without the tangential
focus afforded by the proposed research, it is possible that much of the work on
conections other than the RBS will be rendered useless by the CPRP until further
investigation is conducted. &lt;br/&gt;