* 0335693
* The Kean Noyce Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Sharon Brendzel, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2008
* USD 480,200.00

The Kean Noyce Scholars Program is providing scholarships and stipends to 52
science and mathematics majors to encourage them to become teachers. The
scholarships/stipends are provided during the summer before the senior year, the
senior year and the summer teacher certification program following the senior
year. Students are recruited as Noyce Scholars in their junior year from the
pool of science and mathematics majors and from a new interdisciplinary
mathematics, science, and technology major program. Recruitment efforts are also
targeting community colleges with articulation agreements with Kean. A Noyce
Scholars seminar is being developed to include pedagogy, lesson development and
integrating technology into the teaching of science and mathematics. While
enrolled in the preservice program, students are introduced to leader teachers,
visit classrooms and sample teaching techniques. Two mentors, one from pedagogy
and one from a science or mathematics content area, and a leader teacher are
assigned to each Scholar in their senior year and continue to mentor the Scholar
throughout the first year of teaching. The Program involves students as a single
cohort in their senior year and engages them in a yearlong academic seminar that
is team-taught, interdisciplinary, and revolves around research experiences for
students. Through this forum, the Scholars also interact with regional
scientists and science teachers and are exposed to the latest trends and issues
in the teaching of science and mathematics. Noyce Scholars are placed in high
need schools within eight partnering school districts, which provide support for
the teachers through leader teacher mentors and professional development
workshops. In addition to increasing the production of science and mathematics
teachers, the project seeks to: (1) improve the quality of mathematics and
science education; (2) increase the number of students from partnering schools
and at Kean who may see teaching as a viable career choice for mathematics and
science majors; (3) increase the number of underrepresented minorities teaching
mathematics and the sciences in the partnering school districts; and (4) provide
minority students with role models with which they can identify.