* 0335330
* Borehole Optical Stratigraphy: Ice Microphysics, Climate Change, and the Optical Properties of Firn
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Edwin Waddington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 02/28/2010
* USD 195,883.00

This award supports a study of the physical nature and environmental origin of
optical features (light and dark zones) observed by video in boreholes in polar
ice. These features appear to include an annual signal, as well as longer period
signals. Borehole logs exist from a previous project, and in this lab-based
project the interpretation of these logs will be improved. The origin of the
features is of broad interest to the ice-core community. If some components
relate to changes in the depositional environment beyond seasonality, important
climatic cycles may be seen. If some components relate to post-depositional
reworking, insights will be gained into the physical processes that change snow
and firn, and the implications for interpretation of the chemical record in
terms of paleoclimate. In order to exploit these features to best advantage in
future ice-core and climate-change research, the two principal objectives of
this project are to determine what physically causes the optical differences
that we see and to determine the environmental processes that give rise to these
physical differences. In the laboratory at NICL the conditions of a log of a
borehole wall will be re-created as closely as possible by running the borehole
video camera along sections of ice core, making an optical log of light
reflected from the core. Combinations of physical variables that are correlated
with optical features will be identified. A radiative-transfer model will be
used to aid in the interpretation of these measurements, and to determine the
optimum configuration for an improved future logging tool. An attempt will be
made to determine the origin of the features. Two broad possibilities exist: 1)
temporal changes in the depositional environment, and 2) post-depositional
reworking. This project represents an important step toward a new way of
learning about paleoclimate with borehole optical methods. Broader impacts
include enhancing the infrastructure for research and education, since this
instrument will complement high-resolution continuous-melter chemistry
techniques and provide a rapid way to log physical variables using optical
features as a proxy for climate signals. Since no core is required for this
method, it can be used in rapidly drilled access holes or where core quality is
poor. This project will support a graduate student who will carry out this
project under the direction of the Principal Investigator. K-12 education will
be enhanced through an ongoing collaboration with a science and math teacher
from a local middle school. International collaboration will be expanded through
work on this project with colleagues at the Norwegian Polar Institute and broad
dissemination of results will occur through a project website for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;