* 0335782
* Collaborative Research: Mapping the Rivera Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Stephen Grand, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 305,758.00

The investigators plan to deploy fifty broadband seismic instruments throughout
the Jalisco and Colima provinces in Mexico. This region of Mexico is being
underthrust by the Rivera microplate and has witnessed the largest earthquake in
Mexican history. The subduction of the Rivera plate has also resulted in the
overriding plate, the Jalisco block, separating from the rest of Mexico along
two perpendicular grabens. The Jalisco block is also volcanically active with
the Colima volcano unusually close to the trench. This region is a type example
of the processes that can occur when a ridge meets a subduction zone. The
tectonics of the region has been postulated to be due to the interaction of the
Rivera plate and the overriding Jalisco block but little geophysical data exist
to truly understand the subsurface interactions. In this project researchers
will image the geometry of the Rivera plate at depth including a search for
tears with the adjacent Cocos plate or evidence of breaking up of the Rivera
plate at depth, both of which have been postulated. In this work tomographic
imaging tools as well as receiver function analysis will be employed. Careful
mapping of the slab surface as well as the locations and mechanisms of
earthquakes in the region will provide constraints on the region of coupling
between the Jalisco and Rivera plates. This will provide useful information for
the ongoing GPS projects funded by NSF in this region that will ultimately help
with hazard analysis. The investigators will also attempt to image the mantle
wedge to better understand the volcanism in the region. Using shear wave
splitting we hope to understand mantle flow beneath the Jalisco block. This
study should have broader impact in understanding the evolution of plate
boundaries when ridges interact with subduction zones. This has occurred in the
geologically recent past off the coast of California and northern Mexico. This
research includes a substantial international collaboration with Mexican
colleagues from several institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
sponsored by the Americas Program in the Office Of International Science And
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;