* 0335067
* Optical:    Direct Injection Si/SiO2-Erbium Waveguide Emitters For Uncooled DWDM Transceivers and Optical Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 11/30/2006
* USD 400,000.00

0335067 Koch

This research targets the investigation and demonstration of novel Erbium and
Silicon-based technologies for Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexed (DWDM)
light sources to achieve higher frequency stability with lower power, cost, and
size. This research will involve evaluation of novel fabrication and materials
combinations, application of advanced CMOS characterization tools, confocal
microscopy providing high-spatial-resolution spectral information, advanced
electron microscopy, and a variety of optical device characterization
methodologies.

The program integrates research and education, and promotes partnerships with an
enhancement of the physical infrastructure and the development of intellectual
capital. The intellectual merit of this research will include a heightened
understanding of the incorporation of Erbium ion and co-dopants into appropriate
Si/SiO2 and Si/SiN structures, hot-electron and tunneling injection physics,
oxide degradation mechanisms, and new device designs and fabrication methods for
the proposed DWDM sources. The broader impact will include progress towards
technology with the potential to significantly impact the economics of high-
bandwidth deployment at the network edge. Furthermore, the program integrates
research and education, leveraging the strong materials science capabilities at
Lehigh and bringing together students from different departments in an
interdisciplinary research environment to promote a deep understanding of
advanced integrated design, ranging from the merger of basic materials and
device physics all the way to system-level performance attributes with great
economic benefit to the nation. Through the Optical Technology, Sherman
Fairchild, and Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology Centers' liaison and
outreach programs, the PI will further integrate working partnerships with
industry and incorporate substantive initiatives in education and technical
workforce development.

