* 0335234
* NRT:  Collaborative Research: A Unified Experimental Environment for Diverse Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor S. Frost
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,150,000.00

A critical issue for t e development of future network and distributed system
technologies is the availabil- ity of testbed infrastructure for conducting
research.Availability as three components.First,it requires that testbeds
provide a set of diverse and modern networking resources in realistic
scenarios:environments that include PCs,(potentially mobile)wireless and sensor
nodes,commercial-quality switches and routers, and modern network
interconnects.Second,availability requires software to e .ectively manage the
use of these resources:this requires providing "hardware level" access to
experimenters,through a uni .ed and re- motely accessible user interface,in a
manner that also ensures security both inside and outside experimental
environments.Third,availability requires infrastructure for experiment
manipulation,monitoring,measure- ment,and validation:e.g.,the ability to inject
network tra .c and faults,the ability to obtain precise data from
experiments,and the assurance that the testbed is an accurate model of the real
world.

The work described in this proposal is to build on the University of Utah 's
Netbed to address the three aspects of availability described above.The 165,000
line Netbed software system is e .ectively an operating system for experiments
in distributed systems and networking.The bulk of its code is independent of the
network 's actual mec anisms,so it presents a common interface to experimenters
across a variety of mec anisms,including real networks,emulated networks in a
cluster,and simulated networks.Netbed 's support for ybrid experimentation
allows .exible combinations of real code,abstracted tra .c generation, synthetic
network environments,and real networks.Emulab Netbed 's primary resource,is an
extremely successful 170-node,time-and space-shared automated cluster testbed
that as been in 24/7 production use for several years.Netbed is currently being
used by 440 researchers,from 50 institutions,for over 80 projects.

The proposed work will provide deliverables in four areas.First,the existing
Emulab cluster and its interconnect will be enlarged and modernized.Emulab will
grow to provide continuing service to the public, including user support.The
complementary Utah and Wisconsin facilities (WAIL)will be linked,allowing
resource allocation and co-scheduling across them.This will provide a seamless
transition from simulation, through emulation on PC-based routers,to large-scale
testing on real routers.Second,Netbed will be extended to control,as
transparently to users as possible,many additional kinds of network devices and
deployments.Netbed will provide four di .erent platforms of wireless,sensor,and
mobile devices,ranging from a .xed array of wireless nodes (a "tabletop"
environment)to an actual set of mobile devices deployed on a campus scale.The
Netbed facilities will also be generalized with the addition of "hard" devices -
IP routers,layer 1 switches,optical devices,Intel IXPs,and nodes deployed in the
wide-area - as well as new "soft" devices suc as virtual nodes and links to
enable experiments at 1 - 2 orders of magnitude greater scale.Third,the Netbed
system,speci .cally the Emulab cluster,will be "hardened" so that,when
deployed,it can safely quarantine malicious code while still being remotely
accessible to researchers.The enhanced Emulab will be able to serve as a testbed
for most network security researc and evaluation,suc as worm containment,IP
traceback,intrusion detection,and counter measures for denial-of-service (DoS),
and distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)attacks.Support for researc in these
areas will require Emulab to support osts running Microsoft Windows.Fourth,new
software will provide a comprehensive system for realistic network tra .c
generation,network tra .c measurements,and a measurement arc ive.A wide area
network monitoring system and measurement archive will provide important data to
Netbed researchers and the community at large.It will also serve as the primary
source of data from whic we can validate our modeling and test e .orts.

The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in the creation of new
technologies for networking and distributed system experimentation.This work
will develop new techniques for integrating widely varied resources,both actual
and simulated,both hardware and software,within a single and uni .ed
experimental framework.This work will be realized in an expanded Emulab
cluster,whic will continue to be available to researchers,and it will also be
realized in Netbed 's software that can be used by other institutions that wish
to run their own testbeds - separately,or in cooperation with Netbed.This ties
directly to the broader impacts of the proposed work.The creation and delivery
of an expanded Emulab,as well as the software capable of managing similar
testbeds,will result in new testbeds and new testbed capabilities being made
available to researchers worldwide.This will directly advance the development of
future systems,as well as the teac ing and training of students and computing
professionals.