* 0335088
* Second Workshop for High School Students of Mathematics and Science
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Bozenna Pasik-Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2004
* USD 31,690.00

&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed Workshop&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this workshop is to enhance the cooperation among various
control&lt;br/&gt;groups and high school students of mathematics and science
throughout the United States&lt;br/&gt;and the world, to give attention to
control and systems ideas and technology, and to&lt;br/&gt;increase the general
awareness of the importance of control and systems technology and&lt;br/&gt;its
cross-disciplinary nature among high school teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;Control and Systems Science occurs in many different
disciplines and its applications&lt;br/&gt;occur in a wide variety of
technologies. It involves a variety of tasks, such as,
modeling,&lt;br/&gt;identification, simulation, planning, decision-making, and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;Some application areas of control and systems include
transportation, manufacturing,&lt;br/&gt;communications, processing industries,
and financial markets. The basic control systems&lt;br/&gt;science influences
and impacts a diverse range of study, such as, biology,
physics,&lt;br/&gt;chemistry, economics, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposed Workshop:&lt;br/&gt;The need of modern industry for
well-trained systems scientists is growing and changing,&lt;br/&gt;due to the
marketplace pressures and the advances in technology. Future generations
of&lt;br/&gt;our students will have to be broadly educated to cope with cross-
disciplinary applications&lt;br/&gt;and rapidly changing technology. The
backgrounds of our students are changing too.&lt;br/&gt;They are better prepared
to work with modern computing technologies. Thus the time is&lt;br/&gt;ripe for
major renovations in mathematics and science education in high school. It
is&lt;br/&gt;important to develop a cross-disciplinary set of examples,
demonstrations and laboratory&lt;br/&gt;exercises that illustrate systems and
control across the entire spectrum of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and science. We will
share with high school teachers our successful control
stories,&lt;br/&gt;existing tools and experiments. There is much to be gained by
the sharing of educational&lt;br/&gt;experiences and practices.