* 0335302
* NRT:  Scalable Testbed for Next-Generation Mobile Wireless Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Mineo Takai, University of California-Los Angeles
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2008
* USD 5,570,716.00

WHYNET: Scalable Testbed for Next Generation Mobile Wireless Networking
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of wireless communication technology
is likely to rely on cross-layer interactions&lt;br/&gt;that extend from the
application layer down to the physical devices. This project proposes to design
and&lt;br/&gt;develop WHYNET, a Wireless HYbrid NETwork testbed to facilitate
detailed study of such interactions and&lt;br/&gt;their impact on application
level performance in heterogeneous wireless systems. The eventual
technical&lt;br/&gt;impact of this testbed will be to redefine how specific
innovations in wireless communication technologies are&lt;br/&gt;evaluated in
terms of their potential to improve application-level performance as well as how
alternative&lt;br/&gt;approaches are compared with each other. Its broader
impact will be to redefine how students are trained in&lt;br/&gt;wireless
technologies by providing a multi-disciplinary 'hands on' environment to
complement purely&lt;br/&gt;theoretical classroom
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WHYNET is envisaged as a hybrid testbed that
combines the realism of physical testing with the&lt;br/&gt;scalability and
flexibility of simulations. The hybrid testbed will be a networked federation of
geographically&lt;br/&gt;distributed, heterogeneous wireless physical testbeds
with multiple protocol stacks (CDMA 2000 cellular and IP), next generation
physical technologies including UWB (Ultra Wide Band), MIMO (Multiple
Inputs,&lt;br/&gt;Multiple Outputs) and SDR (Software Defined Radios), and a
parallel &amp; distributed multi-tool simulation&lt;br/&gt;framework. Beyond
providing a more accurate &amp; flexible evaluation framework, the hybrid
testbed will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate a smooth transition from an abstract
simulation model to an operational implementation within a&lt;br/&gt;single
framework. For instance, protocol prototypes can communicate with simulated
lower layers for&lt;br/&gt;repeatable results, or receive and process variable
rate real multimedia application inputs for perceptual&lt;br/&gt;evaluation.
Once the physical hardware devices are ready for testing, a portion of the
target network system&lt;br/&gt;can be configured with real devices while the
rest of the network can still reside in the simulated hardware&lt;br/&gt;domain.
The effort will also generate a repository of wireless networking scenarios,
measurements, models&lt;br/&gt;and implementations. A representative set of
studies will be used to demonstrate the unique contributions of&lt;br/&gt;WHYNET
for cross-layer optimization studies in particular, and mobile wireless
networking in general. These include sensor networks, energy-aware networking,
protocols &amp; middleware for multi-access networking, and adaptive transport
and security protocols. The testbed itself will be accessible by the research
community via a web-based mechanism that will allow remote uploading of models,
implementations, and configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is likely to have a broader impact on two fronts: the training of future
generation&lt;br/&gt;of wireless engineers and wireless technology standards.
Wireless engineers will need significant technical&lt;br/&gt;depth to contribute
to a rapidly developing technology and significant technical breadth to
understand how this&lt;br/&gt;technology fits into a market driven economy. The
latter category requires engineers who are trained in&lt;br/&gt;insystemslt
aspects with an in-depth understanding of trade-offs and interactions across
layers of a wireless&lt;br/&gt;communication system. The current course
structure is not designed to produce well-trained engineers of
the&lt;br/&gt;second type. The project team feels strongly that broad systems
training can only be accomplished in i.hands-&lt;br/&gt;onlo experimental
courses or projects where the students see the tradeoffs involved in real system
design. The proposed testbed can enable these types of courses across the
curriculum. Even though today wireless is a&lt;br/&gt;vertical technology, 4-5
years from now, the most interesting and challenging problems will be those
related to wireless systems, so we believe that an inter-disciplinary yet
closely-knit engineering program such as ours is well suited for the training of
wireless engineer of tomorrow. By providing a scalable platform, methodology,
and tools to support objective and accurate evaluation of protocol and
technology alternatives, we expect that the testbed will also play an important
role in shaping standards activity in IETF and related
bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-disciplinary, multi-institution team has
been formed to achieve the ambitious objectives of the&lt;br/&gt;WHYNET project.
The team members have substantial expertise in design and management of physical
and&lt;br/&gt;simulation testbeds (Bagrodia, Gerla, Rao, Takai), development of
novel radio technology (Daneshrad, Fitz,&lt;br/&gt;Mitra), wireless systems
(Mitra, Rao, Srivastava), protocol design (Gerla, Krishnamurthy, Mohapatra,
Royer, Shen, Srivastava, Tripathi) and performance evaluation (Bagrodia, Gerla,
Molle, Rao, Tripathi). Many of thePIs have successfully worked together on
previous collaborative projects. We have also received strong support from a
number of companies that play a critical role in this space including Microsoft,
Hughes&lt;br/&gt;Research Laboratories (now part of Boeing), ST Electronics, HP,
Ericsson, Intel, and Xtreme Spectrum.