* 0335575
* Workshop on Improving Education in the Social, Behavorial, and Economic Sciences: A National Dialogue, June 12-13, 2003
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Felice Levine, American Educational Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 11/30/2003
* USD 39,600.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds to enable the American
Educational Research Association to provide scientific and technical assistance
to the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Directorate (SBE) in support of
the Directorate's objective to develop a plan of action regarding educational
improvement and human resource development in the social and behavioral
sciences. The objective of the work is to assist the National Science Foundation
in the planning and implementation of a National Workshop, to chair that
Workshop to allow NSF to receive the advice of the external scientific
community, and to prepare a report to the Directorate. The report will be in the
form of a plan of action and recommendation that can be used by the Foundation
in assessing needs, setting priorities, and arriving at concrete steps to
advance knowledge in these sciences and ensure an adequate talent pool of
researchers to meet the challenges in social and behavioral science
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been increasing recognition of the value
and role of the SBE sciences in the "family of science" for addressing the most
significant challenges that we face as a nation. As need and demand for our
knowledge increases, we must invest in ensuring that the talent pool and human
capacity are both sufficient and prepared to undertake this important work. NSF
has developed a new priority area on Human and Social Dynamics to address these
needs. It is anticipated that this workshop will help advance this
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;