* 0335601
* SGER: Topics in the Political Economy of Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Rohini Pande, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 40,000.00

This exploratory research attempts to make three contributions to the literature
on the political economy of inequality, using original data collection and
dissemination, formal modeling, and microeconometric
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the research will collect and organized a
panel data set on income inequality and poverty at the district level in India.
This data set will be derived from the Indian National Sample Survey of 1983,
1987, 1993, and 1999. The PI has already constructed an algorithm to translate
the national survey data into district level inequality indices. A major problem
in research on poverty and inequality in developing countries is lack of
adequate and reliable data at the sub-national level---levels at which policies
are implemented. The construction of the district level poverty and inequality
indices for India will contribute significantly to research on distribution and
poverty in the development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the research
uses the constructed data to examine whether large-scale public projects, such
as the construction of dams, create inequality. Specifically, it investigates
whether the geographical distribution of dams is influenced by politics and
whether dam construction affects inequality and distribution across districts
and through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, the research investigates whether
and how changes in equality and poverty affect the probability of ethnic and
religious conflicts. The premise here is that ethnic and religious conflicts
have economic causes and consequences. The inequality data constructed is used
to test several interesting hypotheses about the initiation, duration, and
intensity of ethnic and religious conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
data collected will be used to investigate how economy-wide changes in income
inequality affect the allocation of family resources along gender lines.
Specifically, it will investigate how changes in economy-wide distribution of
income affect parents' incentives to provide resources to their daughters and
sons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;