* 0336929
* US-UK Dissertation Enhancement:  Evolution of Unusual Steroids in Lamprey Species
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Weiming Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 01/31/2006
* USD 11,560.00

0336929&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-U.K. dissertation
enhancement project involves Weiming Li of Michigan State University, doctoral
student Mara Beth Bryan, and Andrew Scott of the U.K. Centre for Environment,
Fisheries and Aquaculture Science. The award supports a two-month visit by the
doctoral student to investigate the presence and possible functionality of
unusual 15a-hydroxylated steroids in European river lamprey (Lampetra
fluviatillis). This line of research enhances the dissertation effort currently
focused on the structure and functionality of 15a-hyroxylated steroids in the
sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus). The goal is to determine if the
15a-hyroxylated steroids (gonadal steroids) are ancestral and universal in
lampreys by investigating their role in the European river lamprey, the most
derived lamprey genus. The objectives are to study the steroids in the river
lamprey's gonadal tissues in vitro, steroid circulation and production in vivo,
changes in steroid levels in response to GnRH administration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on steroids in lampreys has implications in
evolution and biodiversity of endocrine functions, as lampreys are the earliest
evolving extant vertebrate studied for the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis.
However, most research has focused on hormones of the hypothalamus and
pituitary, and has been conducted on a single species, the sea lamprey. This
dissertation project extends these studies to gonadal steroids in several
different species. The project takes advantage of access to unique facilities in
the United Kingdom which house river lampreys. The results will further
understanding of conservation and control efforts for various lamprey species,
which in different parts of the world are endangered, threatened, or considered
as an invasive species.&lt;br/&gt;