* 0336462
* UNO and MCC STEPping Together
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Jack Heidel, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,999,348.00

Interdisciplinary (99) The University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO) and
Metropolitan Community College (MCC) have developed a collaborative effort to
increase associate and bachelors degrees in the STEM areas of biology,
chemistry, computer science, geology, mathematics and physics. This project is
testing and refining the working hypothesis that a broad, collaborative and
multi-faceted approach will be effective in improving the pathways and
opportunities for students pursuing STEM degrees. The goal is to simultaneously
boost STEM enrollments and degrees awarded in six departments located in two
different UNO colleges, as well as two MCC departments. To accomplish this, new
associate degrees are being developed at MCC, articulation agreements for
complete programs of study are being forged, and interdisciplinary options at
UNO are being expanded. High school outreach, scholarships, tuition waivers, and
enhanced learning center components provide the stimulus to attract and retain
more students.

The project is being accomplished through close collaboration between the two
institutions. It is being coordinated by the PI, two co- PI's at UNO, two co-
PI's at MCC, and involves a number of faculty and staff at both institutions. In
addition, MCC is providing an Outreach Coordinator and UNO is providing an
Associate Dean of Arts and Sciences to oversee articulation issues and a faculty
member to carry out project evaluation. The scope of the project includes the
following: high school outreach; articulation agreements; scholarships for
underrepresented, financially needy, and nontraditional STEM majors at UNO;
bridge scholarships for transfer students; new internship opportunities at MCC
and UNO; early undergraduate research at UNO; an effective mathematics and
science learning center at UNO; and new interdisciplinary courses and majors at
UNO in Bioinformatics, Information Assurance, Medicinal Chemistry and
Neuroscience.