* 0336918
* International Symposium: "Polynanomeress: A Matrix for Design to Build Processes, Porto Heli, Greece
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,07/31/2004
* James Seferis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 41,306.00

&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to organize an international symposium in the town
of Porto&lt;br/&gt;Heli, Greece from June 25 to July 2, 2003 to:&lt;br/&gt;__
Establish the state of the art in international nanotechnology research as
it&lt;br/&gt;applies to a new system class we have defined: polynanomers
and&lt;br/&gt;polynanomeric composites.&lt;br/&gt;__ Identify the needs for
scientific and engineering research to advance new&lt;br/&gt;technologies on a
global scale.&lt;br/&gt;__ Identify the requirements for research cooperation
between academia,&lt;br/&gt;industry, governments, non-government and non-profit
organizations on a&lt;br/&gt;global basis.&lt;br/&gt;__ Develop standards and
methods for rapid utilization of new technologies, such&lt;br/&gt;as
nanotechnology in areas like the aerospace and health industries.&lt;br/&gt;__
Examine the ability to carry out commercialization of innovation
through&lt;br/&gt;international cooperations and alliances performed through
incubators.&lt;br/&gt;We anticipate this symposium to impact a broad
constituency, ranging from&lt;br/&gt;the scientific and engineering community to
the business, management and science&lt;br/&gt;policy at the global, regional
and local levels. Furthermore, we expect the results of&lt;br/&gt;the symposium
to be incorporated in the formation of an incubator related to
the&lt;br/&gt;issues identified. Basic support is being requested between the
U.S., the European Union and Korea to establish the global symposium. Additional
countries and/or regions are also being solicitated and will be invited to the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact Statement&lt;br/&gt;This
symposium may be expected to impact a broad constituency, ranging&lt;br/&gt;from
the scientific and engineering community to the business, management
and&lt;br/&gt;science policy at the global, regional and local levels. Focusing
on rapid&lt;br/&gt;commercialization of nanotechnology, as it relates to a new
class of materials,&lt;br/&gt;polynanomers, that blur the boundaries of
polymers, ceramics and metals, the&lt;br/&gt;symposium will also provide for the
first time applications to the aerospace and health industries in an integrated
manner. We expect collectively the results of the&lt;br/&gt;symposium to be
incorporated in the formation of an incubator related to the
above&lt;br/&gt;subjects.&lt;br/&gt;