* 0336712
* Collaborative Research:  Doppler on Wheels International H2O Project Participation and Studies of Convective Initiation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Joshua Wurman, Binet Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2006
* USD 190,873.00

The International H20 Project (IHOP) is a multi-investigator, multi-agency
program whose chief aim is improved characterization of the four-dimensional
distribution of water vapor and its application to improving the understanding
and prediction of convection. Program emphasis is on four important research
areas: quantitative precipitation forecasting; convective initiation,
atmospheric boundary layer processes; and instrumentation testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical to the success of the IHOP is the measurement of
wind and thermodynamic values spanning several scales of motion. This will be
accomplished with unique and varied instrumentation. To contribute to achieving
the goals of IHOP, the Principal Investigators have submitted collaborative
proposals. As part of the required IHOP instrumentation suite, the Principal
Investigators will deploy the University of Oklahoma Doppler on Wheels (DOW)
radars. These radars provide the IHOP researchers with a high resolution
instrument for obtaining detailed wind measurements. These measurements have
applications to all four IHOP research components. The DOWs will coordinate with
both fixed-site and mobile observing platforms to sample with unprecedented data
density and resolution the pre-convective environment, including wind and
thermodynamic properties within and along boundaries and convergence
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For their research contribution to the IHOP, the
Principal Investigators will analyze these data to elucidate the magnitude of
gradients in the water vapor field and the role of the wind field in focusing
these inhomogeneities. For example, the Principal Investigators will determine
if locally convergent mesoscale circulations along boundaries or intersections
between convergence zones, possibly associated with horizontal convective rolls
(HCRs), create pockets of high water vapor content. They will further assess the
orientation of water vapor gradients with respect to the HCRs. In addition to
boundary studies, the Principal Investigators will perform analyses of data
collected on days without obvious convergence zones to determine the degree of
variability in the water vapor field in the absence of substantial focusing
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After understanding the nature and degree of
water vapor variability in the pre-convective environment further analysis will
focus on the relationship of these inhomogeneities to the convective initiation
process based on current hypotheses. For example, if pockets of high water vapor
content are found to exist, the Principal Investigators will then examine
whether deep convection indeed is favored at these locations. They will examine
in detail the depth of lifting associated with observed very small scale
circulations and convergence zones to determine the transport of water vapor in
the boundary layer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is a better understanding of
the mechanisms governing water vapor variability in the preconvective
environment and the dynamical processes by which this variability is manifested
in the convective initiation process.