* 0336580
* PR2EPS:     Preparation, Recruitment, Retention &amp; Excellence in the Physical Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sunil Labroo, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 854,063.00

The departments of Physics &amp; Astronomy and Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry are
engaging in a multi-pronged program to substantially increase enrollment,
retention, and success of future students in both of these departments and the
3+2 cooperative engineering degree program. The program starts with a pro-active
recruitment of students who attend a summer camp that focuses on skill and
confidence building using multi-disciplinary approaches and a set of both
technological and team-building social skills to solve problems. Students
subsequently attending Oneonta and majoring in the targeted programs are
eligible for a modest financial incentive.&lt;br/&gt;The retention component of
the program focuses on freshman, as well as established upper-level majors and
includes (1) a freshman year, interdisciplinary, seminar and skill-building
courses that will emphasize fundamental mathematical and problem-solving skills,
as well as provide insight into potential careers in the physical sciences, (2)
a physical science walk-in tutoring center overseen by faculty and staffed by
upper level majors that provides peer-led mentoring and tutoring, and (3)
regular freshman guidance by a single faculty advisor who is qualified from both
the educational and scientific perspectives. Opportunities are also available
for students to work during subsequent years' summer camp as peer-leaders or to
conduct research with faculty members. Faculty advisors are also responsible for
providing students information about participation in external research programs
and national scientific meetings to meet peer and senior scientists from other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;This program has set a goal of attracting16-24 new
freshman majors in the aforementioned disciplines during each year of the
program with a retention rate of 60-75% remaining within a physical science or
related major. The recruitment efforts include targeting students from
economically disadvantaged geographical areas surrounding SUNY Oneonta.
&lt;br/&gt;