* 0336642
* Affirmative Action at Work: Corporate Compliance Activites and Workforce Composition
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Frank Dobbin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2004
* USD 31,137.00

In 1964, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, which outlawed employment
discrimination, but did not outline specific means of compliance. Employers
experimented with dozens of different compliance measures. Many were largely
symbolic, such as anti-discrimination policies, while others offered procedural
guarantees of equal treatment, such as in dealing with sexual harassment and
formal promotion. Still others were more substantive in that they involved
positive steps to increase diversity, such as special management training for
women and minority mentoring programs. Which of these measures have worked? How
did the law matter, and through what kinds of changes in employment practices
did it have influence? This project builds on institutional theories of
organizational action to address these questions. It distinguishes between
symbolic, procedural, and substantive anti-discrimination activities, and
specifies hypotheses about the relative effectiveness of each
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests the hypotheses using employment
data from the annual reports that 412 large employers submitted to the
government from 1978 through 1993. These publicly available reports detail
employment by race, ethnicity, and gender in nine occupational categories. It
also surveys these companies to chart the history of their personnel practices,
and merges the survey data with the annual reports. It then analyzes how
particular employment practices of the companies (obtained from the survey data)
affect the gender, racial, and ethnic composition of their workforce (obtained
from the annual reports). The project represents the first sustained effort to
sort out the effects of employment practices on workforce composition, and to
measure the effectiveness of activities designed to satisfy anti-discrimination
laws in making the workforce more diverse.&lt;br/&gt;