* 0336757
* Coupling the High Resolution of Laser Measurements and Finite-Element Simulations to Understand Transport Phenomena during Microdroplet Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Jon Longtin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 09/30/2006
* USD 259,795.00

Ink-Jet technology allows the controlled generation and deposition of
microdroplets of a wide range of fluids, e.g., organic liquids, polymers,
dielectric coolants and liquid metals. Applications include materials
processing, microelectronics manufacturing and cooling, as well as surface
coatings. A typical droplet diameter of 100 mm implies a very large surface to
volume ratio, which drastically enhances transport phenomena between the droplet
and its surroundings. However, the temporal and spatial resolutions of current
temperature measurement techniques, which are on the order of 1 ms and 1 mm,
respectively, are not sufficient to capture the transient transport phenomena
occurring during the early stages of the deposition of a microdroplet on a solid
surface at a different temperature. &lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the
proposed research is to develop a laser-based temperature measurement method
with temporal and spatial resolutions on the order of 1 ms and 10 mm,
respectively. The second objective is to apply this novel measurement together
with an existing finite-element model built particularly for microdroplet impact
and an existing high-speed visualization setup: this combined experimental and
numerical technique will provide in-depth knowledge on the coupling of the heat
flow, fluid flow and phase change during microdroplet deposition. The rapid
solidification of a microdroplet on a colder surface and the initiation of
boiling of a microdroplet on a hot surface will be investigated, with
consideration of the influence of engineered surface roughness and coatings.
Predictive and quantitative models for the transient behavior of the interfacial
thermal conductance and phase change will be formulated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;