* 0336313
* Prediction of the Quaternary Structure and Folding Thermodynamics of Multimeric Helical Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Jeffrey Skolnick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2005
* USD 188,267.00

Skolnick, J MCB 9986019 The long-term objectives of this research are the
development of algorithms capable of predicting the quaternary structure of
small oligomeric helical proteins as well as to provide qualitative insights
into their thermodynamic properties. To accomplish these goals, the lattice
models developed by Skolnick and Kolinski will be reparameterized to better
reproduce the balance of secondary and tertiary interactions, denatured state
properties will be simulated to insure that they are treated appropriately, and
the quaternary structure and folding thermodynamics of simple, multimeric
helical proteins will be predicted. In particular, using Entropy Sampling Monte
Carlo, the quaternary structures of coiled coils such as the GCN4 leucine
zipper, its fragments, sequences designed by Hodges, and ROP-based dimers will
be examined.

Many proteins only assume their biologically active conformation on association
to multimers. For example, the leucine zipper motif present in eukaryotic gene
regulatory proteins is one of the three known modes by which regulatory proteins
recognize and bind DNA. Obviously, the ability to predict their quaternary
structure is of practical importance. In contrast to the substantial body of
experimental work, there are few theoretical studies on these important systems.
The research described here is aimed at addressing this need in coiled coils and
in somewhat more complicated multimeric helical proteins, such as ROP. Such
studies are the first steps in the understanding on a molecular level of
metabolic and signaling pathways.

This project is jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical Physical
Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry.