* 0336500
* JGOFS/SMP: Data-Based Models of Food Web Structure and Export Flux
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Michael Landry, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2004
* USD 77,103.00

Data-Based Models of Plankton Community Structure and Export
Flux&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intensive JGOFS investigations over the
past decade have indicated strong links among physical-chemical environmental
forcing, plankton community structure, and the fate of carbon production
(remineralization or export). However, these relationships are crudely portrayed
in existing plankton food web models. It is presently unclear how much
information on size and taxonomic composition is needed for adequate model
predictions and to what extent community dynamics and biogeochemical fluxes in
different water masses are linked by common organizational principles and
quantitative relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
proposed research is to contribute to the mechanistic understanding of the
factors that regulate "euphotic zone production and export of carbon and related
biologically active substances". To accomplish this, the PIs will develop and
evaluate data-based models of plankton community structure and export flux for
tropical/subtropical open-ocean ecosystems. This project will focus on the
tropical and subtropical oceans, areas most strongly represented in JGOFS
Process and Time-series studies (EqPac, Arabian Sea, HOT, BATS) and presently
most developed in terms of mature databases and supporting experimental studies.
The specific objectives are: 1) to develop data-constrained representations of
planktonic community structure and trophic interactions; 2) to construct models
of temporal plankton community dynamics and associated biogeochemical fluxes at
the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) site and following iron perturbation in the
equatorial Pacific (IronEx II); 3) to compare and test simple parameterizations,
for lower trophic level interactions and export fluxes for use in 3-D coupled
models; 4) to develop a general tropical ocean model that includes appropriate
responses to nutrient supply (Arabian Sea) and iron-limitation (Equatorial
Pacific); and 5) to examine model structures and strategies for predicting
biologically realistic responses in computationally intensive Global Circulation
Models (GCMs). Based on observed similarities in the stocks and process rates in
diverse tropical oceanic ecosystems, the PIs hypothesize that the data will lend
themselves to representation in a general tropical ocean model with common
structure and parameters. To investigate the minimum level of complexity
required to capture essential biological realities in global models, they will
statistically examine an interrelated spectrum of models, all calibrated to
common data sets but differing in structural complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;