* 0336770
* A New Approach to High-Latitude Research Problems:  Nanosystems Neurotechnology Collaboration
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Patrick Kane, Saoirse Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The Principal Investigator has submitted a SGER proposal to develop an area of
science and technology that non-invasively targets biologically active agents to
localized regions of the Central Nervous System or NBS (Nonivasively-targeted
Biomodulation System). In addition, the PI is proposing to explore the potential
of his research to the Arctic research community. With the assistance of a
highly credentialed science team, from Harvard and MIT, the PI's current
research uniquely applies a multidisciplinary approach that combines "physics
and software developed for focused transcranial energy deposition, intelligent -
nanoscale science, and a biotech core based on the mechanisms of known
neuropharmacological agents." The PI is currently developing a proto-type that
will incorporate biologically active agents into nanoscale systems that will
remain dormant until activated by a noninvasive focused energy source.

In addition, the proposed research is not only to help fund the development of
research on nanoscale science, but also to catalyze the application of this very
innovative research among the high latitude researcher community. As such, the
PI proposes to conduct a workshop in Alaska among high latitude researchers to
explore the potential of the proposed research for the Arctic in the areas of
bio-regulation in high latitude adaptation, efficacious and non-invasive
delivery of bio-regulation compounds, medical applications for treatment of
frostbite and trauma injuries, and others.

