* 0336934
* Rural Alliance for Improving Science Education - Track 1, GK-12
* EDU,DGE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Thomas Wikle, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,800,494.00

Title: Rural Alliance for Improving Science Education (RAISE)
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oklahoma State University &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PIs: Thomas
A. Wikle (PI), Joel W. Helmer and John E. Steinbrink (Co-PIs)
&lt;br/&gt;Fellow/Year: 10 (graduate) &lt;br/&gt;School Partners: Perkins/Tryon,
Morrison, and Hennessey Public Schools &lt;br/&gt;Target: 6 through 12th grades
&lt;br/&gt;Setting: rural &lt;br/&gt;Disciplines: interdisciplinary (Earth
sciences, life sciences, general sciences) &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Background:
Despite recent implementation of statewide science education standards,
&lt;br/&gt;students from rural Oklahoma communities lag behind the nation in
math and science &lt;br/&gt;ability. Compounding the problem is a shortage of
math and science teachers making it &lt;br/&gt;necessary for teachers to offer
subjects outside of their primary science teaching area. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity: The Rural Alliance for
Improving Science &lt;br/&gt;Education (RAISE) places outstanding graduate
students (fellows) in 6-12 grade &lt;br/&gt;classrooms to work one-on-one with
public school teachers in three rural school districts. &lt;br/&gt;Supervised by
a committee of science teachers and faculty from Oklahoma State
&lt;br/&gt;University (OSU), RAISE builds on existing relationships among OSU
faculty and K-&lt;br/&gt;12 teachers established through POLARIS, a Department
of Education sponsored project &lt;br/&gt;for improving middle and junior high
science instruction. The interdisciplinary area of &lt;br/&gt;Geographic
Information Science (GISci) serves as the focus for the development of
&lt;br/&gt;innovative science curricula with the goals of: 1) strengthening
curricular ties among &lt;br/&gt;ecology, biology, Earth science and
environmental science, and 2) providing measurable &lt;br/&gt;improvement in
student performance on state-mandated science tests. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity: RAISE targets rural school
districts with &lt;br/&gt;significant numbers of Native American students and
high poverty rates. Fellows from &lt;br/&gt;the Departments of Botany, Zoology,
Microbiology, Geography, Geology, and &lt;br/&gt;Environmental Science are
completing their OSU degree with stronger communication &lt;br/&gt;skills, an
improved understanding of science pedagogy, and a greater appreciation for the
&lt;br/&gt;needs of both teachers and diverse learners. Lesson plans and other
materials developed &lt;br/&gt;by fellow/teacher teams will be disseminated
regionally through summer institutes and &lt;br/&gt;nationally through a project
web site promoted via science education journals and teacher
&lt;br/&gt;conferences. The principal benchmarks for project success are: 1)
student &lt;br/&gt;improvement on science sections of the state-mandated
Oklahoma Core Curriculum Test &lt;br/&gt;and, 2) the number of teachers/schools
throughout the state and nation that integrate &lt;br/&gt;RAISE materials into
6-10th grade science instruction. &lt;br/&gt;