* 0336713
* Investigative Science Learning Environment:  Science and Cognition Combined
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Alan Van Heuvelen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2005
* USD 249,072.00

Physics (13) This project is developing and testing for large enrollment
introductory physics courses a unique multifaceted epistemological learning
system-Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE) - that replicates
systematic discovery methods used by practicing scientists. The goal of this
system is to bring "a scientific way of knowing" into the process of learning
physics. A complete set of curriculum materials (published innovative textbook,
student study guide, and instructor's guide including suggestions for
experiments) is being developed for the algebra-based physics course taken
primarily by biology majors and pre-medical students. In addition, resource
materials, feedback formative assessment instruments, and recommendations on
practical implementation of the ISLE are being prepared as supplements for this
course and for the calculus-based introductory physics courses in which
traditional physics texts are used. ISLE is being tested in algebra-based
physics courses, in a bridging course for under prepared engineering students,
and in regular and honors calculus-based physics for engineering students. The
ISLE is based on research in physics education, cognitive science, and learning-
outcome requests from the 21st century workplace. It is being used in several
institutions-Ohio State University, Rutgers University, Chico State University
and a two-year college. Students can be active learners rather than objects of
teaching. Students construct the understanding of physics themselves following
the same general pattern for each concept-devising and experimentally testing
qualitative and quantitative explanations of the phenomena that they observe.
Various proven thinking and learning strategies-multiple exposures, multiple
representations, and multimedia-enhanced learning-are used. Students are active
participants in all parts of the course, and they solve complex problems and
apply their knowledge for practical purposes.&lt;br/&gt;After taking the
Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE) physics course, students
should be better skilled in the techniques of scientific investigation,
experienced in designing their own investigations and in decision making, able
to construct their understanding of new concepts, and used to working
collaboratively in groups to solve complex real life problems. They leave
instruction with conceptual knowledge and procedural knowledge
structures.&lt;br/&gt;