* 0337399
* Properties of Magnetic Viscosity
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 52,332.00

Viscous remanent magnetization (VRM) is a remanent magnetization that
&lt;br/&gt;is inexorably acquired during exposure to ambient magnetic fields.
&lt;br/&gt;In nature, VRM is a secondary overprint resulting from the
&lt;br/&gt;geomagnetic field. This VRM generally constitutes undesirable noise
&lt;br/&gt;in paleomagnetism. Despite its ubiquity, VRM still presents great
&lt;br/&gt;difficulty in paleomagnetic interpretation. In particular,
&lt;br/&gt;properties of VRM vary substantially as experimental conditions
&lt;br/&gt;change. As a result, it is dangerous to generalize the outcome of
&lt;br/&gt;individual investigations in the laboratory to the NRM of
&lt;br/&gt;paleomagnetic specimens. The investigators therefore propose a
&lt;br/&gt;systematic experimental and theoretical approach that intends to
&lt;br/&gt;explore fundamental behavior of VRM using well-defined natural and
&lt;br/&gt;synthetic samples. Properties of pre-history, temperature, and
&lt;br/&gt;time-dependence of VRM will be examined. They will monitor changes
&lt;br/&gt;in the magnetic remanence vector as well as the demagnetization
&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of VRM. In addition, experiments will be performed
&lt;br/&gt;at elevated temperatures up to 300C to characterize properties of
&lt;br/&gt;thermoviscous remanent magnetization (TVRM). Given the prevalence of
&lt;br/&gt;TVRM/VRM in nature, these investigations will pave the way for a
&lt;br/&gt;much more complete characterization of VRM and its affects on the
&lt;br/&gt;determination of past geomagnetic field
vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;