* 0337543
* Understanding Factors that Sustain STEM Career Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Kathryn Borman, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/2008
* USD 942,545.00

&lt;br/&gt;The proposed one and a half-year research program addresses a
national need to develop an understanding of how individual student occupational
career lines in STEM are either nourished and sustained or inhibited and
attenuated during the course of student careers in secondary and post-secondary
settings. Research includes two interrelated studies. The Cohort Study of STEM
Career Outcomes tracks students longitudinally in terms of course taking
patterns and post-secondary outcomes to examine career pathways taken by the
1993/94 cohort of 82,000 Florida high school graduates to understand demographic
and experience variables associated with successful and unsuccessful outcomes
related to STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Retrospective Study of STEM Career
Outcomes provides a detailed look at the range of motivations, opportunities,
obstacles and structural constraints that either sustained or curtailed STEM
career mobility through interviews conducted with 150 individuals who have moved
successfully into STEM careers. These data will be compared with a matched group
of 150 individuals with similar credentials who have not pursued STEM careers.
Based on available research on career decisions and pathways, we will collect
information on the key background factors, experiences and career cognitions
affect STEM career persistence, looking in detail at differences in the career
paths for individuals who have pursued different types of STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is little
in-depth understanding of how individuals effectively orchestrate school and
work-related experiences over time from high school through college and beyond
to pursue careers in STEM in contrast to those who do not. While other research
has investigated institutional impacts on individual outcomes (c.f. Bowen &amp;
Bok, 1998; Massey, Charles, Lundy, &amp; Fischer, 2003), neither of these
studies (1) documents career decision making processes; (2) focuses
systematically on career pathways and outcomes or (3) relies upon a mixed
methods approach. Both studies are informed by an interest in economic outcomes
of affirmative action policies in higher education. Results will offer an
understanding of how structural supports and barriers affect student outcomes
including student motivation to excel and embark upon STEM career pathways.
Results will also show differences in factors that enhance or impede
participation in STEM education and occupations for different demographic
groups, providing a foundation for practices likely to increase motivation and
opportunities to participate in STEM, particularly for women and other
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Our
program of research addresses an imperative national need for recruiting skilled
and talented U.S. workers into STEM careers. Contemporary U.S. society is
characterized by an absence of structured supports, making career decision-
making in adolescence particularly significant. Furthermore, while approximately
60 percent of high school graduates obtain some college education only about 25
percent actually graduate with 4-year degrees. This research can provide
guidance to NSF in building and sustaining a well-prepared STEM workforce
representative of the American populace.&lt;br/&gt;