* 0337553
* Coupled Heat and Water Transfer in Soil
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Thomas Sauer, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2008
* USD 350,187.00

0337553&lt;br/&gt;Horton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Movement of heat and water across
the soil surface largely drives both the atmosphere and the terrestrial
hydrosphere. In near-surface soil, coupled transfer of heat and water is the
rule rather than the exception, yet the coupling process is poorly understood.
In fact, predictions made using the de facto standard Philip and de Vries type
coupled transfer model can be substantially off. Current models, based as they
are on data sets covering only a narrow range of conditions, ignore at least two
important considerations: thermally-driven advection ('soil breathing'), in
which daily heating at the soil surface cyclically alters the density of the gas
phase and so drives advection of soil air, and wettability, which controls both
the height of capillary rise and the area of the air-water interface.
&lt;br/&gt;We propose to conduct detailed experiments measuring heat and water
in both sealed and open soil columns. Our experiments will use the new thermo-
TDR probe, capable of measuring temperature, thermal properties, and water
content, allowing us to conduct several months of experiments on each individual
soil column. This permits us to subject each soil column to a wide range of
boundary conditions, and so to collect data for both calibration and validation
from each soil column. We will examine effects of soil texture and wettability,
water content, mean temperature, direction of thermal gradient, and influence of
fluctuating boundary conditions on coupled heat and water movement in sealed
soil columns. We will then study effects of soil texture and wettability, mean
temperature, upper boundary condition, and advective vapor barrier on
evaporation from open soil columns. &lt;br/&gt;In parallel with the laboratory
experiments, we will develop a network model of &lt;br/&gt;coupled heat and
water transfer in soils. A network model operates from first principles, and (in
contrast with conventional continuum models) properties such as unsaturated
hydraulic conductivity, air/water interfacial area, and soil breathing emerge
from the network rather than being explicitly programmed in. This fundamental
approach will allow us to examine which properties and processes are important
under which conditions, furthering our understanding and focusing the
development of improved continuum models in the future.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop and disseminate new models and approaches in both experiment and
modeling. These ideas, data, and models will be made available in the peer-ed
literature, at conferences, and on a group website. Additionally, the research
will be integrated into broader programs and activities of national interest,
such as natural resource management and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;