* 0337501
* Collaborative Research:  Anisotropy and Mantle Flow Beneath Japan from Seismological Observations and Geodynamical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Maarten de Hoop, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 28,399.00

Proper characterization of elastic anisotropy can help understand the
&lt;br/&gt;causes, mechanisms, and consequences of tectonic deformation in the
&lt;br/&gt;upper mantle and in other regions of the Earth's deep interior and
&lt;br/&gt;beneath regions of active tectonics. Unfortunately, our
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of seismic anisotropy is still unsatisfactory and
&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of seismological diagnostics of anisotropy (such as
&lt;br/&gt;shear wave birefringence) is often ambiguous. Gaining full
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of seismic anisotropy and flow beneath complex tectonic
&lt;br/&gt;regions has, therefore, remained an outstanding challenge of modern
&lt;br/&gt;seismology and geodynamics. In collaboration with colleagues in
&lt;br/&gt;France, scientists from MIT and Colorado School of Mines propose to
&lt;br/&gt;meet this challenge through the explicit integration of powerful data
&lt;br/&gt;sets and forward and inverse modeling tools. In particular, they aim
&lt;br/&gt;to improve the understanding of 3-D seismic anisotropy and tectonic
&lt;br/&gt;deformation in the upper mantle near subduction zones, which are
&lt;br/&gt;tectonic regions that are of particular societal interest because of
&lt;br/&gt;their association with significant volcanic and seismic hazard. They
&lt;br/&gt;will focus on Japan, where geophysical instrumentation is dense
&lt;br/&gt;because of the need for the continuous monitoring of seismic and
&lt;br/&gt;volcanic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from these dense
networks can be obtained through the internet, &lt;br/&gt;thanks to scientists
in Japan, and the MIT-CSM team has already &lt;br/&gt;assembled a large data set
from 64 broadband seismic stations. &lt;br/&gt;Through examination of ~12,000
individual seismograms, they compiled &lt;br/&gt;a database of ~1330 high-
quality shear wave splitting measurements &lt;br/&gt;for S, SKS/SKKS, and ScS,
and more will be added later. They propose &lt;br/&gt;to improve the
quantitative interpretation of the splitting maps by &lt;br/&gt;combining two
complementary approaches. First, they wish to extend &lt;br/&gt;their numerical
modeling of upper mantle flow from 2.5 to 3-D, &lt;br/&gt;incorporating
(evolving) velocity boundary conditions and realistic &lt;br/&gt;geometries and
rheologies. Second, they plan to develop a novel &lt;br/&gt;technique for
tomographic inversion of the observed shear wave &lt;br/&gt;polarizations and
split times. The flow models will be used to &lt;br/&gt;design the
parameterization and regularization of the inversion, and, &lt;br/&gt;in turn,
the seismic imaging results will be used to update the flow &lt;br/&gt;models.
Such an explicitly cross-disciplinary approach will not only &lt;br/&gt;yield
new insight into the 3-D anisotropy and flow field beneath &lt;br/&gt;Japan.
Indeed, the powerful new tools and concepts for data &lt;br/&gt;analysis,
modeling, and interpretation can also be applied to data &lt;br/&gt;from such
new initiatives as USArray/Earthscope.