* 0337483
* Generation of Basaltic and Andesitic Magma in the Central Southern Volcanic Zone, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Rosemary Hickey-Vargas, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2009
* USD 183,154.00

The petrogenesis of basaltic and andesitic magma at continental convergent
margins will be investigated using the Andean Central Southern Volcanic Zone,
Chile, as a natural laboratory. Problems to be addressed are: 1) How are diverse
basaltic magma generated concurrently from the sub-arc mantle wedge? and 2) How
is andesitic magma generated from basaltic magma in a continental arc setting? A
hypothesis, based on previous work, that large basaltic stratovolcanoes are
generated by flux melting of the mantle wedge, whereas small eruptive centers
(SEC) are decompression melts of "aged" subduction-modified mantle wedge, will
be tested. Basaltic rocks will be analyzed for fluid-mobile elements (B, Sb, Mo,
Sn), and U-series isotopes (230Th, 226Ra, 238U, 232Th). Melt inclusions in
olivines will be analyzed for volatile elements (H2O, CO2, Cl, S, F). These
results will help to determine the wedge composition during melting, and the
timing of melting and ascent of basaltic magma. Andesites from two volcanic
centers, exhibiting contrasting bulk rock trends of low-pressure fractional
crystallization of degassed magma and crustal assimilation and hornblende
crystallization, will be examined through analysis of minerals, groundmass and
melt inclusions using electron microprobe, ion-microprobe and laser ablation
ICPMS. U-series isotopes will be studied in selected basalt-andesite pairs to
compare the timing of distinct differentiation processes. Results will
contribute to an understanding of magma generation in continental arcs, and to
fundamental geologic/geochemical issues such as the processes and time scales
for mass transfer of subducted materials to the mantle wedge and to the
continental crust. An internet-based database of petrographic and chemical data
for the collection of SVZ rock samples housed at FIU will be developed as part
of this project, and research will integrate FIU undergraduates participating in
an ongoing NSF-funded project to enhance diversity in the geosciences. The PI
and students will attend the 2004 IAVCEI General Assembly in Pucon, Chile, and
further research interactions with Chilean colleagues.