* 0337191
* An Integrated Investigation of Ultrahigh-Pressure (?) Metamorphism, North Qaidam, China
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* An Yin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 260,297.00

A recent discovery by geologists is that continental crust could be buried as
deep as >90 km. This is a rather astonishing revelation because continental
crust is typically about 30-35 km thick, and to have it buried below a depth of
90 km would require the continental crust to be surrounded by denser and fluid
upper mantle rocks. This is rather difficult in physics because it requires the
lighter continental crust to be dragged into the denser mantle materials.
Exactly what forces have made the occurrence of this unusual process possible
remains an active debate. A team of geologists from the University of California
is currently investigating this problem. Because there are a variety of likely
processes that may have induced continental rocks to decent to great depths, it
is important to examine the rocks that bear the record of such deep burial in as
many places on earth as possible. Another reason for geologists to examine as
many cases of rock records of deep burial is that individual areas may not
preserve a complete record of the burial process. Therefore, geologists as
detectives, must use as many cases as possible to piece the complete history
together.

The study area that is currently under investigation is located in North Qaidam
of the northern Tibetan plateau. This is a desert region exhibiting excellent
exposure of rocks. Their research includes the following components. (1) Making
a detailed geologic map of rocks that record deep-burial processes. The geologic
map allows the naturally occurred geologic elements to be placed into a rigorous
spatial context. As a result, the geometrical relationships among the different
types of rocks can be systematically examined. (2) Sampling and petrologic
analysis. Numerous samples collected from the field area are currently being
analyzed for their mineralogical and chemical compositions using a variety of
the state-of-the-art techniques and instruments. This analysis determines the
exact depth that the rocks were buried and the temperature history associated
with the rock burial. (3) Determination of age, duration, and rate of rock
burial. This task is being carried out using the ion-microprobe and noble gas
analyses. The main purpose of this investigation is to determine how fast the
rock burial took place and how long it has taken to bring the rocks back to
Earth's surface. The final completion of this research project will allow
geologists to determine the forces that caused the down plunging of the light
continental crust into the denser upper mantle, which in turn will reveal the
fundamental aspects of physics and chemistry for the formation and evolution of
Earth's crust that is central to Human's day-to-day livelihood.