* 0337023
* Integrated Petrologic and Volcanologic Studies of the 1991 Eruption of Hudson Volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Roberto Scasso, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2009
* USD 117,851.00

Carey&lt;br/&gt;EAR 0337023&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The 1991 eruption of Hudson
volcano in Chile was one of the largest explosive events of the twentieth
century with a Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) of 5. The eruption transected a
thick glacier in the summit caldera resulting in significant magma/water
interactions. The objectives of the work will be to investigate the relationship
between the different magma compositions erupted in 1991 (basalt, trachyandesite
and rhyolite) and define the pressure, temperature and volatile conditions of
the magmatic system prior to eruption. In order to investigate potential modes
of fragmentation, particle morphologies will be quantitatively characterized
using fractal analysis and vesicularity indices. Measurements of grain size and
dispersal characteristics will be used in conjunction with observations of
eruption column height to evaluate the effectiveness of theoretical models for
tephra dispersal that are often used to reconstruct the dynamics of ancient
eruptions. The overall project is intended to 1) provide a more detailed
understanding of the volcanological processes of the 1991 Hudson eruption, 2)
examine the potential effects of glacial meltwater on the eruption, 3) develop a
model for the magmatic system beneath Hudson based on the petrologic and
geochemical features of the erupted products and 4) test existing tephra fallout
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In terms of broader impacts, the project will
involve the participation of graduate students in both the United States and
Argentina and will thus serve as a valuable exchange experience. In addition, an
important objective will be to foster more interest in volcanological research
in Argentina through this collaborative research. The P.I.s will share the
information gained at Hudson to the general public via a website constructed to
highlight the history, activity, and hazards associated with this volcano.
Research results will also be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses
taught by the P.I.s at their respective institutions. &lt;br/&gt;