* 0337743
* Collaborative Research:  High-Resolution Study of Subduction Zone Seismicity and Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* E.Robert Engdahl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2008
* USD 50,214.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Subduction zones are one of the most important
components of the Earth's plate tectonic system. This is reflected by the
existence of two major international science initiatives focused on subduction
zones: the Subduction Factory (SubFac) and the Seismogenic Zone Experiment
(SEIZE), both part of the MARGINS initiative. The SubFac initiative has
motivated substantial mineralogical and petrologic work on stability fields of
candidate slab constituents (especially hydrated phases) and their relation to
intermediate-depth seismicity. One working hypothesis is that the intermediate-
depth earthquakes are related to metamorphic dehydration reactions in the
subducting slab. Tests of this hypothesis are imperfect for four main reasons -
uncertainties in slab thermal structure, slab composition, slab seismic velocity
structure, and earthquake locations. The latter impacts earthquake locations and
also affects the association between seismic velocities in slab models and
candidate mineralogies.&lt;br/&gt; This project involves a multi-faceted
seismological investigation of subduction zones around the world. The principal
project goals are refining knowledge of the distribution of seismic activity
within down-going slabs and improving seismic models of their structure.
Analysis methods that are being applied in the project include (1) improved
waveform alignment techniques, (2) high-precision teleseismic and local
earthquake location, (3) associated focal mechanism determination, and (4)
double-difference (DD) seismic tomography. Methods 1, 2 and 3 are applied to a
broad suite of subduction zones, especially where the presence or absence of a
double seismic zone is in question. Methods 1 and 4 are applied to a selected
set of subduction zones where adequate local earthquake data are available -
Northern Chile, Alaska, Costa Rica, and Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt; Previous work
indicates that waveform cross-correlation (WCC) time delays verified with the
bispectrum waveform alignment method provide better relocation results than
those selected with the standard threshold criterion. This improvement is
expected for two main reasons. First, unreliable WCC time delay data can be
removed using bispectrum checking. Second, the bispectrum verification process
can provide more time delay measurements for two close earthquakes and thus more
control over their relative positions. Based on previous work with both
teleseismic and local events, close to an order of magnitude reduction in
relative location scatter can be expected.&lt;br/&gt; Refined waveform alignment
techniques and a new DD seismic tomography method are applied to local datasets
from several subduction zones to sharpen images of seismic velocity structure.
All of the proposed target areas have been the subject of one or more previous
local earthquake tomography studies, and thus have datasets suitable for DD
tomography. Based on initial results applying the DD tomography method to
catalog data from northern Honshu, the production of subduction zone seismic
images of unprecedented clarity can be anticipated.&lt;br/&gt; This project will
contribute in a fundamental way to the understanding of subduction zones and
related processes. Subduction zones are a fundamental feature of the plate
tectonic engine that drives the evolution of the Earth. The structure, state of
stress, and evolution of down-going slabs are topics that have received
substantial scientific attention yet remain relatively poorly understood. This
project will provide improved information on the distribution of seismic
activity within down-going slabs along with detailed models of the seismic
structure of the slab and overlying mantle wedge, which are critical constraints
for geodynamic and petrologic models. In particular, there are several competing
hypotheses about the nature of intermediate-depth earthquakes. Through a
detailed study of several different subduction zones, seismic evidence for or
against these hypotheses will be obtained.&lt;br/&gt; This project will take
advantage of the new NSF-supported Center for the Integration of Research
Teaching and Learning (CIRTL) at UW-Madison in preparing web-based outreach
materials based on the research results. Software and data will be shared with
other scientists, particularly by providing training on the use of DD
tomography.&lt;br/&gt;