* 0337634
* Collaborative Research: Pleistocene Hydrogeology of the Atlantic Continental Shelf, New England
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Mark Person, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2007
* USD 281,469.00

0337634&lt;br/&gt;Person&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many coastal settings around
the world the distribution of freshwater within continental shelf sediments is
not in equilibrium with modern sea level conditions. One of the most extreme
examples of this can be found in New England where groundwater within a shallow
Miocene sand about 150 km offshore Long Island, New York is remarkably fresh ( ~
3000 mg/l salinity). Closer to the mainland, a 512m borehole on Nantucket
Island, Massachusetts, contains freshwater (&lt; 2000 mg/l salinity) in all
permeable units. Thick confining units within this well have a parabolic
salinity profile consistent with ongoing vertical diffusion. Analytical
calculations suggest that diffusion began within the confining units as recently
as 21ka. Heads within the Cretaceous section beneath Nantucket Island are
overpressured by about 4 m above the local water table. We propose to use
mathematical modeling and environmental isotope analysis to determine whether
flushing of coastal plain sediments offshore New England was caused by: (1)
meteoric recharge during Pleistocene sea-level low-stands; (2) sub- ice-sheet
recharge during the last glacial maximum; (3) recharge from proglacial lakes;
(4) clay dehydration reactions; (5) vertical infiltration of freshwater
associated with local flow cells that may have developed on the continental
shelf during sea level low stands. A second goal of this research is to
determine whether the observed excess heads on Nantucket Island can be explained
by solely by Pleistocene sediment loading or whether more exotic mechanisms such
as clay dewatering reactions must be invoked. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will
construct a three-dimensional, variable-density groundwater flow, heat, and
solute mass transport model for the Atlantic continental shelf between Maine and
New Jersey. The code will be run on the Indiana University SP Supercomputer.
Direct simulation of isotope transport and groundwater residence times will be
compared to environmental isotopic data (C-13, C-14, O-18, H-2) collected from
wells tapping confined aquifers on the continental shelf. In order to constrain
the isotopic composition of pro-glacial lake recharge, we will drill one well to
extract pore fluids from lacustrine sediments 230 feet below land surface on
Nantucket Island. Pleistocene ice sheet, climatic, and sea-level reconstructions
will be used to constrain temporal variations in hydrologic, chemical, and
isotopic boundary and initial conditions. Flexural adjustments of land surface
topography during Wisconsin glaciations will be made to account for the effects
of ice sheet loading on relative sea level. &lt;br/&gt;