* 0337949
* Track 2, GK-12:  SFSU/SFUSD Science Teachers and Research Scholars Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Kathleen O'Sullivan, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,148,197.00

Title of Project: Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education (GK-12) Track 2:
SFSU/SFUSD Science Teachers and Research Scholars (STAR) Program
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: San Francisco State University (SFSU) ,College of
Science and Engineering(COSE)&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI.s: John Stubbs, PI; Kimberly
Tanner, Kathleen O.Sullivan, Gretchen &lt;br/&gt;Rollwagen Bollens, Co-PI.s
&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per year: 12 &lt;br/&gt;School District Partners:
San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD) &lt;br/&gt;Target audience of the
project (K-12 grade band): Middle and High schools ,Grades
6-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved:
Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Geosciences, Mathematics &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
STAR Program is focused on individual partnerships between SFSU science graduate
students and SFUSD teachers, working together on-site in middle and high schools
to deliver high quality inquiry-based science instruction. This Track 2 project
uses a three phase plan to institutionalize graduate student-teacher
partnerships by replacing the NSF GK-12 Graduate Teaching Fellows (GTF) over 5
years with COSE Graduate Research and Teaching Partners (GRTP). These GRTP will
be graduate students in the COSE who are working toward their Master's degree in
a science content discipline (Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Geosciences,
Mathematics), but have a new requirement added to their thesis, a Science
Education component. The GRTP will take a series of pedagogy courses and, as a
culminating experience, will participate in a 10 hour per week on-site
partnership with a middle or high school teacher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit: The project contributes to the knowledge base of the
emerging discipline of science education partnership, as well as pioneers
strategies and structures for the integration of partnership efforts into the
mission and goals of university science departments. The Fellows develop
pedagogical skills and K-12 education advocacy as part of their graduate
training. Teachers improve inquiry-based teaching methods and mentoring skills,
and K-12 students experience enhanced science learning and gain access to
diverse role models pursuing careers in science. The institutionalization plan
is a creative focus that imbues science education outreach into traditional
research degrees throughout the SFSU COSE.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The STAR Program partners, SFSU and the SFUSD, are both diverse urban
educational institutions. The 60,000+ students in the SFUSD, 55% of which are
from economically disadvantage families, represent over 50 ethnic backgrounds,
with no single group representing &gt;30% of the total student body. Moreover,
the STAR Program draws from a diverse graduate and undergraduate population at
SFSU in which ~20% are Latina/ African American students.Thus, this program will
directly influence K-16+ students traditionally underrepresented in science, as
well as disseminate a model for institutionalizing partnership programs to other
urban institutions. The project expands the current science education
partnership efforts at SFSU, establishes courses and reward structures that will
sustain the effort beyond the term of the grant, and initiates new academic
pathways in existing COSE Master's degree programs to involve graduate students
in science education partnership efforts as part of their scientific training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from Track 1: GTF (27 to date) have improved their
skill in devising effective science learning activities and have committed to
continued outreach in their careers. Partner teachers have a renewed sense of
enthusiasm for teaching science, documented in external evaluation surveys. The
GTF-teacher partners have made grade-specific adaptations of over 80 inquiry-
based lesson plans to date, with direct impact on ~1500 students in 5 middle
schools (4 inner city) and 1000 students in six high schools( 4 inner city). The
inner city schools have &gt;60% Latina/African American student populations. All
partner teachers(14 MS, 16 HS) report that students have significantly increased
interest in science activities as a direct result of GTF presence. From
experience gained in Track 1, procedures have evolved which establish effective
GTF-teacher partnerships prior to semester startup. Finally, the Track 1
experience has resulted in a very close partnership between the SFUSD and SFSU,
which will allow for rapid and smooth implementation of the Track 2 STAR
Program. Finally, the COSE administration has become a strong advocate of
institutionalizing the GK-12 model as a component of science graduate
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;