* 0337822
* World Forum on Collaborative NEES Research
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Robert Reitherman, NEES Consortium, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2006
* USD 49,344.00

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
initiated by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) in late 1999 is intended
to transform the nation's ability to carry out earthquake engineering research,
With over $80 million in new cutting-edge tools for experimentation, networking,
data curation and communication, the best minds in the earthquake engineering
field will be able to challenge and solve the most difficult impediments to
reducing the nation's vulnerability to earthquakes. NEES will fundamentally
change the processes by which earthquake engineering research is initiated and
performed, accelerate the generation and dissemination of basic knowledge,
facilitate the development of effective educational programs, minimize the lag
between knowledge development and its application, and hasten the attainment of
the nation's goals for earthquake loss reduction.

To accelerate attainment of NEES' goals, and avoid unnecessary duplication of
effort, US investigators need to have access to data and facilities available
internationally, and to be able to collaborate and share data with experts in
their or related fields around the world. The US earthquake engineering
community has already achieved a distinguished record of international
collaboration, which will be heightened through NEES. To promote international
collaborations, a World Forum on Collaborative Research in Earthquake
Engineering is being convened by the NEES Consortium, Inc. The NEES Consortium
is expected by NSF to be a central focal point for international contacts
regarding NEES, and has been encouraged to establish linkages and agreements
necessary to facilitate international collaboration. The purposes of the World
Forum are to convene in the US a representative international group of
researchers and research administrators to discuss opportunities for
collaboration with the NEES program as well as necessary linkages necessary to
facilitate this collaboration. The World Forum will focus identifying (1) major
international research programs and facilities; (2) policies or agreements
needed to facilitate international collaborative research; and (3)
infrastructure resources and standards needed to facilitate international
collaboration.

Intellectual Merit: The diversity of talents, backgrounds, experience and
disciplinary concerns represented within NEES provides an unparalleled stimulus
to intellectual inquiry and education. International collaboration is a key
aspect of realizing this vision.

Broader impacts resulting from proposed activity: The NEES program will provide
heightened opportunities for international cooperation. These are associated
with various activities, including conduct of international cooperative and
collaborative research programs, sharing of unique research facilities and
resources, development of international standards and capabilities for
documenting, archiving and sharing information, and exchange of personnel. The
pool of U.S. participants will include junior researchers, women and members of
underrepresented groups, and/or graduate or undergraduate students.