* 0337888
* Collaborative Research: Design, Modeling, and Testing of Electro-Optic Mechanical (EOM) Mooring Cables for Moored-Buoy Observatories
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Mark Chaffey, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 07/31/2006
* USD 648,549.00

P.I. Frye (WHOI) Proposal #: 0337893&lt;br/&gt;Collaborating Inst: Chaffey
(MBARI) Proposal #: 0337888&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative
Research: Design, Modeling, and Testing of Electro-Optic Mechanical (EOM)
Mooring Cables for Moored-Buoy Observatories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt; This proposal is for the development and testing of an
electro-optical-mechanical (EOM) mooring system for use with the global network
of moored buoy observatories. This EOM mooring cable and its related mechanical
and electro-optical components is a crucial technological element of moored buoy
observatories that at present is not well defined and is not available from
commercial manufacturers. The goal of the proposed work is to develop a reliable
and cost effective design for this key mooring component and the related
termination and connection hardware. It will be applicable to most of the global
network sites and reliable for periods of three to five years before replacement
or repair. Existing EOM mooring/cable designs are expensive, unreliable and not
designed for the full range of environmental conditions. In addition, reliable
and tested methods for terminating the cables, connecting them to buoys and
anchors and adjusting their buoyancy to meet the mooring configuration
requirements are not available. The PIs propose to develop and test a complete
and integrated mooring system for long term observatory applications that will
provide the capability for real-time data and power transfer between surface
buoys and submerged instruments arrays. The technical effort will include tasks
to: 1) design and perform numerical modeling of candidate mooring configurations
for moored buoy observatories, 2) develop laboratory test procedures that
reliably predict cable and termination performance in the field, 3) design EOM
cables, terminations, and strain- relief connection devices, 4) conduct
laboratory strength, bending and fatigue testing of cable specimens, 5) develop
techniques for predicting fatigue failure in synthetic EOM cables, 6) fabricate
and field test a prototype EOM cable and mooring system, 7) instrument the
mooring to collect engineering data on cable strain and bending to assess
mooring and cable performance, and 8) perform post-deployment testing of mooring
components to determine residual strength and compare these results to
predictions of the fatigue models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;