* 0337005
* In Situ Raman Spectroscopy Study for Phase Diagrams of Mantle Minerals at High Pressure and Temperature
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Sang-Heon Shim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 255,829.00

This project is to study the phase transitions and thermodynamic properties of
mantle minerals at in situ high pressure and temperature using a newly developed
combined Raman spectroscopy and laser heating system at his new laboratory.
Recent discrepancies in the phase transitions and thermodynamic properties of
important mantle minerals, such as Mg2SiO4, MgSiO3, and SiO2, demand a new
experimental approach. As part of this project, a new system will be developed
to enable Raman scattering measurements directly at high pressure-temperature in
a diamond-anvil cell. This makes in situ phase identification possible in
laboratory, which has been only possible at few synchrotron facilities. The new
system will be used to resolve some of the problems in conventional approaches.
The central goal of the project is to study the coesite-stishovite and the post-
stishovite transitions in SiO2, the post-spinel transition in Mg2SiO4, lower
mantle phase transitions and thermodynamic properties of MgSiO3 perovskite, and
tetragonal-cubic transition in CaSiO3 perovskite using the new combined
spectroscopy and laser heating system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research on phase transitions in mantle minerals will impact our understanding
of seismologic structures and dynamics of the mantle. The planned experiments in
this proposal will be conducted using the newly developed infrastructure for
research and training at MIT. This project will also impact research training
for undergraduate and graduate students at MIT. The research results from this
project will become a basis for a PhD thesis. The proposed research is expected
to provide research opportunities in experimental geophysics to undergraduate
students at MIT, which will be particularly important to attract a new
generation of researchers for mineral physics community.&lt;br/&gt;