* 0337513
* 2004 ACES International Workshop:  Understanding Earthquake Physics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 07/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

The APEC Cooperation for Earthquake Simulation (ACES), an international
collaboration of scientists that has been meeting and working together since
February 1999, represents a highly &lt;br/&gt;promising, new, Computational
Science and Information Technology (CSIT) approach to the &lt;br/&gt;problem of
understanding earthquake physics and dynamics. The purpose of this May 2004
workshop, with joint agency sponsorship by NASA is to review recent progress in
several key areas of science and technology related to earthquake simulations,
and to formulate joint plans for future progress. Work through ACES promotes
understanding of earthquake processes. &lt;br/&gt;Scales ranging from
microscopic to global, and timescales ranging from milliseconds to
&lt;br/&gt;millennia are considered. One goal of ACES is to integrate these
scales into comprehensive &lt;br/&gt;models that will improve understanding of
how earthquakes occur and how faults are &lt;br/&gt;interconnected. The work is
carried out through the application of computational technologies to
&lt;br/&gt;improve modeling and interpretation capabilities. ACES activities and
meetings involve students and academia from all of the participating countries.
The work involves research and mentoring of students, as well as their
participation in the working groups, workshops, and meetings. Many of the
results are also communicated to the broader public through press releases and
news stories.