* 0337839
* Track 2, GK-12: Building a Learning Community in Science and Mathematics through Educational Patnerships
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Michael Carr, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,961,533.00

Title of Project: Building a Learning Community in Science and Mathematics
through &lt;br/&gt;Educational Partnerships . Track II &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Kathleen Scott, PI;
Michael Carr, Jolie Cizewski, Warren Crown, Joseph Rosenstein &lt;br/&gt;Number
of Fellows per year (graduate vs. undergraduate): 8 graduate/4 undergraduate
&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: South Brunswick Township Public Schools;
Public Schools of &lt;br/&gt;Plainfield; Piscataway Township Schools; Old Bridge
Township Public Schools; Edison &lt;br/&gt;Township Public Schools
&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience of the project (K-12 grade-band): grades 6-9
&lt;br/&gt;Setting: urban, suburban &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines
involved: Mathematics, Physical Sciences, Biology, Computer &amp;
&lt;br/&gt;Information Sciences, Engineering, Geosciences, Environmental
Sciences &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Narrative: This Track II GK12 program builds
upon the experiences and achievements of our initial program to establish and
support learning communities among the university and local school districts. It
partners teachers and administrators from local school districts with Rutgers
&lt;br/&gt;University Fellows (graduate students and advanced undergraduate
students) and faculty in &lt;br/&gt;science, mathematics, engineering and
technology. School teams, each comprised of a Rutgers &lt;br/&gt;University STEM
graduate student and two or three middle school teachers, work together
&lt;br/&gt;to enhance their school curriculum and develop new hands-on science
and mathematics &lt;br/&gt;activities. Each team shares activities with a
partner team. Training is provided in a two-&lt;br/&gt;week Summer Institute
that includes team-building activities, development of team goals,
&lt;br/&gt;training in pedagogy for the Fellows, exposure to new material in
science and mathematics for &lt;br/&gt;the teachers, and preparation of a
standards-based hands-on activity. Throughout the academic &lt;br/&gt;year, the
teams work together to enhance existing curricula and develop innovative hands-
on &lt;br/&gt;activities. Fellows collaborate on developing and presenting
activities with their partner &lt;br/&gt;teams. Professional development of
teachers is offered during the Summer Institute, each &lt;br/&gt;semester at
Rutgers, and by the fellows in the schools. The Rutgers Science Bus Program,
where &lt;br/&gt;fellows showcase their most innovative activities, is
integrated with this project, enhances the dissemination of the results of this
GK12 program, and institutionalizes the involvement of graduate students in New
Jersey schools. Each of these activities is being evaluated throughout the
project by analysis of team portfolios, focus groups and surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project is resulting in enhanced
instruction of middle school students in STEM disciplines through student-
centered classroom experiences, refined methods of training teachers and fellows
to work collaboratively, and development of a graduate level teaching course
based on GK12 activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The graduate
and undergraduate fellows are enhancing their teaching and communication skills,
learning to work as members of a team, and will be better prepared for future
careers where they can build on their GK12 experiences. Teachers are becoming
knowledgeable about current trends in these disciplines as they increase their
interest in and knowledge about STEM. Middle school students, including urban
students from disadvantaged backgrounds, are experiencing the excitement and
relevance of science and mathematics, and becoming familiar with career
opportunities in these fields. The modeling of innovative hands-on inquiry
methods is becoming a part of each school's mathematics and science program. The
results of this project will be disseminated across the state by graduate
student involvement in the Science Bus Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant Outcomes from Track I: A total of twenty-seven
graduate fellows, seventeen undergraduate fellows, and forty-five teachers
formed nine teams each year to bring the excitement of contemporary mathematics
and science to middle school classrooms. The number of school districts expanded
from four in Year 1 to seven in Year 3. This program developed and implemented
methods to successfully recruit STEM graduate and undergraduate students and
teachers into the program. The program design incorporated a Summer Institute
training program, which included a unique series of team building activities and
workshops that prepared teams for their work in the schools, culminating with
the development of the team's first academic year activity. The program also
developed effective strategies for having second-year Graduate Fellows assume a
leadership role in ways that strengthened the program. Experienced fellows
presented activities developed with their team teachers to other participants at
the Summer Institute and at academic year follow up meetings, as well as
advising new fellows based on their experiences in the schools. During the
academic year program, all of the teams effectively collaborated in developing
activities that enhanced the curriculum of their school, related mathematics and
science to real life applications, and positively affected middle school student
attitudes toward mathematics and science. The team activities in the school
enhanced the teaching skills of the fellows and their ability to work
collaboratively. Teachers reported increasing their content knowledge, and
continue to use the activities developed by the team. This project is partially
supported by funds from the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;