* 0337789
* UBM: An Interdisciplinary Program in Mathematical Biology at New Mexico State University.
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* William Boecklen, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Boecklen&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and colleagues develop an
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;program in mathematical biology at New Mexico State
University&lt;br/&gt;that exposes biology and mathematics students to ongoing
research&lt;br/&gt;at the interface of biology and mathematics, and that
enhances&lt;br/&gt;the training of undergraduate students in mathematical
biology.&lt;br/&gt;They develop new courses in mathematical biology, establish
an&lt;br/&gt;intensive mentorship program that involves hands-on
research&lt;br/&gt;experience (field, laboratory, and computers), and
develop&lt;br/&gt;supplemental materials for undergraduate biology courses
that&lt;br/&gt;promote mathematical skills and critical thinking. They
generate&lt;br/&gt;three research projects suitable for undergraduate
participation:&lt;br/&gt;endophyte mediation of tri-trophic interactions in
Gambel's Oak,&lt;br/&gt;evolution of virulence in environmentally transmitted
parasites,&lt;br/&gt;and a chemostat model for metapopulation
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt; The project supports undergraduate training at New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;State University, an institution with large enrollments of
Native&lt;br/&gt;American and Hispanic students and that is officially
recognized&lt;br/&gt;as a Minority Serving Institution. In addition, the
project&lt;br/&gt;integrates research and education within the mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;biological sciences and serves as a springboard for
the&lt;br/&gt;development of an interdisciplinary program in
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;biology. It contributes directly to the training of
young&lt;br/&gt;scientists and mathematicians by supporting a graduate
student&lt;br/&gt;and four undergraduate students over two years, and
by&lt;br/&gt;interjecting cross-disciplinary elements into the biology
and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics curricula. This project is jointly supported by
the&lt;br/&gt;Biological Sciences directorate, the Education and
Human&lt;br/&gt;Resources directorate, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;Activities and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
in the&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical and Physical Sciences
directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;