* 0337398
* World of Ecology--The Extreme Zone
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Charles Kopczak, California Science Center Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 06/30/2011
* USD 2,203,901.00

The California Science Center (CSC) will develop the "World of Ecology," a
45,000 sq ft permanent exhibition that involves the large-scale fusion of
interactive science exhibits with the immersive live-habitat concept of zoos,
aquariums and botanical gardens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The focus for this project is the Extreme Zone, which will
explore how species adapt to their environment. It contains four habitats: the
Sonoran desert, deep sea hydrothermal vents, polar regions and rocky shores and
will include more than 259 terrestrial and aquatic animal and plant species. The
overall goal is to communicate that in every ecosystem the physical and living
worlds are connected and shaped by the same fundamental ecological principles.
It will be achieved through the integration of science center exhibits with
immersive habitats on a large scale. This approach provides an interesting model
for the science center, museum, zoo and botanical garden
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT &lt;br/&gt;The target audience is
the 1.6 million annual CSC visitors, 57% of whom are from minority populations,
with an emphasis on families, elementary and middle school students. In
addition, CSC will enhance the exhibition through outreach programs that serve
at-risk students. All audio-visual programs will be available in Spanish as well
as English, and a Spanish language audio guide will be produced. Collaboration
with the Santa Barbara Zoo will bring valuable expertise as well as enhance
prospects for dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;