* 0337195
* Modeling and Interpretation of Ultraprecise Crustal Deformation Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Duncan Carr Agnew, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2007
* USD 68,925.00

Modeling and Interpretation of Ultraprecise&lt;br/&gt;Crustal Deformation
Measurements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Duncan Carr Agnew&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing models to understand deformation signals observed over the
last decade with precise strainmeters in southern California; these can measure
very small changes in the ground over a range of periods from seconds to many
months. The models and interpretive methods will be used elsewhere, for example
to understand the signals to be be observed by the Plate Boundary Observatory
(PBO) component of EarthScope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data come from three
sites in southern California: (1) Pinyon Flat Observatory (PFO) at which we
operate three long-base strainmeters, two long-base tiltmeters, and many related
sensors; (2) Durmid Hill (DHL), where we operate a single long-base strainmeter
close to the San Andreas fault, and (3) Glendale, Los Angeles (GVS), where we
completed a single long-base strainmeter in the fall of
2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some signals come from known sources, so that
modeling them tests how adequate the usual simple models are for interpreting
deformations from earthquakes and other tectonic changes. These signals include
two types of surface loading near DHL (seiches and trains); for both of these
the strains for an elastic halfspace directly contradict the observations. They
also include the earth tides, which show significant distortions at both DHL and
GVS, from laterally varying elastic structure and rugged topography
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are also modelling less-understood
signals, such as short-term strain changes seen at DHL, which we interpret as
creep events on the San Andreas fault nearby, and changes related to the Landers
and Hector Mine earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;