* 0337757
*  Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Earthquake Fault Zones: Particle Dynamics Simulations and Laboratory Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Julia Morgan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2008
* USD 241,482.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory studies have contributed significantly to our
understanding of earthquake nucleation, dynamic rupture, and shear deformation,
however, results of these experiments are often difficult to scale up to natural
fault systems. Particle-based numerical models, which have successfully
reproduced a wide-range of observed laboratory and natural phenomena, can help.
This collaborative research project is designed to (a) improve and refine
existing particle-based numerical techniques to better replicate laboratory
experimental results, in particular, first and second order variations in
frictional strength and sliding stability, and (2) bridge the gap between these
improved models and natural faults, allowing investigation of the structural
evolution of complex tectonic faults&lt;br/&gt;This research involves parallel
laboratory and numerical experiments, conducted under a wide range of identical
initial and boundary conditions. The experimental and numerical results are
being compared, guiding updates of the numerical interparticle contact laws to
better reproduce realistic physico-chemical surface interactions. The primary
focus is on accurately constraining the base ("Byerlee's Law") coefficient of
sliding friction in the two sets of experiments, as well as its variation with
shear, dilation, and compaction. Focus will also include the 2nd-order
variations in friction with contact time and slip velocity, i.e., rate- and
state-dependent friction. The numerical models further help to isolate the
deformation mechanisms acting within the fault zones under different boundary
conditions, including shear localization, grain-boundary sliding, particle
rolling, translation, and fracture. Results of the proposed work will have
significant impact on understanding fault mechanics and earthquake physics
including fault interaction, earthquake triggering, and seismic hazard
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;