* 0337535
* Collaborative Research:  Interfacial Dynamics in Multi-Phase Flow and Transport Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* William Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2007
* USD 62,300.00

Gray&lt;br/&gt;0337535&lt;br/&gt;We propose to conduct an integrated study of
the role of interfacial characteristics (area, curvature, and thin films) on the
flow of fluids and solutes in porous media, with particular attention to how
these variables pertain to low saturation phenomena. The principle aim is to
image and quantify these interfacial characteristics with micron resolution and
subsequently use the measurements for comparison to and advancement of existing
and new theory, as well as new pore-scale numerical model developments. As a
result, we anticipate being able to improve both theory and numerical models to
better include interfacial features and obtain an improved understanding of
their role in multi-phase flow and transport. A thorough understanding of these
features at the pore scale will allow us to constrain multi-phase flow theory
such that a macroscale description can be achieved based on sound thermodynamic
principles. The direct solution of conservation equations at the microscale is
possible in theory, but impossible in practice for any real system due to the
complex geometry of the pore space. Thus it is necessary to employ an averaging
procedure to change the scale such that the governing equations can be applied.
A complex pore-scale geometry and its associated distribution of fluids can be
optimally simulated using the Lattice-Bolzmann approach, allowing us to
investigate the averaging procedure using numerical simulations in addition to
theory. By improving our insight at the pore-scale, using both theoretical and
numerical modeling approaches, we will be in a far better position for
developing a sound macroscopic description, which will be an intermediate step
in the direction of larger scale predictions, such as those pertaining to clean-
up of contaminants in the subsurface, improved agricultural irrigation and
fertilization practices, as well as issues in enhanced oil recovery.
&lt;br/&gt;Integration of experiments, theory, and simulation in a single
project offers the best hope of developing a sound fundamental basis on which to
build field scale models of multiphase flow that have predictive capability.
Measuring interfacial properties in such detail as suggested here has only
recently become technically feasible, and the incorporation of this information
in both theory and numerical models is going to provide critical new insight
into the processes involved. &lt;br/&gt;