* 0337055
* Sources of Mathematical Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Elizabeth Spelke, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,673,864.00

The proposed project continues current work to examine non-human primates,
children, and adults and investigate the foundations of mathematical thinking.
Past research has converged on the identification of three 'building-block
systems' on which mathematical thinking is based: 'exact small number system,'
'approximate large number system,' and the quantification and counting functions
of natural language. The proposed studies continue to investigate these three
systems in non-human primates, children, and adults through a variety of primate
and developmental research techniques (e.g., studies that investigate what
stimuli primates or infants can discriminate through measures of attention,
gaze, and so on.). The proposed research is a strong program of four strands of
research that investigate each of these foundational systems: (1) number
representation in monkeys, (2) number representation in preschool children
(e.g., examining learning first number words), (3) number representation in
adult humans (using mental addition, multiplication etc. to examine the
capabilities of the approximate large number and exact small number systems
without symbolic manipulation), and (4) mapping between linguistic and number
systems in children learning formal mathematics. The studies are well designed
and exciting in the attempt to pull together primate and developmental research
to construct a model of the foundational systems on which mathematical reasoning
is based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of the proposed
activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, the studies have the potential to
provide important contributions to the foundational theories that underlie
mathematical thinking. The synergy between the primate, infant, and preschool
developmental research has been exploited in past work to advance the state of
understanding of the basic cognitive mechanisms on which mathematical thinking
is built. The fourth strand of research attempts to make the connection to
education, looking at how the formal symbolic mathematics taught in school
brings together the three systems in these studies.&lt;br/&gt;