* 0338329
* Track 2, GK12: Technology Integration Partnerships: Bringing Emerging STEM Research into Grades 5-12 enabled by New Technologies
* EDU,DGE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Elizabeth Sklar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,774,219.00

Title of Project: Track 2, GK12: Technology Integration
Partnerships:&lt;br/&gt;Bringing Emerging STEM Research into Grades 5-12 enabled
by New Technologies&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Columbia University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-
PI: Jack McGourty/Susan Lowes/Elizabeth Sklar&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows/year:
6 Graduate and 6-9 Undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Manhattan
High School Superintendency, Bronx School District&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience:
Grades 5-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban&lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported Disciplines: All
STEM disciplines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narrative Summary: An integral objective
of this Track 2 project is advancing understanding of how to best integrate
instructional technologies into the classroom. Teams of Fellows, Faculty, and
K-12 teachers are investigating how to best integrate instructional technologies
in support of standards based STEM topics within classroom imposed time, space
and resource limitations. Using applied research techniques, all partnerships
investigate, test, and evaluate how these technologies improve teaching and
enhance student motivation and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The Technology Integration Partnership (YIP) project has four major
goals: (1) to increase the access to, and the integration of, new technologies
into the curriculum of STEM teachers who are working in urban environments; (2)
to deepen the science, math and engineering content knowledge of these teachers;
(3) to bring the excitement of emerging STEM research to 5th-12th grade
students, offering them a window into future academic and career paths; and (4)
to interest and excite STEM graduate students about education, giving them
unique opportunities to improve their teaching and communication skills. Fellow
and Teacher partners are expanding knowledge concerning best practices
concerning technology in the classroom by developing the three technologies
(probeware, robotics, and simulations) applied in the Track 1 project and by
introducing three additional technologies (engineering design applications,
remote lab experimentation, and educational games).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project's outcomes will provide a
model of how engineering and applied science faculty and students can partner
with urban school districts to support the integration of technology into the
classroom in the service of standard-based curriculum on emerging STEM topics.
All best practices and technology-enabled lessons will be disseminated through
the project's established web site and lesson plans database
(http://tip.columbia.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from Track 1: Eight
Fellows and over 30 K-12 teachers have collaborated over the three-year period.
The Fellow-teacher partnerships have clearly benefited both Fellows and
teachers. Each Fellow and cooperating teacher developed between two and four
curriculum units that use technology to address difficult-to-teach topics in the
standard curriculum for that grade level, tested them in the classroom and
revised them for posting on the website. Pre- and post assessments developed by
Fellows-Teachers College faculty teams have demonstrated significant K-12
student learning of abstract math and science concepts as a result of using
these new technologies in comparison with more traditional methods of
instruction. Teachers report that Fellows have enriched the curriculum with
their knowledge of the subject areas being taught, from global warming to bridge
building to mechanical engineering to computer programming, in a way that would
not have been possible without their expertise. They have been able to introduce
topics and technologies that they would not otherwise have had the time or the
confidence to try in their classrooms; and have gained access to badly needed
resources, including hardware, technology expertise and content knowledge.
Fellows' teaching skills have improved dramatically, as has their ability to
explain the importance of their research to a non-specialist audience. Several
undergraduates and one Fellow have embarked on a career path toward teaching in
urban K-12 schools. This project is receiving partial support from the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;