* 0338324
* Track 1, GK-12:  Computer Science Resources for Memphis Area High Schools
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Sajjan Shiva, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,659,778.00

Title of Project: Computer Science Resources for Memphis Area High
Schools&lt;br/&gt;Institution: The University of Memphis, Memphis,
TN&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Linda Sherrell (PI), Lee McCauley, and Sajjan
Shiva&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per year: Six graduate Fellows the first year,
nine graduate Fellows and one undergraduate Fellow for the second and third
years&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Memphis City Schools and Shelby County
Schools&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience of the project: Grades 9-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Urban, Suburban&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved: Computer
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narrative Summary: This project, which is a
partnership between the school districts in the Memphis metropolitan area and
the University of Memphis, enhances the curriculum of high school programming
courses. Fellows majoring in computer science assist participating teachers by
presenting modules that emphasize important skills such as problem-solving,
object-oriented design, teamwork, and software development processes.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Prior to each academic year, teachers
and Fellows attend two summer workshops to receive instruction and to preview
the modules for the coming year. Innovative aspects include the use of
AgentSheets, a conceptual modeling tool, to teach introductory programming
concepts and the use of both the game Mind Rover and Lego Robots to introduce
object-oriented programming. Fellows receive additional instruction throughout
the year from the PIs and create some of their own lesson plans and examples.
The high school students are motivated to learn concepts common to all object-
oriented programming languages through activities that are both challenging and
fun. Furthermore, students demonstrate their understanding of concepts by
participating in a month-long Programming Challenge in which they work in teams
to plan, design, implement, test, and document a software project. Students may
participate in multiple categories and they receive valuable feedback when they
present their work to judges from both academia and local software
firms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impacts of this project
are reflected in the benefits to each participant. Fellows are improving their
communication skills and are able to teach introductory computer science and
software engineering concepts using innovative techniques, thereby better
preparing the Fellows for future corporate or academic positions. Participating
teachers, most of whom do not have formal training in computer science, are
building on their current knowledge base by attending workshops and interacting
with Fellows who are computer science majors. High school students associated
with the project have a better understanding of the field of computer science,
which will help them to make informed decisions about their future careers. The
benefits to schools have been twofold: professional development activities for
participating teachers and a higher quality program for students enrolled in
computer courses. The higher education partners are also benefiting from the
project because the project facilitates collaboration between the computer
science faculty and secondary teachers. Furthermore, the Fellowships are helping
the University of Memphis to offer more assistance to outstanding students
interested in computer science. &lt;br/&gt;