* 0338364
* Acquisition and Analysis of Gravity Wave Image Data for Investigating Antarctic Mesospheric Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Michael Taylor, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 05/31/2008
* USD 155,139.00

This proposal is for data acquisition and in-depth data analysis that will
utilize existing and new measurements from two key sites in Antarctica to
investigate the climatology of short-period (&lt;1 hour) mesospheric gravity
waves at high-latitudes and to study their propagation and most copious sources.
The proposed program is a follow on to a pilot research, jointly funded by the
NSF Office of Polar Programs and the U.K. British Antarctic Survey, to
investigate the potential of imaging gravity waves from Antarctica. An all-sky
multi-wavelength CCD imager was developed at Utah State University and deployed
at Halley Station, Antarctica (76 S) in December 1999 and automatic measurements
were initiated in March 2000. The USU/BAS imager has operated very successfully
for the past three Austral winters (April-September) providing the first long-
term (~5 month/season) image measurement of small-scale gravity wave morphology
and dynamics over the Antarctic continent. In 2002, the camera was relocated to
Rothera Station (67 S) on the Antarctic Peninsula in preparation for new
coordinated measurements using a suite of specialized instrumentation including
an Fe temperature lidar, a Bomem OH Interferometer and an MF radar for
simultaneous wind measurements. Measurements at these two sites provide a
diverse sample of high-latitude gravity wave activity and sources, enabling the
investigation of orographic forcing and long-distance ducted wave propagation.
The isolated location of Halley on the vast Brunt Ice Shelf greatly removed from
localized convective sources that prevail at mid-latitudes and several thousand
kilometers from the Antarctic Mountain Range contrasts markedly with Rothera
Station which is located on a potential "knife edge" wave generator caused by
strong winter polar vortex winds blowing over the near-vertical peninsula cliffs
rising as high as 2 km above sea level. As part of our ongoing collaborative
program with BAS the operation and maintenance of the all-sky camera is covered
by BAS. In this proposal support is requested to continue this exciting
collaborative measurements supporting a graduate student for the data analysis.