* 0338279
* Gneiss Dome architecture: Investigation of Form and Process in the Fosdick Mountains, W. Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Christine Siddoway, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2008
* USD 158,046.00

This project will study migmatite domes found in the Fosdick Mountains of the
Ford Ranges, western Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica. This area offers unique,
three-dimensional exposures that may offer new insight into dome formation,
which is a fundamental process of mountain building. These domes are derived
from sedimentary and plutonic protoliths that are complexly interfolded at
decimeter to kilometer scales. Preliminary findings from geobarometry and U-Pb
monazite dating of anatexite suggest that peak metamorphism was underway at 105
Ma at crustal depths of ~25 km, followed by decompression as the Fosdick dome
was emplaced to 16-17 km, or possibly as low as 8.5 km, in the crust by 99 Ma.
Near-isothermal conditions were maintained during ascent, favorable for
producing substantial volumes of melt through biotite-dehydration melting. This
dome has been interpreted as a product of extensional exhumation. This is a
viable interpretation from the regional standpoint, because the dome was
emplaced in mid-Cretaceous time during the rapid onset of divergent tectonics
along the proto- Pacific margin of Gondwana. However, the complex internal
structures of the Fosdick Mountains have yet to be considered and may be more
consistent with alternative intepretations such as upward extrusion within a
contractional setting or lateral flow within a transcurrent attachment zone.
This proposal is for detailed structural analysis, paired with
geothermobarometry and geochronology, to determine the flow behavior and
structural style that produced the internal architecture of the Fosdick dome.
The results will improve our general understanding of the role of gneiss domes
in transferring material and heat during mountain-building, and will
characterize the behavior of the middle crust during a time of rapid transition
from divergent to convergent tectonics along the active margin of Gondwana. In
terms of broader impacts, this work will train undergraduate and graduate
students, and involve them as collaborators in the development of curricular
materials. It will also foster mentoring relationships between graduate and
undergraduate students.

