* 0338281
* Collaborative Research:     Dynamic Models for the Tectonic Evolution of the Transantarctic Mountains and the Ross Embayment
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Roger Buck, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2007
* USD 279,300.00

This is a proposal to address many aspects of the formation of the
Transantarctic Mountains (TAM) and the Ross Embayment, which (as documented in
the geologic record) remain poorly understood, little studied or controversial.
For example, the volume of uplifted rocks of the TAM is about five times greater
than any other rift flank uplift worldwide; or it remains unclear why the larger
magnitude extension during the Cretaceous produced relatively little denudation
in the TAM, while the minor Cenozoic extension produced more. The wide rifting
of the Ross Embayment in the Cretaceous with accompanying TAM denudation has not
yet been modeled, and existing models explain only the main Cenozoic uplift
phase of the TAM. New constraints on the geology history and the density and
seismic structure of the TAM and Ross Embayment combined with recently improved
numerical techniques prompt to propose evaluation of ideas for the tectonic and
erosional development of the region using dynamic models of lithospheric
deformation. It is now possible to combine numerical models of large-scale (100
to 1000 kilometers) mechanical and thermal evolution of the lithosphere with
consideration of the small-scale development of individual faults. The small-
scale deformation capability means that geologic data, like fission track
studies, can be compared to model predictions. The proposed approach is to first
study models for separate components of the problems that may relate to the
tectonic development of the TAM and Ross Embayment, and then integrate the
results later. The tight integration of geophysical and geological data with
numerical models will be critical to determine which sequence of processes is
likely to have shaped the region. The proposal outcome will provide the
framework for a better understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the
formation of the TAM and the mechanical behavior of the Ross Embayment
lithosphere. The proposal objectives match with science goals of the
international Antarctic Margin Drilling initiative (ANDRILL), as well as may
provide a valuable input to the scientific goals of the new international
research initiative on Antarctic Climate Evolution (ACE). Generally, the
proposed modeling will contribute to the understanding of geologic processes and
how such a long and high mountain range was formed and maintained. Broader
impacts of this proposal include providing an opportunity for graduate students
to participate in the modeling project, to include summer students in the
ongoing analysis through the Lamont summer intern program, give presentations at
the annual Open House that are usually well attended by the public. The team
plans to create an educational Web site with model animations and make the
proposed research a part of outreach activities at both Lamont and Syracuse
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;