* 0338401
* US-France Joint Workshop: From Spatial Constraint to Socio-Economic Organization: The Settlement and Technology of Magdalenian Hunters at Verberie, Marcoux, France, February 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2007
* James Enloe, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2007
* USD 19,000.00

0338401&lt;br/&gt;Zubrow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award will support
U.S. participation in a U.S.-France joint workshop on the behavioral and social
organization of hunter-gatherer camps at Verberie, France and other similar
Paleolithic sites. The workshop, co-organized by Ezra Zubrow of the State
University of New York in Buffalo and Francoise Audouze of the Universite de
Paris X, will take place in Marcoux, France, February 2004. Verberie is a late
Magdalenian open-air site located at the bottom of the Oise river valley, just
north of Paris. The site was occupied between 12,900 and 12,400 years ago. A GIS
research program, initiated in 2002, has utilized new techniques to clarify the
"patterns of domesticity." Verberie and other similar sites represent the best
data available on Upper Paleolithic behavioral and social organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address: (1) theoretical issues
regarding the interpretation of Paleolithic behavior and social organization
from archaeological data; (2) social divisions relating to age, gender and
kinship based on the spatial distribution of activities and (3) the larger
social context of the Verberie in the European Upper Paleolithic. A web site and
a small museum display describing the results of the workshop will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will advance understanding of how
people organized their communities and domestic patterns in the Upper
Paleolithic of Europe. The workshop also provides an opportunity for graduate
students to present their research and develop international connections early
in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique(CNRS). NSF will support the travel of U.S. participants to France
and the CNRS will support the participation of the French
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;