* 0338482
* Interactive Teaching in Undergraduate Economics Courses:  Bridging the Gap between Current and Best Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* William Walstad, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2010
* USD 674,928.00

This project is disseminating best interactive learning practices and materials
to undergraduate economics instructors, especially junior faculty. The project
is of vital importance because research shows that most economics instructors do
not use interactive learning strategies and teach their courses almost
exclusively with lecture. As a consequence, few undergraduates in economics
courses benefit from the significant contributions that interactive teaching
methods and materials can make to student learning. &lt;br/&gt;The project is
being carried out in three phases. In Phase 1, participants attend a workshop
where they work in teams to learn about interactive learning strategies and
materials. In Phase 2, participants return to their institutions, re-think their
teaching plans, receive on-line supplemental instruction for interactive
strategies that they plan to use, and implement them. In Phase 3, participants
have new opportunities to participate in a community of teaching scholars. They
share teaching experiences, present papers and author research articles on
teaching and learning, and participate in teaching conferences. The project
provides participants with important incentives to follow through on what they
learn and revise their teaching practices. &lt;br/&gt;The project provides
valuable training to hundreds of economic instructors and improved education to
over 100,000 economics students. There is broad support for the project among
department chairs and other economists at a variety of institutions. It is co-
sponsored with the Committee on Economic Education of the American Economic
Association (AEA). Special emphasis is being given to recruiting minorities and
women for the project in cooperation with the AEA's Committee on the Status of
Women in the Economics Profession and its Committee on the Status of Minority
Groups in the Economics Profession. &lt;br/&gt;