* 0338566
* Minority Post Doctoral Research Starter Grant: Understanding Post Colonization Recovery of Genetic Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Paul Barber, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This study examines the ability of populations to reacquire normal levels of
genetic diversity genetic following a recolonization event. Populations of
multiple marine species will be compared from 1) Krakatau, a volcanic island
colonized less than 120 years ago following a catastrophic eruption, 2) the
Sunda Shelf colonized 10,000 years after postglacial sea level rise, and 3)
Manado Bay where populations have remained largely unaffected by vulcanism or
sea level fluctuations. DNA sequencing will be employed to estimate levels of
genetic diversity within populations of each species from each region to
determine the effect of time, dispersal ability, and generation time on the
reacquisition of genetic diversity.

Genetic diversity is fundamental to the ability of a population to respond to
environmental stress and perturbations and is an essential component of
biological diversity. The maintenance of genetic diversity in populations is a
primary concern of both conservationists and resource managers. Understanding
how populations acquire genetic diversity, as well as the variables affecting
this process, is critical to developing effective management strategies to
preserve both genetic and biological diversity. The results of this study will
provide insight into how populations may recover following a severe reduction in
population size or reintroduction as well as how managers might facilitate the
reacquisition of genetic diversity within populations.