* 0338537
* SBIR Phase I: A Unified Coordinates Approach to Gridless Computation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Lei Tang, ZONA TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,792.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop an innovative unified coordinates approach to gridless computation.
Instead of using the spatially fixed Eulerian coordinate system as in most
Computional Fluid Dynamics (CFD) computation, the proposed unified coordinates
approach is based on a generalized coordinate system which moves with velocity
hq with q as the velocity of fluid particles and h as a free function. It
includes the Eulerian coordinates approach as a special case when h=0 and the
Lagrangian when h=1. Choosing h to preserve grid orthogonality can result in a
coordinate system which avoids not only excessive numerical diffusion across
slip lines as in the Eulerian coordinates but also severe grid deformation as in
the Lagrangian coordinates. Unlike Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) approach,
no remapping from the distorted Lagrangian grid onto the spatially fixed
Eulerian grid is required. All computations are done entirely in the transformed
space without a staggered grid. More importantly, using the unified coordinates,
the computational grid is generated simultaneously by the flow (more precisely
by the movement of the pseudo particles) while computing the flow field.
Therefore, the computational grid is no longer a required input for CFD
computation and gridless CFD computation becomes feasible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional CFD methods are based on the spatially
fixed Eulerian coordinates approach, in which body-fitted computational grids
are needed a priori to accurately implement surface boundary conditions. The
generation of body-fitted grids around complicated geometries in real
applications is a very tedious process, which requires substantial human
intervention and hence experience and specialized training, making CFD as
somewhat of an art. The proposed SBIR effort will resolve this problem and
significantly facilitate the use of CFD in manufacturing industry as a design
tool. &lt;br/&gt;