* 0338216
* K-12 Project-Based Learning Partnership Program
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Michael H. Temkin, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2010
* USD 2,071,513.00

This Track 2, GK-12 project builds upon existing relationships and
infrastructure developed in the previous GK-12 project to further develop and
institutional the Project-Based Learning (PBL) approach with nine school
districts in northern New York along with faculty collaboration from St.
Lawrence University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to extensive
broader impacts, with K-12 students, teachers, Fellows, faculty advisors and
institutions benefiting from the partnership between both universities and the
nine school districts involved. It is anticipated that students will have a
greater interest and competence in STEM disciplines; teachers to have renewed
enthusiasm and new approaches for teaching STEM in an integrated and PBL
approach; Fellows to have significantly improved teaching and communications
skills; and college faculty to have the facility and resources to integrate K-12
PBL outreach into their own research projects. The schools included within this
project include one with a very high population (57%) of Native Americans and
inner city schools with a significant proportion (50%) of students from groups
currently underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the
intellectual merit of the proposal is that through the extensive evaluation and
longitudinal outcomes assessments program included, data to analyze the benefits
of the PBL approach at lower levels will be generated and disseminated, leading
to a better understanding of suitable pedagogical approaches required to meet
the national need for STEM literacy among all and increased numbers entering
these professions. This project is receiving partial support from the
Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from Prior Project:
Since the initial GK-12 project began in 1999, 26 Fellows have worked primarily
with 11 teachers from 4 separate school districts helping to introduce Problem
Based Learning into the classroom in coordination with existing New York State
science standards. Twenty other teachers have been involved in a variety of
related workshops. The program has a 31% rate of funding female graduate Fellows
versus a national average of approximately 15% women in engineering graduate
program. All 13 undergraduate Fellows and 12 of the 13 graduate Fellows have
graduated on time. Modules, matched to New York State Learning Standards,
dealing with vermiculite composting and solid waste recycling have been
developed and pilot tested. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title: Track 2, GK-12
Project-Based Learning Partnership Program Officer Review Institution: Clarkson
University with St. Lawrence University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Susan E. Powers
(PI), Peter Turner and Esther Oey (co-PIs)&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: 9
school districts in northern New York&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per Year: 7
graduate students and 7 advanced undergraduate students (yr. 1, then
fewer)&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: Primarily middle school with some high school
projects&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Rural&lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported Disciplines:
Engineering, mathematics and physical sciences, biological sciences&lt;br/&gt;