* 0338445
* SGER:  Geotechnical Site Characterization for Instrumented Excavation Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Paul Mayne, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2005
* USD 38,919.00

In this SGER, a geotechnical site characterization program will be performed by
Georgia Tech (GT) using in-situ seismic piezocone (SCPTu) and seismic flat plate
dilatometer tests (SDMT) to capture the geostratigraphy, soil properties, and
small-strain stiffness at three sites. Two sites involve specially-instrumented
large excavations at the Ford Design Center on the Northwestern University
campus and the Prentice Women's Hospital in downtown Chicago. The third site is
the National Geotechnical Experimentation Site (NGES) on the western shore of
Lake Michigan. These projects are selected in collaboration with a joint NSF
project by Northwestern University (NU) and the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) to develop new integrated tools to predict, monitor and
control ground movements associated with construction of supported excavations.
Since September 2002, the NU-UIUC activities have focused on collecting and
analyzing detailed field performance data at several excavations in the Chicago
area, developing and evaluating new methods to track excavation progress, and
developing numerical techniques to automatically update predictions of
performance of the excavation support system. Block and piston samples have been
collected for laboratory testing using internally-mounted local strain sensors
to capture the nonlinear stress-strain-strength behavior of the soft clay soils.
Of particular merit is the inclusion of the small-strain shear modulus (Gmax =
G0) in the numerical scheme as a key initial state parameter in order to
realistically model the induced strains and stresses within the soil mass
surrounding the excavations. Current available commercial packages (e.g.,
PLAXIS, CRISP, FLAC, SV-Solid) do not include any built-in algorithms to start
the constitutive nonlinear stress-strain-strength curves of the soil regions
from the initial fundamental G0 stiffness. Yet, natural soil deposits and
formations all originate from an initial state condition specified by their in-
place void ratio (e0), vertical stress (svo), hydrostatic porewater pressure
(uo), lateral stress coefficient (K0), and small-strain stiffness (G0 = rT Vs2).
While laboratory tests such as resonant column and bender elements can provide
evaluations of G0, only discrete values are obtained and sample disturbance
issues often arise. Therefore, in-situ soil parameters and properties are
desired, particularly using geophysical tests via the planned sets of SCPTu and
SDMT soundings and derived shear wave velocity profiles. Since the Evanston NGES
is located nearby, the GT team will calibrate their new true-interval downhole
seismic array in a SDMT deployment with standardized test data already available
and documented at the NGES. At each of the three test sites, a series of 3 to 6
SCPTu and SDMT soundings will be performed to optimize data field collection.
Based on prior information, the sites are underlain by sand and/or fill
overlying soft clayey silts, stiffer clays, and tills (Finno, 1989 GSP 23; 2000,
GSP 93). At select soundings, detailed shear wave profiles can be obtained by
frequent true-interval surveys. Working with Professor Rich Finno of NU and
Professor Yousef Hashash of UIUC, the interpretation of relevant parameters
?e.g., g??f', su, OCR, K0, E', Eu) will be evaluated for input into the
numerical modeling. In terms of Intellectual Merit, the intended goals involve
the optimized collection of site-specific data using hybrid tests (SCPTu and
SDMT) which combine penetration type probes with geophysical methods to
ascertain multiple measurements in a single sounding. In-situ shear wave
profiles will allow the utilization of small-strain stiffness for the initial
portion of the stress-strain-strength curves of soil layers within the updated
FEM algorithms by NU-UIUC. In terms of Broader Impacts, this SGER seeks to
establish a collaborative effort between NU-UIUC-GT on a major initiative
towards a fully-integrated system of laboratory and in-situ testing, numerical
finite element simulation, and continued feedback from embedded-wireless field
sensors within the controlled excavations during construction. The utilization
of small-strain stiffness is paramount to reflecting the true anticipated
response of the construction operations. The complementary nature of the
laboratory testing and cone/dilatometer/shear wave testing in calibration with
full-scale field performance of walls and supports during excavation and
detailed modeling can benefit future urban projects and infrastructure
redevelopments in the US. Finlaly, during field visits to the NU and UIUC
campuses, the GT team will offer demonstrations of in-situ techniques to
graduate students and interested parties.

