* 0338322
* Track 2: GK-12 Program in Mathematics at the University of Washington
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2004,03/31/2011
* Loyce Adams, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 03/31/2011
* USD 2,228,224.00

Title: GK-12 Program in Mathematics &lt;br/&gt;Fellows:
10-15&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Washington &lt;br/&gt;NSF discipline:
Math&lt;br/&gt;PI: Loyce Adams &lt;br/&gt;District Partners: Northshore &amp;
Seattle&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Lillian McDermott, Virginia Warfield &lt;br/&gt;Non-
profit Partner: University Child Development School (UCDS)&lt;br/&gt;Audience:
Northshore: 5-9 (Suburban-Rural) Seattle: K-5 (Urban)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project continues and expands the GK-12 Program in Mathematics at the University
of Washington by leveraging several existing K-12 outreach programs to help
increase the subject-matter understanding of pre-college mathematics teachers
and their students while increasing the Fellows' understanding of teaching and
learning. Ten to fifteen graduate students are placed in local elementary and
junior high school math classrooms. Fellows receive initial preparation in
instructional methods of inquiry-based mathematics by McDermott (co-PI) and the
Physics Education Group followed by Developing Mathematical Ideas sessions to
analyze student thinking directed by Warfield, Co-PI of the Expanding a
Community of Mathematics Learners, a local systemic change project. Fellows work
with classroom teachers in a weeklong summer math workshop taught by our UCDS
partners and returning GK-12 Fellows. They observe the inquiry-method in actual
UCDS math classrooms, debrief bi-weekly as a cohort, and receive follow-up
mentoring by the faculty. The Track-2 award investigates whether the current
GK-12 model is replicable and sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Washington's approach to GK-12 is novel in many ways. They have a
dedicated team that includes practicing teachers who provide a teacher-to-
teacher mentorship that complements the fellow-to-teacher relationship. This
feature also allows for more fellow mentoring in the areas of classroom
management and pedagogy. They also provide the fellow an opportunity to see how
children develop their mathematical thinking from the elementary to the middle
school years by placing them with both elementary and junior high teachers in a
learning community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and Example of Outcomes
from Prior Projects: Well-prepared fellows that are placed in public school
classrooms will be more inclined to understand the issues in math achievement
and know how to become productively involved in K-12 after leaving the
University. For example, one of their graduating fellows this year has accepted
a tenure-track job at a University where he plans to set up a similar outreach
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported by the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;