* 0338662
* SGER:  Promoting Free Market and Open Source Software Innovation Through Better Licensing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Geoffrey Parker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2005
* USD 50,490.00

This SGER project will investigate the socially optimal tradeoffs between open
and closed software licensing. In the context of software development, where
there are complex interactions among economic vs. non-economic and controlled
vs. free access, this work seeks to articulate the best use of software licenses
that balance legitimate business interests against public interest in enhanced
social welfare. There are two kinds of scientific contribution. The first is an
expanded theory of two-sided network effects that explores how opening a
software platform to complementary investment can benefit both those who develop
and those who consume. Under this framework, a set of model parameters might be
tuned so as to generalize certain existing licenses, while suggesting an
opportunity space for new kinds of licenses. The second contribution is the
coding of a browser-accessible model that allows dynamic simulation of the many
tradeoffs involved. Openness of the models and deliverables help ensure
relevance and accuracy of results. The social benefit of successful output is
the potential to improve the quantity, accessibility, and growth of software, a
valuable resource for users and developers, non-profits and for-profits
alike.&lt;br/&gt;