* 0338359
* Methyl chloride and methyl bromide in Antarctic ice cores
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2007
* USD 456,927.00

This award supports the analysis, in Antarctic ice cores, of the ozone depleting
substances methyl bromide (CH3Br) and methyl chloride (CH3Cl), and the sulfur-
containing gas, carbonyl sulfide (OCS). The broad scientific goal is to assess
the level and variability of these gases in the preindustrial atmosphere. This
information will allow testing of current models for sources and sinks of these
gases from the atmosphere, and to indirectly assess the impact of anthropogenic
activities on their biogeochemical cycles. Longer-term records will shed light
on the climatic sensitivity of the atmospheric burden of these gases, and
ultimately on the biogeochemical processes controlling them. These gases are
present in ice at parts per trillion levels, and the current database consists
entirely of a small number of measurements made in from a shallow ice core from
Siple Dome, Antarctica. This project will involve studies of ice core samples
from three Antarctic sites: Siple Station, Siple Dome, and South Pole. The
sampling strategy is designed to accomplish several objectives: 1) to verify the
atmospheric mixing ratios previously observed in shallow Siple Dome ice for OCS,
CH3Br, and CH3Cl at sites with very different accumulation rates and surface
temperatures; 2) to obtain a well-dated, high resolution record from a high
accumulation rate site (Siple Station), that can provide overlap in mean gas age
with Antarctic firn air samples; 3) explore Holocene variability in trace gas
mixing ratios; and 4) to make the first measurements of these trace gases in
Antarctic glacial ice. In terms of broader impact on society, this research will
help to provide a stronger scientific basis for policy decisions regulating the
production and use of ozone-depleting and climate-active gases. Specifically,
the methyl bromide results will contribute to the current debate on the impact
of recent regulation (via the Montreal Protocol and its Amendments) on
atmospheric levels. Determination of pre-industrial atmospheric variability of
ozone-depleting substances will help place more realistic constraints on
scenarios used for future projections of stratospheric ozone and its climatic
impacts. This research will involve the participation of both graduate and
undergraduate students.