* 0338192
* Curation of National Antarctic Collections
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,572,220.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports continued operation of the Antarctic Marine
Geology Research Facility (AMGRF) at Florida State University. AMGRF, the
largest repository of Southern Ocean piston cores in the world, has been
conducting marine geological research and receiving, describing, and archiving
sediment cores for over 30 years. The AMGRF provides numerous services to the
Antarctic and marine geology and geophysics community. This award provides
operating funds not only to continue in these efforts but also to provide the
means to make significant improvements in (1) Facility services and equipment
for the benefit of the Antarctic marine geology community and (2) education and
outreach programs to students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Items
1-4 below speak to the Intellectual Merits of this proposal and Item 5 discusses
the Broader Impacts of AMGRF activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The services and
programs provided by the Facility include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Technical Service - The
Antarctic Marine Geology Research Facility offers a variety of services to
Principal Investigators, most at no direct cost to the user. These services
including standard core processing (e.g., core splitting, Multi-sensor track
analyses, core photography, whole-core x-rays, etc), core description
publications (macroscopic and microscopic), and core sampling. In addition,
Facility personnel provide curatorial support services to field-based projects
upon request (e.g., the Cape Roberts Project, SHALDRIL, ANDRILL).&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Core Curation - The AMGRF archives and curates more than 20,000 meters of cored
sediment (over 6500 cores) and over 5000 kg of dredge, trawl, and grab samples
collected by United States Antarctic Program (USAP) vessels. The Facility also
archives and curates nearly 3000 meters of rotary-cored material from programs
such as the Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP), Cenozoic Investigations of the
Ross Sea (CIROS), and the Cape Roberts Project (CRP).&lt;br/&gt;(3) Core and
Sample Database - The AMGRF maintains a core and sample database that can be
accessed through the Facility's World Wide Web server. At present, this
searchable database contains basic information (lat, long, water depth, etc.)
about all the cores stored at the facility, as well as information about samples
taken from cores (core, interval, size, investigator, etc.) between 1964 to
present.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Research Capabilities - The analytical equipment at the
Antarctic Marine Geology Research Facility serves both the research needs of
both the AMGRF personnel (for generation of detailed core descriptions) and the
Principal Investigators involved with the United States Antarctic Program. This
equipment provides the users of the Facility with the necessary tools to rapidly
and objectively analyze the piston cores and drill cores that are sent to the
AMGRF each year.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Education and Outreach - As part of the Facility
Education and Outreach program, Facility Personnel routinely provide (1) tours
and lectures for students (K-20) and the general public; (2) Laboratory sessions
for undergraduate Geology and Oceanography survey courses; (3) Training for
graduate and undergraduate students; (4) and workshops and short courses for
investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this award supports the
processing and archiving of deep-sea sediment cores from U.S. Antarctic Program
projects that are active now and that will be active in the next five years in
the Southern Ocean. It also addresses the needs of FSU students and visiting
students that need exposure to and training in state-of-the-art equipment for
conducting first-class research in marine geology.&lt;br/&gt;