* 0338484
* Tinker With and Think About Transport Phenomena-Using Experiments and Dimensionless Groups to Understand Nonlinear Interactions Via a "Proof of Concept Proposal"
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 07/31/2007
* USD 74,984.00

This project is developing hands-on experiments and explanatory material that
train students in analyzing multiple length and time scales in transport
phenomena based on ideas of transport and hydrodynamic instabilities. The
experiments mostly comprise of simple tabletop demonstrations and have both
flexibility and variability. The material is being made available in a WEBCT
format and explains experimental phenomena using picture arguments, scaling
arguments and mathematical analysis and is fortified with animations and
applications to engineering, everyday experience and natural phenomena. Each
experiment and accompanying material is a stand-alone and can be exported in
modules or in groups of modules to classes in heat, mass and momentum transport.
These experiments and video clips are being constructed so that they are of use
to curricula in chemical, mechanical, materials, and biomedical engineering, and
engineering physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The beneficiaries of the proposed
prototype are undergraduate students and faculty alike. The experiments are
particularly helpful for the visual intuitive student whose appreciation does
not lie in the mathematical model, rather in the art form and in the physics
underlying the phenomena. Yet, they also benefits the analytical deductive
student and stir up creativity in both types of students. The professor gains
because the hands-on experiments are expected to liven up the lectures and
sustain the interest of the student. The prototypes are being be tested in a
classroom setting and evaluations are being conducted both during the formative
and execution phases of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of
the Proposal: The proposed activity is based on over twenty years of research
experience of the PI. The students are learning to think creatively and view
transport phenomena as more than a mathematical subject to be tolerated. The
intellectual merit lies in the fact that the affected audience actually learns
to become intellectuals instead of number-crunching
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposal: The proposed
study encourages the participation of undergraduate students and graduate
students in the development of the educational materials. As a result, students
are being encouraged to participate in the education process and consider
teaching and research as a career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this Proof of
Concept phase, the results of the project are being tried at the University of
Florida. The PI is also sending materials to the University of Idaho where one
of their faculty members is trying the materials in a course on fluid flow and
transport. Both universities have substantial numbers of women and minority
students. Dissemination is via the electronic media and major
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;