* 0338991
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Bidding Behavior in Sealed Bid Auctions: Regret, Learning, and Risk Aversion
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Richard Engelbrecht-Wiggans, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 03/31/2006
* USD 52,721.00

Over the past two decades auction theory has been used extensively to help
design real world auctions and exchanges. Examples of these new auctions include
the FCC auctions for spectrum licenses, electric power auctions, auctions for
transportation services, and different types of procurement auctions. These
mechanisms are complex, and designers must make decisions about many aspects of
auction rules that are likely to have a profound effect on the auction's
efficiency, the sellers' revenue and the buyers' profits. Good auction theory is
essential if we are to design good auction mechanisms, yet there are important
instances in which observed behavior in auctions differs from what would be
expected based on auction theory. One important example of this is overbidding
(i.e., bidding above the Risk Neutral Nash Equilibrium) observed in Sealed Bid
First Price (SBFP) auctions. This result has been replicated many times by
different researchers at different laboratories and in a variety of
environments, but the reason for overbidding has never been fully understood.
Engelbrecht-Wiggans (1989) suggests that participants may overbid in these
auctions to avoid feelings of regret. Although the theory of regret has been
used to explain some well-known anomalies in expected utility theory, this
notion has never been applied to auctions prior to Engelbrecht-Wiggans (1989),
and has never been tested in the auction context. The aim of our research is to
systematically test the Engelbrecht-Wiggans (1989) theory of regret in auctions
in the laboratory, with the specific objective of separating the role of regret
from that of risk aversion. As we gain a better understanding of behavior in
SBFP auctions, we will also extend and refine the theory to incorporate our new
insights and to explain other puzzles involving auctions.