* 0338094
* Planning for Site Selection, Installation and Operation of Geotechnical Strong-Motion Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2007
* J. Carl Stepp, Consortium of Organizations for Strong Motion Observation System
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2007
* USD 171,630.00

This action is to support two workshops which, together, will address
earthquake strong-motion arrays for geotechnical engineering sites.
Specifically, they will document current and planned arrays; develop a strategic
plan for future strong motion instrumentation for geotechnical sites; and
develop a long-term implementation plan and management structure. The workshop
participants will be from the United States and other countries where
significant geotechnical strong-motion monitoring is being conducted.

The deployment of strong-motion instruments at the surface and in the subsurface
for geotechnical monitoring provides a major advance in the direct measurement
of the effects of surface geology. Borehole measurements provide critical
constraints on methods for interpreting surface observations and for
understanding non-linear stress- strain behavior of site geology up to and
including soil failure. Borehole measurements provide data to address some of
the most basic unresolved seismological and earthquake engineering issues,
including the dynamic strain threshold where non- linear behavior begins, with
insights into strain-limited ground motions. Because the required measurements
are costly to obtain, planning and broad coordination of monitoring programs and
initiatives is highly important in order to maximize the likelihood of obtaining
useful recordings in a reasonable time period.

The first workshop will document the current monitoring activities, and develop
a strategic plan for future monitoring. The second workshop will develop a long-
range implementation and management structure for coordinated geotechnical
strong-motion monitoring. The report from the workshop will: (1) document the
current geotechnical strong-motion monitoring; (1) provide a strategic plan for
future monitoring, an implementation plan for future monitoring, and a
coordination and management plan for future monitoring. The Proceedings of the
two workshops will be published by the Consortium of Organizations for Strong
Motion Observation Systems (COSMOS) and will be distributed on CD-ROM. The
proceedings also will be posted on the COSMOS Home Page, http://www.cosmos-
eq.org