* 0338896
* SBIR Phase I:     Software for Three-Dimensional Simulation of Polymer Coextrusion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Mahesh Gupta, Plastic Flow, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves
development of software for accurate simulation of polymer coextrusion. Even
though use of coextrusion software is critical for optimizing the process, die
designers in the plastic industry rarely use commercial coextrusion software
because these packages cannot simulate complex coextrusion systems, and they
also fail to capture various complexities of polymer rheology. The proposed
coextrusion software will use a unique proprietary constitutive theory, which
can accurately capture the complex rheological behavior of polymers. The three-
dimensional mesh of tetrahedral finite elements in the coextrusion system will
remain unaltered during the coextrusion simulation. Instead of requiring the
interface between different polymers to match with finite element boundaries,
the interface will be allowed to cut through the finite elements. These
innovative features in the new software will allow simulation of complex
coextrusion systems. The new software will eliminate the trial-and-error
approach currently being used to design coextrusion systems, and it will cut the
time to market of coextruded products by over 50 percent.

Even though complex phenomena, such as encapsulation of high viscosity polymer
by less viscous polymer, and instabilities at polymer interface, have been
observed in coextrusion experiments, the mechanisms behind these phenomena are
still not understood completely. The software, which will be developed in this
project, will enhance the scientific understanding of the root cause behind
various complexities encountered in polymer coextrusion. It will provide design
engineers as well as engineering students a useful tool to perform numerical
experiments for optimization of coextrusion systems. Many different types of
companies, including plastic material suppliers, plastic part manufacturers and
extrusion equipment manufacturers, will be able to cut cost and increase
revenues using this software. Planned experimental verification of coextrusion
simulation at Michigan Technological University and University of Massachusetts
will benefit engineering education. The scientific knowledge developed in this
project will be included in a senior-level course at Michigan Tech.