* 0338629
* Extensible Terascale Facility (ETF):  Enhancing the Capabilities, Scope and Impact of the Extensible Terascale Facility
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Mary Thomas, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2006
* USD 3,245,266.00

The University of Texas is funded by a two-year Cooperative Agreement from the
Division of Advanced Computational Infrastructure in the amount of $3,245,266 to
integrate the resources available at University of Texas with the Extensible
Terascale Facility (ETF). Funding is provided to establish a 10 gigabit/second
connection from University of Texas and the Los Angeles Hub of the
ETF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of the funding provided through this
Terascale Extension Award, the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) will
contribute significant resources to the ETF user community including: 1) 50% of
a major new high-end SUN terascale visualization system that would complement
rather than duplicate the visualization system at Argonne National Lab; 2) 50%
of a tow high-end computing systems, a 1.2 Teraflop IBM Power 4 system, and a
new 5.0 Teraflop Cray-Dell Linux cluster, 3) access to significant storage
facilities including 2.8 Petabyte of archival and 50 Terabyte SAN storage; and
4) access to four geosciences data sets that are expected to have a significant
impact on research and education in a wide variety of disciplines. The PI's and
co PI's involved in this project are deeply immersed in a number of grid
architecture and middleware development activities that will also add
substantial expertise to the further development of the Extensible Terascale
Facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas has strong commitments to
issues of broader impact including:&lt;br/&gt;1) TACC is committee to providing
leadership in High Performance Computing Across Texas (HiPCAT), an initiative
that will bring together six Texas higher education institutions and over 60
minority-serving institution; 2) University of Texas has also actively
participated in an international collaboration with Mexico in the area of HPC;
3) access to the geological data across ETF will provide information necessary
to respond to emergency and life-threatening situations such as natural
disasters and security threats. This data will also contribute broadly to the
formulation of public policy on matters such as homeland security, climate
change, and water conservation; and 4) TACC is committee to a diversified
staffing, educational programs, internships and mentoring and training programs
that augment classroom education.&lt;br/&gt;