* 0338855
* SBIR Phase I:      Efficient Light Out Coupling from AlGaN Light Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Hisham Menkara, PhosphorTech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,958.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project propose to
develop new device concepts and manufacturing techniques to greatly increase
light extraction efficiency. Current solid state devices suffer from poor light
extraction efficiencies (&lt;10%) as the result of the mismatch in the index of
refraction between the light emitting diode (LED) material and epoxy/air
interface. The new concept maximizes output coupling through detailed control of
the optical properties (refractive index, scattering, absorption, etc.) of the
materials surrounding the LED die. This will be accomplished through the use of
a nanotechnology based material deposition technique suitable for high volume
production of LEDs and LED arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial
application of this project is in energy efficient replacements for incandescent
and fluorescent lighting. These techniques have applicability to all LED light
sources. Thus, any current application, such as lighting in portable
electronics, automobiles, traffic signaling, etc., will immediately benefit from
the increased efficiency. Increased efficiency will also open new markets where
traditional light sources currently dominate and will lead to significantly
reduced energy requirements, lower levels of pollution, reduced toxic waste
(e.g., Hg from fluorescent lamps) and a reduced dependence on foreign oil
suppliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;