* 0338371
* Collaborative Research: Controls on Sediment Yields from Tidewater Glaciers from Patagonia to Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Bernard Hallet, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 12/31/2009
* USD 438,890.00

This project examines the role of glacier dynamics in glacial sediment yields.
The results will shed light on how glacial erosion influences both orogenic
processes and produces sediments that accumulate in basins, rich archives of
climate variability. Our hypothesis is that erosion rates are a function of
sliding speed, and should diminish sharply as the glacier's basal temperatures
drop below the melting point. To test this hypothesis, we will determine
sediment accumulation rates from seismic studies of fjord sediments for six
tidewater glaciers that range from fast-moving temperate glaciers in Patagonia
to slow-moving polar glaciers on the Antarctic Peninsula. Two key themes are
addressed for each glacier system: 1) sediment yields and erosion rates by
determining accumulation rates within the fjords using seismic profiles and core
data, and 2) dynamic properties and basin characteristics of each glacier in
order to seek an empirical relationship between glacial erosion rates and ice
dynamics. The work is based in Patagonia and the Antarctic Peninsula, ideal
natural laboratories for these purposes because the large latitudinal range
provides a large range of precipitation and thermal regimes over relatively
homogeneous lithologies and tectonic settings. Prior studies of these regions
noted significant decreases in glaciomarine sediment accumulations in the fjords
to the south. As well, the fjords constitute accessible and nearly perfect
natural sediment traps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study
include inter-disciplinary collaboration with Chilean glaciologists and marine
geologists, support for one postdoctoral and three doctoral students, inclusion
of undergraduates in research, and outreach to under-represented groups in Earth
sciences and K-12 educators. The results of the project will also contribute to
a better understanding of the linkages between climate and evolution of all high
mountain ranges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;