* 0338294
* Collaborative Proposal: Population Spatial Structure and Stage-specific Connectivity of the Toothfishes Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Cynthia Jones, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 04/30/2008
* USD 441,364.00

Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) and Antarctic toothfish (D.
mawsoni) are widely sold in the North American market as Chilean sea bass. On
the basis of genetic evidence, toothfish are managed as discrete stocks within
sub-areas frequently corresponding to island groups under the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), and by neighboring
national authorities. Management as discrete stocks assumes that each represents
a closed population driven by its own births and deaths, and any vagrants are
effectively lost. There is increasing evidence that toothfish can move
considerable distances; however, rates of movement have proved difficult to
examine. The elemental structure of growth increments in fish otoliths reflects
the composition of water passing across the gills, and therefore the environment
in which a fish is located; the growth increments also provide a chronological
record of the life history up to capture. Otolith trace element signatures serve
as a record of a fish's location in the past, and laser-based Inductively-
Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry has been used by the principal investigators to
examine elemental signatures in the otoliths of Patagonian toothfish
(Dissostichus eleginoides), and to identify significant differences between
management areas.&lt;br/&gt;Using this technique to sample the location on the
otolith corresponding to the known date and site of capture, elemental
signatures will be characterized over time and across the major areas of
toothfish concentration in the Southern Ocean. Using toothfish taken recently,
the elemental signatures recorded in the otolith during the life history will be
compared with the corresponding spatial signatures determined in the ground-
truthing analysis. Divergence between the two signatures will indicate that fish
originated from outside the area of capture. The elemental data will then be
used to estimate the proportion of fish currently in the population that have
immigrated, and the life stage during which they migrated. By collecting
otoliths and genetic samples from each fish, otolith microchemistry will be used
to identify source populations and make effective use of multilocus data to not
only characterize the distribution of genetically distinct stocks, but also to
provide baseline data for estimating admixture proportions. By developing a set
of chemical and genetic markers for both species, a comprehensive
characterization of source populations and an accurate estimation of admixture
proportions will be provided. &lt;br/&gt;As part of this research, international
collaborations will include scientists working in the high Antarctic. This work
will draw on these collaborations to further the integration of physical-
biological components to clarify boundaries to the movement of toothfish. The
project will provide scientific data will be of value in the Antarctic Treaty
system on managing resources in the Southern Ocean. This proposal will also
involve development of interdisciplinary studies that include minority and
underrepresented, undergraduate, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;