* 0338656
* SBIR Phase I:  Digital Correlator Imaging Spectrometer For Submillimeter Astronomy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Steven Kaplan, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel broadband digital spectrometer for radio-frequency receivers, with
particular application to an imaging spectrometer for sub-millimeter-wave
astronomy. For optimum performance, such a receiver will make use of a cryogenic
mixer to generate an intermediate-frequency output ~1 GHz. A spectrometer that
can accept this type of mixer output and then generate the signal power spectrum
with frequency resolution ~1 MHz is proposed. The core of this spectrometer will
be a fast, sensitive analog-to-digital converter and a digital auto-correlator
based on rapid-single-flux-quantum (RSFQ) digital logic, designed to operate
with a commercial cryo-cooler at a temperature of 4 K. Other components of this
receiver, such as multiplexers to combine pixel outputs, have already been
developed. These components will be integrated monolithically on the same
niobium integrated circuit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The auto-correlator has
extensive applications in RF communications and image-processing systems
currently limited by the speed of digital processing. Some of these applications
include Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) communications, advanced
instrumentation for ground-based and space-based spectroscopy and signal
analysis are further enabled by the combination of the proposed auto-correlator
with recent advances in the manufacturing of affordable cryo-coolers. The
digital-RF base station target, where the auto-correlator would be used for load
management, and its close relative, the cross-correlator could be used for
reducing multi-path distortion. The digital-RF base station with software radio
architecture represents a multi-billion dollar market, from which even a small
market share will be worthwhile pursuing.&lt;br/&gt;