* 0338128
* Graduate Student-University-School Collaborative for Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology-II (GraSUS-II)
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Donald Schwert, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2010
* USD 2,072,059.00

Graduate Student.University.School (GraSUS) Collaborative for Science,
&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology-II &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Title of Project: Graduate Student-University-School Collaborative
for Science, &lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, Engineering and Technology-II.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Dakota State University. &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI:
Dogan Comez, PI; Co-PI.s: James P. Bartlett, Edward L. Deckard, Canan
&lt;br/&gt;Bilen Green, David W. Haney, William O. Martin, Lisa Montplaisir,
Donald P. Schwert, &lt;br/&gt;Alan R. White. &lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per
year: 13 fellows per year. &lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: All seven Public
School districts in Cass County, ND, and &lt;br/&gt;Moorhead School District,
MN. &lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: High school and Middle School.
&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban and rural. &lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported Disciplines
Involved: Biology, Chemistry, Earth Science, General &lt;br/&gt;Science,
Mathematics, Life Sciences, Physics, Physical Science, Pre-engineering.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The GraSUS-II at the North Dakota
State University is a project in which graduate and advanced undergraduate
students and faculty work with science and mathematics teachers in grades 6-12
in urban and rural schools in Cass County, ND, and western Minnesota to enhance
student achievement in math and science as measured against state and local
standards. The project focuses on inquiry-based learning to promote students'
learning, problem-solving skills, creative thinking, and teamwork. It builds
upon the accomplishments of and lessons learned from the prior GK-12 award
[008445], and expands geographically, departmentally, and in scope to establish
sustainable university-school partnerships that improve STEM education. This
project provides professional development of teachers and fellows, and designs
standards linked instructional strategies appropriate for grades 6-12. There is
a special focus on enhancing the participation of underrepresented groups,
particularly the participation of women in STEM teaching and learning. Women are
well represented in the current cadre of fellows, and special consideration will
be given to maintain and even increase this representation in GraSUS-II.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project fosters working relationships
between districts, higher education, and industry, focusing on broadly improving
mathematics and science achievement. The project includes: (a) recruitment
activities, including incentives for participating teachers; (b) professional
development and dissemination activities designed to establish the project
goals; and (c) comprehensive formative and summative evaluations to monitor and
help direct the project activities and document its impact. The project
establishes a summer institute to develop programs and an organizational
structure integrated with existing partnerships planned to continue beyond grant
funding. The project will also develop an ongoing fellow support program that
uses NDSU resources and service learning to involve NDSU science, math, and
engineering students in sustaining GraSUS activities permanently in local public
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of Prior Project: Teachers report their
content knowledge has increased as a result of interacting with the Fellows,
while their teaching skills have been enhanced by the extra materials provided
by the project. One veteran physics teacher commented that working with the
Fellow energized both his physics and his love of teaching. The Fellows report
improved ability to discuss complex problems with a relatively naive audience
and the K-12 students have gained a better understanding of the subject matter
(science and mathematics) covered as well as an appreciation of who scientists
are and what they do. It has as well helped build stronger partnerships between
the university and the school district. This project is partially supported by
funds from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;