* 0338134
* The Antarctic Glaciological Data Center:     Continued Data Collection and Management for Antarctic Glaciology
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Ted Scambos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2010
* USD 776,118.00

Scambos&lt;br/&gt;0338134&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides continued
support for the Antarctic Glaciological Data Center (AGDC) at The National Snow
and Ice Data Center (NSIDC), an archive and data distribution system for
glaciological data from the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP). This on-going effort
has created a website containing recently gathered Antarctic glaciological and
related data from numerous principal investigators, and compiled products of
important glaciological parameters such as ice flow velocity and 10-meter
temperature. The AGDC has two guiding objectives: to accumulate a record of
research data from NSF-funded Antarctic glaciology grants; and to provide
principal investigators in the Antarctic Glaciology program with basic
geophysical parameters useful for field planning, modeling, or research
analysis. The AGDC is related to, but not a part of, the U.S. Antarctic Data
Coordination Center, a repository of metadata information about all Antarctic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this second five-year period the AGDC will
improve the overall activity in a number of ways. A large number of P.I. data
sets from the US-ITASE project will be added as those data are published and
becoming available for archival. Additional data sets from current glaciological
research will be added as well. AGDC will develop appropriate schemes for
handling selected dynamic and thermodynamic modeling results, and ice-
penetrating radar data sets. These are two data types that have proven difficult
to manage up to now. AGDC will also continue to build the current "Compiled
Product" data sets, and add to them a compilation of snow accumulation
measurements, and deep ice temperature profiles. A newly-formed review panel of
principal investigators will be consulted for guidance and additional
suggestions of data to incorporate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project is that the data center supports basic glaciological research by
providing researchers with ready access to well-described data from past and
recent activities. By having these data web-accessible, with human assistance if
needed, investigators can explore ideas more rapidly, and find needed
information and citations more easily. The broader impacts of the data center
are that it also provides the interested public with access to information and
pictures of Antarctica, and links this somewhat high-level information to more
outreach-oriented sites on the NSIDC web. Further, as a long-term archive of
information and data, the AGDC site is a record of the scientific exploration of
Antarctica, which will become increasingly valuable with the passage of time.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;