* 0338119
* Collaborative Research:     A Fully Geographically and Stratigraphically Resolved Cretaceous-Tertiary Biostratigraphic Database From Seymour Island, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* William Zinsmeister, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 04/30/2008
* USD 138,380.00

This award supports a project to analyze faunal distribution patterns from
Seymour Island, Antarctica by melding two independently developed, but
complimentary, applied biostratigraphic numerical techniques developed in two
previously funded pilot projects. Stratigraphic projection analysis (SPA) allows
complete datasets of geographically distributed faunas to be projected into two-
dimensional cross-sections. SPA was developed in Excel for the simple, tabular,
Campanian-Paleocene strata of Seymour Island. This project will test the wider
applicability of SPA against the nested complex of lenticular, disconformity-
bound, stratal units in the Eocene of the island. The limits of spatial
resolution of the disconformity surfaces will be found by projecting their
positions from different geologic maps into the cross sections displaying the
faunas. In the other pilot study, constrained optimization algorithms (CONOP9),
developed in Visual Fortran for stratigraphic correlation in a Windows
environment, proved feasible for replacing the probabilistic confidence
intervals with best-fit intervals, based on parsimony criteria. The best-fit
intervals extract more information and stay closer to the raw observations by
exploiting the inconsistencies between individual stratigraphic sections rather
than the gaps in a composite section. This project will extend the pilot study
to incorporate numerous transects bootstrapped from the full SPA database for
the Campanian to Paleocene strata. This combination of new methods will not only
improve the resolution of the extinction event, but also test the hypothesis
that there will be asymptotic limits to the rate at which the resolution can be
improved by collecting more fossils. The combination of new methods and the full
database will extend the fundamental analysis of gap frequency distributions to
two and three dimensions. To ensure broad dissemination of the results, the
project will compile a full geographically and stratigraphically resolved data
base of Seymour Is. macrofaunas and make it readily accessible to users of
common database, spreadsheet, and GIS programs. By gathering their findings into
one easily interrogated database, the compilation will add value to the legacy
of prior NSF-funded and international paleontological investigations on Seymour
Is. and provide a sharper focus for future cruises. The numerical tools will be
made available with the raw field data. The societal importance of analyses of
global biodiversity and the refinement of the geologic time scale have both been
recognized by the recent funding of global database initiatives (Paleobiology
Database and Chronos). The Seymour Island database will be extractable as
individual faunal assemblages or continual transects . the standard data units
of these two endeavors. The Seymour Is. database will also provide easy access
to the general public to one of the most remarkable fossil deposits in the
southern Hemisphere. The project is a new collaboration which will train
graduate students at both institutions in a wider spectrum of modern numerical
methods.

