* 0338452
* Preliminary Investigation of Unexpected Liquefaction-type Behavior of Fine-Grained Soils in Turkey
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* James Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2005
* USD 40,422.00

This small grant for exploratory research supports a field investigation to
further examine important observations made during a post-earthquake
reconnaissance of the 1999 Kocaeli Earthquake in Turkey. Liquefaction-type
behavior in the form of strength loss, softening, and settlement occurred in
saturated fine-grained soil strata at the Carrefour Shopping Center complex
located along Izmit Bay, about 5 km from the ruptured portion of the fault.
Construction of the shopping center was underway when the earthquake struck, and
the soil beneath the main building had been improved to mitigate soil
liquefaction, while most of the site, and all of the surrounding properties,
remained on unimproved soil. Significant settlements were observed to occur in
two silt/clay (ML/CL) strata and one high-plasticity clay stratum (CH). Cyclic
strength loss in these fine-grained materials, especially the CH soils, is
unexpected, as they are not considered liquefiable by current liquefaction
guidelines. If the settlement data is found to be valid, there are important
implications, as it may be shown that current guidelines are not reliable
predictors of the seismic behavior of these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
further examination of the soil liquefaction at the Carrefour Shopping Center
complex is intended to: 1) confirm the previous observations, and 2) gather
perishable data that will permit complete documentation of this unique site for
the engineering community and allow a future, more comprehensive study. The
study will involve field testing and sampling, cyclic triaxial testing, and
analytical work. The Carrefour Shopping Complex is being rapidly developed and
it is imperative to sample the soils before the data is
lost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;