* 0339012
* SBIR Phase I:     Athermal Multiplexers Based on Reflective Arrayed Waveguide Grating Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Luis Grave de Peralta, MULTIPASS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

DMI-0339012&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project proposes to design and demonstrate an athermal multiplexer based on an
already existing arrayed waveguide-grating (AWG) device. AWGs are key components
in wavelength division multiplexed optical networks. Temperature induced changes
in the refractive index of conventional AWGs based on silica-on-silicon
technology result in large shifts in the peak wavelength transmission. This
necessitates the use of thermoelectric coolers and temperature sensing and
compensating circuitry. A specially designed external mirror combined with a
reflective AWG (R-AWG), will be used to compensate the temperature-induced index
change. Differential thermal expansion of the mirror assembly rotates its
reflecting surface at a constant rate with temperature. The reflective AWG-
external mirror combination also allows for wavelength trimming that centers the
channel wavelength at the ITU grid. The detailed rotation rate and design of the
mirror will be determined by simulation and experiments. The goal of this
project is to fabricate a high-performance 40-channel, 100 GHz, passive AWG
device insensitive of temperature in the 0-85 degree C range.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work hopes to significantly improve the performance of
DWDM-based telecommunication systems. These features hope to make the athermal
reflective-AWGs proposed here attractive and commercially competitive when
compared to conventional AWGs. The new approach should eliminate complex
packaging and processing steps, the need for electric power and external
temperature control, resulting in a more robust, easier to use, and considerably
less expensive packaged device.&lt;br/&gt;