* 0339103
* Collaborative Research:  Control and Adaptation of Attentional Processing:  Empirical and Computational Investigations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Mozer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,800.00

Human vision is exceptionally flexible. Consider searching for a familiar face
in a crowd, finding car keys in a cluttered kitchen, chasing down an opponent in
football, or threading through a crowded restaurant to find a table. How does
vision accommodate such a variety of visual environments and achieve such
diverse goals? One key is selective attention, which allows a person to focus on
relevant aspects of the visual environment. But how does the mind determine what
is relevant? What is the nature of control of visual attention?&lt;br/&gt;With
support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Shaun Vecera and Dr. Michael
Mozer propose research to investigate selective attention. Dr. Vecera will
conduct experimental studies that explore human behavior in novel tasks and
unfamiliar environments to investigate how people exploit visual cues in the
environment to enhance performance. Dr. Mozer will build computer simulation
models to explain the experimental results. Broader impacts of this research
include building artificial systems with the flexibility of human vision and
improving the design of user interfaces for computer systems and mechanical or
electronic devices. Additionally the proposed research may inform the diagnosis
of control deficits due to brain damage. A computer model of human control can
be damaged in various ways, to simulate brain damage, leading to a better
understanding of the consequences and strategies for remediation.&lt;br/&gt;