* 0339816
* SBIR Phase I:  Creating Functionally Decomposed Surface Models from Measured Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Lazhu Wang, RAINDROP GEOMAGIC INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project deals with the
problems of reconstructing complex freeform shapes from measured data. Of
primary interest is the creation of well-structured, high- quality CAD models.
Several techniques exist to reach this goal. Unfortunately, automatic surfacing
systems provide only rough approximations and do not capture the original design
intent, while manual segmentation methods are not very stable and require
tedious work. Using the functional decomposition paradigm, objects are built up
as a collection of large, independent primary surfaces being connected by
smaller, dependent feature surfaces, such as fillets or swept surfaces. This
project aims to elaborate semi-automatic methods to build up the topology of the
object and compute optimal surface representations for the individual point
regions. Emphasis is put on different fairing methods to relocate the segmenting
curve network and different constrained surface fitting algorithms to assure
smooth connections to existing surface geometry. The proposed research starts
with theoretical ground work in geometric modeling, followed by a prototype
implementation to prove the feasibility and efficiency of the algorithms.

This technology should significantly shorten lead-time in related industrial
design and manufacturing processes and produce more aesthetic objects. The main
applications will be product design, including automotive, aerospace, consumer
products, and medical devices. The improved product will help US manufacturing
industry to be more competitive in the world market by providing a way to
introduce design on demand and engineering on demand services. It will also help
US companies increase customer-focused production and reduce the time between
product iterations.