* 0339040
* NSF/USDOTPartnership for Exploratory Research - ICSST: Timely and Effective Dissemination of Traveler Information in Rural Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Michael Kelly, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas A. Birkland
* 02/28/2006
* USD 149,641.00

The need for timely and effective dissemination of traveler information in rural
areas is underscored by the disproportionately high percentage of traffic
accidents and other incidents, exacerbated by the relatively long trip durations
and lack of reliable and comprehensive communications infrastructure along the
roadways in these areas. Technical and structural approaches that are prevalent
in metropolitan areas simply are not feasible for rural settings. This research
explores alternative technical and structural approaches to effectively
disseminating traveler information in rural areas. A systems engineering
approach is used to incorporate technologies and methodologies from diverse
disciplines. Peer-to-peer communications between vehicles and between vehicles
and roadside sensors, using recent advances in wireless technologies and ad hoc
networking protocols are explored to serve as a surrogate for extensive fixed
communication and information infrastructure. Human factors and inputs from
private and public sector stakeholders are used to further shape the system
design. Emerging technologies such as smart antennas are evaluated using
requirements-based criteria and an end-to-end system design. Modeling and
simulation techniques are used to conduct performance assessments and technology
trade-off studies. An outcome of this research will be the design of a prototype
that might be deployed in a rural area for a field
trial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will direct future
investments in communications and information technology infrastructure that
will suit the particular demand of rural and sparsely populated areas. The
approach provides a high benefit to cost ratio that meets the structural
requirements of large portions of the less populated regions of the country. The
benefits go beyond improvements in safety and efficiency, as the infrastructure
also supports a broad range of traveler information services that are of value
to businesses that rely on transportation, such as fleet management, as well as
the broader tourist industry. The project is highly multi-disciplinary,
incorporating expertise from the electrical and computing engineering as well as
the transportation sector. Students involved in several facets of the work
engage in research that cuts across traditional departmental boundaries. The
potential that this project provides to minorities such as Native American
communities is extremely high, as the lack of adequate communications and
information infrastructure in their areas will be directly and positively
affected by the outcomes of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;