* 0339459
* STTR Phase I: Integrated Self Monitoring Sensor Networks within Composite Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Anthony Starr, SensorMetrix
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,996.00

0339459&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I research project proposes to
develop a new class of self-sensing composites. Self-sensing, self-monitoring
composites will be engineered materials with embedded networks of miniaturized
transducing and sensing elements, judiciously integrated within reinforcement
morphology of a composite,&lt;br/&gt;that will acquire, process, and even
respond to information crucial for determining the state of&lt;br/&gt;structural
health. The goal of Phase I is to fabricate a proof-of-concept self-sensing
composite without&lt;br/&gt;significantly diminishing its overall structural
integrity. This will be addressed by developing&lt;br/&gt;techniques for
integrating sensors, electronics and connecting elements within the braids of
a&lt;br/&gt;typical fiber-based composite. All electronic components must be
able to withstand typical&lt;br/&gt;processing techniques, including the
moderately high temperatures and pressures. A composite&lt;br/&gt;with an
embedded sensor network, interconnects, data acquisition and local processing
will be&lt;br/&gt;fabricated. Its structural properties will be compared with
conventional composite of the
same&lt;br/&gt;composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We anticipate that this work
will result in development of self-monitoring composite materials. These
composites will be capable of acquiring and processing information related to
its structural health and responding to this information by self-correcting its
behavior if needed. Self-monitoring capabilities will result in more efficient
higher performance, tighter and more precise specifications for composite
structures and greater flexibility in composite design. Adding self-sensing
functionality to existing composites offers a unique means of improving
structural performance without additional demands on mechanical properties. It
will also enable wider use of composites in the remote, inaccessible and
hazardous environments where conventional NDE is difficult or impossible to
perform in real time. The real time monitoring capabilities will improve safety
in the mission-critical composite application areas. The proposed research is
expected to have a significant impact on structural and environmental
engineering.