* 0339051
* EHP:  Tax Policy and Low-Wage Labor Markets:  New Work on Employment, Effectiveness and Administration
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* John Scholz, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 379,912.00

Part 1 of this project will provide new information on the employment effects of
tax policies targeted to low-income families. Part 2 will produce new
information on the relative effectiveness of welfare policy choices, tax policy,
and economic growth in enhancing the incomes of poor families. And part 3 will
develop new information on the degree to which administrative problems arise
with low income tax provisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many previous studies find
the EITC has large, positive employment effects. But much of this work uses
indirect identification strategies and it has not been able to verify with tax
data that the EITC causes the observed employment patterns. We examine the
employment effects of the EITC using a sample of California adults who received
AFDC or TANF sometime between 1987 and 2000. Our proposed work will be the first
study to use information on whether sample members actually filed a tax return
and claimed the EITC. Using an identification strategy similar to that used by
earlier studies, the PIs document employment patterns across groups, both in the
raw data and in regression-adjusted estimates, that are consistent with
significant, positive EITC employment effects. Tests using tax data, however,
raise questions about whether the EITC employment effects reported by others are
in fact caused by the credit. The PIs will also carry out additional work to
examine the validity of the preliminary results and help reconcile our work with
past EITC employment studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employment rates of low-
skilled single mothers increased sharply in the 1990s and welfare caseloads
declined precipitously. Considerable uncertainty remains about the relative
importance of factors accounting for these changes. This project is a systematic
analysis of the relative importance of welfare reform, the EITC, and the role of
labor demand in understanding patterns of employment and welfare use. Four
features make this proposed work promising. Tax data improve the identification
of EITC effects. The PIs use more geographically precise measures of labor
market characteristics than other papers. And they use much more detailed
characterizations of the "treatments" of state (and county) welfare programs
than other papers. Finally, samples exceeding 3 million adults allow us to
examine interactions in the way welfare and tax policy influence employment and
welfare use in different labor market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 3 of the
project examines the extent to which families respond to welfare program and tax
system incentives to inaccurately report their income or household
circumstances. The PIs use statistical models to study income reporting to
welfare and tax authorities. They will also complete a unique study that
examines misreporting of family structure, the largest single source of EITC
non-compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will directly inform policymaking.
Our partners in this research include the Internal Revenue Service, California
Franchise Tax Board, and the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. They are making
data available to (under strict confidentiality agreements) and underwriting
much of the cost of data construction and processing, because they are convinced
the research promises to improve the tax policy effectiveness and
administration. Second, this work has required a substantial investment in data
infrastructure. The PI team will continue to make data available to other
researchers, except in cases where confidentiality restrictions legally prevent
them from doing so. &lt;br/&gt;