* 0339430
* SBIR Phase I:A New High-Strain Material for Medical Ultrasound Transducers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Frank Djuth, Geospace Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at
engineering a high-strain piezoelectric material for use in medical ultrasound
transducers. The proposed work entails investigations of the relaxor
ferroelectric Pb(Yb0.5Nb0.5)O3-PbTiO3 (PYbN-PT). A major increase in the d31 and
d33 piezoelectric coefficients can be realized by growing rhombohedral PYbN-PT
crystals along the pseudocubic &lt;001&gt; orientation. The objective is to
attain the benefits of &lt;001&gt; oriented single crystals, but to do so via
the sol-gel thin film method. Our initial research in the area of relaxor
ferroelectrics shows that PYbN-PT has significantly higher strain than lead
zirconate titanate (PZT), the mainstay material of high performance transducers.
In addition, the new film has many other desirable features of PZT. In Phase I,
PYnB-PT will be developed and fully characterized for use in medical ultrasound.
To be useful for medical ultrasound purposes, a PYbN-PT film thickness of at
least 3-4 microns must be achieved. The proposed Phase I optimization study
should be able to increase ultrasound system selectivity by more than one order
of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this project is
in the field of medical ultrasound imaging. The PYbN-PT film will be used to
enhance the sensitivity of medical ultrasound images with cellular resolution.
To achieve the necessary spatial resolution, the transducer must emit a high-
frequency, broadband pulse. As the ultrasonic frequency increases, the
attenuation of the diagnostic wave increases in human tissue and there is a need
for more measurement sensitivity. The proposed investigation is particularly
relevant to the development of low-cost imaging devices for ophthalmology,
dermatology, and otolaryngology as well as for the intravascular assessment of
coronary pathologies. For these applications, transducer sensitivity plays an
important role in the differential diagnosis of disease.. Ultrasound is one of
the most cost-effective imaging diagnostics, and its continued development in
other medical disciplines satisfies an important social
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;