* 0339158
* Task Frame in Individual and Collective Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Garold Stasser, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/2007
* USD 249,999.00

Small groups make important decisions in government, organizations, and
education. Often the goal is to pool diverse information from group members and
use it effectively in order to reach more informed decisions. The proposed work
will examine the role of task framing in promoting more effective individual and
collective decision-making. Many decision problems can be resolved by using
heuristics or by applying systematic, analytical procedures. For example, one
can evaluate prospective employees by judging their similarity to a prototypical
"good" employee (heuristic frame). Conversely, one could use test scores, level
of education, and GPA and other measures that are known to predict job
performance (analytical frame). The proposed work examines the interplay of task
framing at the individual and group level and its effects on decision-making.

This work will also explore different ways of distributing access to information
that may facilitate problem-solving styles in collective decision-making.
Preliminary work has shown that people who anticipated working in a group and
thought that they had more information than others performed better on reasoning
tasks. This work further suggests that the improved performance was partly due
to "more informed" individuals processing information more deeply and framing
the task in a more analytical way.

In a series of proposed laboratory studies, individuals and groups will complete
social prediction tasks based on descriptive information about targets and base
rate information that can be used to derive a prediction. The distributions of
descriptive and base rate information among group members before discussions
will be systematically varied. The descriptive information will be
stereotypically associated with a prediction that is inconsistent with the
derived base rate prediction. In addition to assessing the correspondence
between base rates and individual and group predictions, the types of
information mentioned during group discussions will be analyzed. The studies
will examine the following ideas: 1) The mix of information (descriptive versus
base rate) that is commonly known will affect how the prediction task is framed
by individuals and subsequently by groups; 2) Task framing will determine how
groups reach decisions: analytical frames will be promote information exchange
and argumentation (problem solving) and heuristic frames will promote conformity
and compromise; and 3) A critical number of members must import an analytical
frame into a group for the group to adopt a problem solving approach.
Information distributions that are expected to promote analytical frames are
ones that result in a critical number of prospective group members having: 1)
the necessary information to support an analytical solution and 2) a sense of
being better informed than others (thus, promoting more effortful cognitive
processing). This work will contribute to our understanding of the processes
involved in decision-making and of strategies that could be used to enhance the
performance of individuals and groups.