* 0339471
* SBIR Phase I:     Network Anomaly Detection Using a Self-Similar Traffic Model
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Raymond Garcia, Shadowband Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project targets the
development of a new network anomaly detection method. The proposed method uses
the deviations in the self-similarity characteristics of the network traffic to
detect network attacks such as denial of service (DoS) and distributed denial of
service (DDoS). DoS, and DDoS attacks are extremely popular in the Internet, and
cause significant financial damage to the U.S. economy every year. The proposed
innovation can be used as a standalone IDS or as a module in an IDS framework.
The potential advantages of the proposed concept are its speed, efficiency, and
its ability to detect new and unknown attacks. The relationship between the
existence of a network anomaly, and a change in the self-similarity
characteristics of the network traffic will be studied. Existing methods for the
real-time estimation of the self-similarity parameter H (Hurst parameter) will
be evaluated, and new approaches will be investigated. Possible improvements for
accurate anomaly detection with minimum false-alarm rates will be discussed,
once the desired relations between attacks and the changes in the H parameter
have been established. The results of this project will provide valuable
information about the feasibility of real-time, automated network anomaly
detectors. The development of these mechanisms is critical for the success of
the next generation of intrusion detection systems, and more importantly,
intrusion prevention systems (IPSs).

The concept of intrusion prevention has great commercial potential, because it
allows networks to detect and stop attacks before any considerable damage
occurs. An IPS requires not only fast but also accurate anomaly detectors for
successful deployment in real networks. The proposed innovation will be a
promising step towards the realization of the next-generation of robust network
security devices.

