* 0339525
* STTR Phase I:   A Software Simulator For Magnetohydrodynamic-Based Microfluidic Networks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Prabhu Arumugam, SFC Fluidics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project proposes
to develop a design tool for magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) based microfluidic
devices. SFC Fluidics' exclusive MHD microfluidic technology has the potential
to play an important role in the emerging microfluidic applications market, but
this requires the availability of an application development design tool for MHD
microfluidic devices. No such design tool presently exists. In Phase I, a
software program that will be able to predict the flow characteristics of an MHD
microfluidic system given user defined design parameters will be developed. MHD
microfluidic networks can potentially provide an elegant, inexpensive, flexible,
customizable fluidic platform that will allow one to move fluids along
programmable paths, stir liquids, and facilitate chemical and biological
interaction and thermal cycling. While no single approach to microfluidic
control works well for all applications, the proposed approach has several
unique advantages that make it very promising for many
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the current laboratory equipment and
instrumentation existing today can potentially be implemented in a laboratory-
on-a-chip configuration using microfluidics. This potential transformation has
been compared by some to the transformation in electronics that occurred upon
the transition from vacuum tubes to integrated circuits. The anticipated
advantages include increased speed and performance, reduced materials usage,
reduced size and power requirements, improved reliability and robustness, and
reduced opportunity for contamination. As an enabling technology, MHD-based
microfluidics could improve microfluidic technology for a wide variety of
devices, leading to smaller, less expensive, more portable and more sensitive
devices for industrial, medical, and defense purposes. MHD-based microfluidics
can move samples through fluidic channels at pl/min to ml/min flow rates without
moving parts, and without bulky power supplies, making the technology especially
well suited for handheld devices. Successful development of MHD-based
microfluidics will further knowledge about microfluidic systems, and will lead
to more advanced microfluidic devices. &lt;br/&gt;