* 0339532
* SBIR Phase I:     Long Endurance Autonomous Aerial Vehicles for Geoscience Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Tom Sherwood, KalScott Engineering Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,956.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
demonstrate capable and reliable autonomous aerial platforms for geoscience
missions. This will allow relevant scientific data to be gathered via remote,
autonomous means, providing timely atmospheric and environmental data on a
global scale, using a reliable, costeffective, easy-to-use tool. Such data has
been shown to have significant bearing on the global weather patterns, thereby
affecting the lives of people in all parts of the planet, both in the short term
and in the long term. There are two major challenges: efficient aerodynamic,
efficient engines and robust airframes to withstand turbulence. This proposal
tackles these challenges, and presents innovative airframe and engine concepts
that will enable long range (3500+ miles), long endurance (50+ hour) missions to
be flown routinely. The aircraft will be able to make transoceanic or
transcontinental flights, gathering relevant atmospheric data. Due to their
improved aerodynamics and engines, such aircraft will also be able to fly in
adverse weather conditions, which is currently not possible with existing UAV
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The company is currently working with several
university groups on such scientific missions, along with the US Department of
Defense, Department of Transportation, NASA, and the Department of Homeland
Security, thus giving us a clear path to commercialization. The vehicle
developed in this effort can be sold or leased to end-users for scientific,
civilian or military missions including atmospheric and environmental
monitoring, wildlife monitoring/tracking, aerial photography, border patrol, law
enforcement surveillance, communication nodes, target designation and tracking.