* 0339300
* SBIR Phase I:     Software Protection Shield (SoftShield)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Abdo Husseiny, Technology International Incorporated of Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project proposes to
develop the skeletal structure and estimate the technical feasibility of a
reverse engineering protective shield software package, a novel advanced
integrated secure software processing system comprising a working environment
that utilizes the most promising tools and techniques to eliminate or
drastically reduce the vulnerability of high-value software binaries from being
reverse-engineered. This project explores creative and original concepts of
secure wrapper-based capability that utilizes the most promising tools and
techniques for processing software binaries. The effort will examine various
reverse engineering techniques and identify the strengths and weaknesses of each
technique. Based on that, innovative tools and techniques will be identified to
counter those reverse engineering techniques through the capabilities of
detecting hostile reverse engineering applications including debuggers and
disassemblers; detecting falsified operating environments; memory and file
protection; and obfuscation, as applied to executables. This set of tools and
techniques will be recommended for incorporation into a package to provide the
foundation for developing a prototype environment for demonstration in Phase II.

The proposed project is important to advancing knowledge and understanding
within the software security field since it reduces the vulnerability of high-
value legacy software against reverse engineering. The project will advance
discovery and understanding of software security while promoting teaching,
training, and learning of protection of high performance computing (HPC). It
will benefit the society through protection of US Government assets and future
investments on HPC. Any computer application where software binary
vulnerabilities are a concern would benefit from this technology.