* 0339604
* SBIR Phase I:      A Novel Bulk Acoustic Wave Oil Quality Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Lester French, Mainely Sensors, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of &lt;br/&gt;developing a novel acoustic wave sensor for use as an
oil quality monitor for motor vehicles and &lt;br/&gt;industrial machinery.
Normally oil quality is not monitored in situ. The most common method of
&lt;br/&gt;ensuring oil quality is to change the oil after a specified amount of
time or miles. The research objectives &lt;br/&gt;will be to determine the ideal
excitation geometry for the sensor, fully characterize the sensor to
&lt;br/&gt;mechanical and electrical perturbations of the contacting liquid, and
demonstrate that the sensor can &lt;br/&gt;reliably monitor engine oil quality.
Phase I work will demonstrate that the sensor is a vast improvement over both
standard quartz crystal microbalances (QCMs) and QCMs with modified electrode
geometries. The result will be acoustic wave sensors that are highly stable and
optimized for oil quality monitoring. &lt;br/&gt; The development of an oil
quality sensor will demonstrate that cutting edge sensor research can be brought
to commercialization and at the same time promote teaching, training and
learning for high school (HS), undergraduate (UG), and graduate (G) students.
This project, in concert with an existing NSF Grades Kindergarten-12 (GK-12)
program and a previously funded NSF science education grant integrating sensors
into the UG and G engineering programs, will offer research, educational and job
opportunities for HS, UG and G students to participate in the proposed project.
The successful demonstration of an oil quality sensor will motivate the
development of similar sensors for applications in health, agricultural,
automotive, environmental and military areas. &lt;br/&gt;