* 0339467
* Including Solar and Heliospheric Models at the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Michael Hesse, NASA/GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER
* Interagency Agreement
* Ilia I. Roussev
* 01/31/2010
* USD 611,046.00

This proposal will incorporate solar and heliospheric models into the Community
Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) at National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) Goddard Space Flight Center. The CCMC will then provide
the research community access to these models via tailored online interfaces,
and transfer validated versions of the solar and heliospheric models to U.S.
space weather operational agencies after suitable testing and evaluation have
been completed. For this purpose, CCMC intends to hire a new staff member to be
supported by the present proposal. CCMC staff will work with developers of solar
and heliospheric models and will adapt these models to CCMC computing resources.
These resources range from in-house Beowulf-type parallel computers to U.S. Air
Force (USAF)-provided computational assets at the Department of Defense (DoD)
high-performance computing centers. CCMC staff will develop easy-to-use
interfaces that will allow users to request solar/heliospheric simulations and
analyze the results of completed runs in a flexible manner. CCMC will evaluate
the performance of the solar/heliospheric models and, together with model
owners, work to increase model performance where desirable and possible. This
activity may include coupling models of adjacent domains or physical scales.
After models have been evaluated for scientific validity and numerical
stability, and their performance assessed through metrics-based studies, they
will be considered for transfer to operational agencies in the federal
government. CCMC has established a new path for this process. Thus, the use of
solar and heliospheric models by U.S. operational agencies will be greatly
enhanced by the proposed program.