* 0339684
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Adaptive Electrically Tunable Lasers with Ultra-Wide Tuning Range
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Le Li, Kent Optronics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a feasibility
study on electrically tunable lasers made from novel liquid crystal based
tunable photonic crystals (TPC). As predicted by a theoretical model and
experiment results, the tuning of the laser wavelength is realized via tuning
the TPC stop band. When doped with lasing dye(s) and pumped by a pumping laser,
electrically tunable lasing is expected over a wide spectral range of 200 nm.
The lasers are also expected to have greater than 20% light-to-light efficiency
in a robust, lightweight, compact, and low cost package. The Phase I effort is
devoted to developing tunable lasers followed by performance improvement by
researching the lasing action and the sources affecting the lasing performance.
In addition, the feasibility of using other pumping sources will be explored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the adaptive nature and low cost feature, the new
tunable laser technology promises a powerful tool that instantly turns fixed
wavelength laser or other incoherent light source into an electrically tunable
laser source for various commercial/space/law/military applications. A single
laser can replace multiple lasers for a certain spectral coverage to reduce the
system cost. Next, a new display product will be created for viewfinder, small
display panels for cameras and camcorder. In military and law enforcement side,
active light modules and tunable laser sources are crucial components in Light
Detection And Ranging (LIDAR), targeting, measuring, imaging, remote sensing,
and display devices. In telecom, the use of tunable laser will save components
inventory cost. In forensic, the advent of the tunable laser technology enables
a miniaturization laser eavesdropping system to monitor conversations. In
astronomy, tunable lasers are important for a sodium guide star laser. They are
also power tools for scene simulation that is widely applied in military unit
for cost reduction&lt;br/&gt;