* 0339535
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Materials Integration Concepts for Electronic and Photonic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Elena Semouchkina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 04/30/2008
* USD 387,500.00

It is anticipated that the ADVANCE Fellows award will not only advance the PI's
career in academia, but also allow her to serve as a role model and mentor to
women students who are pursuing careers in engineering and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will integrate fundamental study of
electromagnetic wave interaction with non-uniform media, approbation of new
ideas in engineering hybrid ceramic materials, and development of innovative
devices vital for advanced wireless communication systems. The goal of the
research is to find new ways to enhance functionality and reduce size of
microwave and mm-wave devices by affecting wave propagation processes in their
circuitry through integration diverse dielectric and magnetic materials in the
device design. Recent achievements in low-temperature co-fired ceramics
technology open up the opportunities to co-process diverse ceramics, which makes
the approaches feasible. The research will be based on full-wave electromagnetic
analysis and include prototype fabrication and
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;Significant advances in several related areas are
expected, where the integration of diverse ceramics in the device design will be
used, in particular, for: 1) local reactive loading in filters and antennas to
reduce device size and optimize characteristics; 2) electromagnetic field
redistribution in antenna chips to improve efficiency and directivity; 3) phase
shifting in power supplying transmission lines in electro-optical modulators; 4)
formation of ceramic meta-materials with exotic electromagnetic properties,
including negative refractive index, in mm-wave range. &lt;br/&gt;The knowledge
gained from the research activities will be incorporated into a new
interdisciplinary course, in which materials science, solid-state physics, and
electrical engineering concepts will be combined to tackle future problems in
wireless communications.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work are expected to
motivate device designers to apply engineered substrates, to stimulate the
development of integrated materials-based technology and to promote a wide
variety of innovative compact microwave and mm-wave components. &lt;br/&gt;This
ADVANCE Fellows award will be managed by two divisions, ECS and
DMII.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;