* 0339000
* An Empirical Investigation of Peer Effects in Schools and of Household Responses to School Policy Changes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Thomas Nechyba, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 361,102.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0339000 &lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ENHANCING HUMAN PERFORMANCE&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Nechyba, Thomas&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: An Empirical Investigation of Peer Effects in
Schools and of Household Responses to School Policy
Changes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research empirically investigates the size and
nature of peer effects in North Carolina public schools and how parents choose
schools (and thus how peer groups within schools endogenously form) both through
their choices of residential location and their choices of school type (private
or public). A new and unique dataset from the North Carolina Education Research
(NCER) Data Center contains detailed information on all North Carolina public
school students in grades 3 through 8 over a five-year period. Students are
linked to teachers and this allows for a variety of definitions of peer groups,
including at the classroom rather than the grade or school level. Student
addresses, available for all public school students, will be linked to addresses
in privately available mortgage/renter datasets that include a wealth of
household information not typically available in education datasets of this
kind. This data will be the basis for the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to permitting researchers to use more extensive household controls,
this dataset permits the separate identification of students who (i) remain
within North Carolina public schools over the sample period regardless of
whether they move and switch schools, (ii) switch between public and private
schools, and (iii) enter or exit the state and thus enter or drop out of the
school dataset. The NCER dataset is currently available and can be used in
pursuit of the first of the identification of peer effects and the evaluation of
the precise nature of peer effects within schools. Merging the private
mortgage/renter data for the Raleigh-Durham metropolitan area with the NCER data
permits the researchers to investigate the second objective of the proposal.
Policy experiments and frequent school neighborhood boundary changes within the
Raleigh Durham area will be used to identify determinants of household choices
over residential location and school type. This lays the groundwork for a more
ambitious effort to merge similar mortgage/renter data with the entire NCER
dataset in order to create a single dataset with extensive information on all
students, teachers, schools, peers and households within North Carolina. This
would be the only dataset of its kind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
results will be useful in several ways: Because the research allows the testing
the importance of different types of peer groups, it is likely to make
substantial advances in identifying the causal nature of peer effects. Second,
the research will yield insights for policymakers whose efforts are often
frustrated by household choices that respond to policy changes. Finally, the
project lays the groundwork for the construction of a very comprehensive
education dataset that combines detailed information on students, households,
peers and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;