* 0339464
* SBIR Phase I:     Tools for Protecting Against Online Password Guessing Attacks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Stuart Stubblebine, Stubblebine Research Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need to
protect networked computer systems from sophisticated password guessing or
dictionary attacks. Such attacks result in the adversary learning the password
or causing a denial of service due to account locking. In many cases account
locking is not practically feasible due to the increased costs of supporting
customers. Recent countermeasures require human-in- the-loop or Reverse Turing
Tests (RTT) as part of the authentication protocol. This project will
demonstrate that many RTT protocols are vulnerable to relay attacks. In one
instance, RTT challenges are relayed to unsuspecting parties, who generate
responses that are then relayed back to the challenger. This project explores
this threat of attack, propose mechanisms to address it, and explore specific
enhancements to an RTT-based login protocol. A major feature of our approach is
increased security, usability, flexibility, and configurability. The protocol
will be tailored to match particular environment, classes of users, and
applications. These features are necessary for any practical adoption RTT-based
solutions.

The success of this project will lead to more secure networks that are more
user-friendly, flexible and configurable.