* 0339338
* SBIR Phase I:  Nano-Porous Silicon Gas Diffusion Electrode for Miniaturized Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Ron Foster, Moducell Incorportated
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses
fabrication of micro- and nano-machined silicon gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs)
for miniaturized Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) fuel cells. Novel micro- and
nano-machining techniques will enable application of thin-film inorganic
membranes with resultant miniaturization and elimination of methanol crossover.
The typical PEM fuel cell is designed around a Membrane Electrode Assembly (MEA)
in which the membrane is a self-supporting mechanical member. Current state-of-
the-Art PEM fuel cells apply relatively thick membranes of NAFION or other
organic materials, with GDEs pressed onto each side at high temperatures and
pressures to form the MEA. Shifting the requirement for mechanical support from
the membrane to one of the GDEs allows the membrane to be made up to two orders
of magnitude thinner. This approach opens up broad possibilities for new
membrane materials and miniaturization of fuel cells to meet application needs.
Thin-film materials have not previously been applied as electrolytic membranes
because the integration problems of applying thin films over porous GDEs have
not been solved. This project will demonstrate that a GDE with thin-film
membrane can be constructed from micro- and nano-machined silicon, with the
silicon GDE providing the required mechanical support. Commercially, PEM fuel
cells are used in applications ranging from transportation to personal
electronics. Current applications of fuel cells to portable electronic devices
such as cell phones, laptops or PDAs are limited largely by the difficulty in
achieving the necessary miniaturization. The proposed technology will ultimately
enable integration of fuel cells with any arbitrary integrated circuit. This
creates entirely new possibilities for miniaturized autonomous systems.
Additional applications for nanoporous silicon technology are electrochemical
sensors, SOFC fuel cells, thermal management, light emission, absorption and
detection devices. In this work, silicon is an ideal choice of material with
excellent electrical and mechanical properties, allowing application of
equipment, facilities and processes developed for the semiconductor electronics
industry to fabrication of miniaturized fuel cells. Due to the discipline of
standardization practiced by semiconductor fabricators, it is likely that
developed processes will be adopted and widely disseminated.