* 0339251
* NSF/USDOT:     Context-Aware Software Agents for Multi-Modal Travel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Martin Griss, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/28/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This project addresses the use of software agents in a highly personalized
intelligent Advanced Travel Information System (ATIS), providing integrated
real-time traffic advice to travelers. Travelers will use increasingly powerful
personal and in-vehicle wireless appliances, which monitor the user's context,
location and motion (via GPS and other sensors), preferences, priorities,
schedule and situation. USDOT studies suggest that information customized to a
traveler's specific needs and situation will enable better transit decisions,
adjusting schedule, routing, and travel modes (car, bus, train, etc.), and
coordinating with other travelers, colleagues and family. This should improve
the overall transport system convenience, utilization and safety.

Software agents are loosely coupled software elements, ideal for highly
flexible, dynamic, and complex systems. Agents are autonomous, pursuing a task
agenda and collaborating with other agents via messages. ATIS agents represent
traveler goals, preferences and plans, monitor trips, adapt plans to changing
circumstances, and prioritize guidance and delegated actions. Agents combine
information from multiple sources on routes, congestion, incidents, weather,
transit modes, and schedules to make real-time, traveler-specific
recommendations.

The research goal is to determine how to effectively create, evolve and use
models of traveler context, plans, routes and services which enable multiple
agents to autonomously maintain their individual information, and to negotiate
and combine information with other agents for useful and timely travel
recommendations. Research outcomes include: 1) concepts, relationships and
attributes for user and travel information; 2) models and representations to
drive agent behavior and collaboration; 3) an agent "intelligence" engine
integrating rules, machine learning, and information retrieval; and, 4) an
evaluation of the technology in a prototype ATIS test bed.

More broadly, the research addresses fundamental issues in intelligent multi-
agent system development, valuable to other context-aware, agent-based
applications and research. The results will enable improvements in numerous
user-oriented systems, including space, defense, health care, manufacturing,
finance, e-commerce, and transportation, reducing user errors and increasing
user satisfaction. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in the
research, results will be incorporated into the education of a diverse student
body, and key software components will be distributed as open source.

