* 0340327
* SBIR Phase I:  Creation of a Massively-Scaleable Emergency Medical Resource Information Exchange System (MEMRIES) Based on an Entity-Attribute-Value (EAV) Database
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Edward Barthell, Infinity HealthCare, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is intended to
design, develop, and evaluate an innovative web-based software application to
address a compelling national need to organize emergency resources. The project
will develop an innovative Entity-Attribute-Value (EAV) database design to
provide a flexible, scaleable platform to meet the needs for a next generation
National emergency resource system. Effective communication systems linking
stakeholders responding to emergency events are critical to the Nation's
preparedness but a standardized, national-level, flexible system is not yet
available. The main Phase One activities are: (1) remodel the current database
as an EAV system; (2) design web-based application tools that provide the
ability to generate aggregate hierarchical views of the data at multiple levels,
and agile messaging; and (3) build a prototype system and convert/replicate a
set of current data, using it with the new prototype system for performance,
scalability and user evaluation during test scenarios.

Commercial application of this project will provide first responders with
ability to simultaneously monitor the status of emergency resources, and to
distribute messages and queries to emergency personnel in local and regional
areas. Successful development and implementation will result in major
improvements in the Nation's preparedness.

