* 0340041
* SBIR Phase I:     iPointer - A Device for Directly Querying Geographic Objects in the Field
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Chris Frank, INTELLIGENT SPATIAL TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 98,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
test the spatial models, algorithms, and software. They are needed to
computationally match the real-time measurements of location and orientation
with the best candidate object in a geospatial dataset. Integrating location-
orientation information data with a digital landscape model and developing a
plausible computational model that targets granularity is key to the success of
the project. Unlike the current location-based services, which put digital maps
on to GPS PDAs, this project will exploit the use of orientation sensors so that
geospatial datasets are not only user centered but also egocentrically oriented.
This aspect is germane to our product since no distinction could be made between
such cogitative aspects as in front and behind an important outcome of the work
will be a set of robust and fast algorithms that will form the core technology
of an integrated hardware-software-data product.

The benefits to society will be felt in several ways. The project will extend
the capability of handheld devices and enable a better understanding of the
environment through technology. Developing a spatial query device that is
simple, easy to use and more intuitive increases accessibility for non-
specialist users. The project will advance infrastructure for research and
education through collaboration with the Spatial Information and Engineering
(SIE) Department at the University of Maine and by being based at the Target
Technology Center, an incubator for science and technical research in Orono,
Maine. The project will advance discovery and understanding while promoting
Teaching, Training and Learning through collaboration with the GK-12 Sensors
Project; working with graduates to trial the sensor technology with high school
students, and by developing materials for the GIS day at SIE. Participation of
underrepresented groups will be addressed through strengthening information
technology research in collaboration with the University of Maine, an EPSCoR
institution.