* 0340139
* SBIR Phase I:     Saving the Black Rhino:    Thinking Globally and Acting Locally
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* George Newman, The Power of Three, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to support the
research and development of a multi-user virtual environment (MUVE) to support
science content learning and environmental awareness among students ages nine to
thirteen. Leveraging an existing platform developed through previous National
Science Foundation support and a 2000+ user-base, it will develop an educational
gaming context in which children will be engaged in investigating the socio-
political and environmental dynamics surrounding the creation and maintenance of
a game reserve located in Tanzania. Children learning from the Black Rhino Unit
will travel around a virtual environment where they can collect environmental
data and interview experts to develop an understanding of the game reserve and
black rhino, learn about the reasons for the animals' near extinction, its
biology, its habitat, and additionally develop an understanding of the Tanzania
(climate, population, terrain, political situation, etc). However, the primary
learning goal of the Black Rhino unit goes beyond learning about the black rhino
with students also having to identify an issue in their local community that
they will investigate and report on. With a fully developed online education
game made possible through National Science Foundation support and expected
supplemental funding, the firm, One Planet Education Network (OPEN), would have
a unique and powerful online education-based 3D gaming application and product
to sell or license to schools and homes online around the world. This education
game development would align with and extend the firm's current portfolio of
online science curriculum programs and result in a product that could have
worldwide practical impact