* 0340910
* A Student-Accessible Model for Human Genetics Using Fast Plants and Microsatellite Markers
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Dawn Pickard, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 08/31/2006
* USD 74,859.00

An experimental system that models human genetics is being developed for
instructional laboratories. The experiments involve microsatellite markers in
rapid cycling Brassica rapa (RCBr), or Fast Plants. The objectives of the
project include development of microsatellite markers for RCBr and analysis
methods that make them accessible to the instructional lab, strains of RCBr with
defined microsatellite genotypes resembling human genetic variation, a pedigree
analysis experiment for linkage analysis with microsatellite markers and the
model genetic disease anthocyaninless, a virtual laboratory in which students
will exchange data with peers, analyze data, and allow the instructor to track
their data analysis, and a prototype web site and manual for high school
teachers and students to analyze data generated by the college labs. The types
of genetic analysis the students can use in these instructional labs include
techniques of microsatellite analysis, assessment of informativeness of
families, inheritance of highly polymorphic markers, and haplotype analysis.
Since genetic linkage cannot be established from a single family, students use
the virtual lab to pool data. In this way, students can perform experiments that
accurately model human genetic analysis and gain experience with molecular
markers. The web-based system facilitates analysis of complex data, pooling of
individual student data, and instructor tracking of analysis.