* 0340864
* On-line Inquiry Learning in Geology:  Prototype Development of a Case-Based Cyber Library
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Daniel Murray, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2005
* USD 74,934.00

Earth System Science (40) This project is producing inquiry-based electronic
field trip modules, which will ultimately be part of a larger Geology Case
Library for use in introductory geology classes. The target audience includes
both geology majors and non-majors, and future teachers. The modules present
geologic principles, and also facilitate students in assuming ownership of their
learning toward becoming self-sufficient, critical thinkers. This library
provides access to geology cases, data sets, and analytical tools, so that
students can identify key elements of scientific problems, determine and find
needed information, write clear explanations of their decisions, discuss
findings, and collectively develop solutions. At the heart of the Geology Case
Library modules is a set of inquiry-based tools that draw upon research into the
relationships between intelligent systems and learning. These tools scaffold and
organize student inquiry, provide feedback and coaching, and support
collaboration and reporting. Project software is designed to put the student in
command of the learning process by guiding exploration from a background posture
and providing customized feedback, dialogue, and redirection where needed. This
software can be adapted to a variety of teaching styles, and easily scaled to
large audiences. The electronic format is ideally suited to the Digital Library
of Earth Science Education and provides teaching that is not susceptible to
changes in personnel. Modules under development at this stage deal with rivers
and faulting, as well as a Generic Case module, which allows users to create
their own case modules within a framework of ideal instructional practices.