* 0340114
* SBIR Phase I:  Linking Curriculum and Assessment:  Products and Services from Research to Classroom
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Paul Horwitz, Educational Network Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,955.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to create a
series of interactive curriculum and assessment materials for middle and high
school science. These materials will be in the form of computer-based activities
that use scaffolded, manipulable models to encourage scientific reasoning. In
addition to capturing their answers to specific questions, the activities will
monitor students' actions as they engage in exploratory and problem-solving
tasks. This rich source of information will be automatically transferred where
it will be analyzed and made available to teachers for embedded assessment of
students' content knowledge and reasoning skills. The technology produced by
this project will enable researchers and educators to create and customize novel
education activities that guide and monitor students' actions as they solve
increasingly difficult problems using computer models of scientific phenomena.
The technology enables extremely fine-grained performance data to be collected
from very large numbers of subjects. This combination will create unprecedented
opportunities for conducting scientific research in education.

Research with computer-based, interactive curriculum materials demonstrates that
they impose no extraordinary requirements for teacher professional development,
and are disproportionately effective with precisely those students whom
traditional science teaching often leaves behind. By bringing up-to-date
research results to the classroom in the form of easily accessible reports on
student achievement, the project will accelerate a shift away from the current
post hoc, multiple-choice testing modality, in favor of real-time embedded
assessment of critical aspects of science learning that are difficult to measure
by conventional techniques. The project will give teachers a tool that will help
them reach underachieving students, coupled with a powerful assessment technique
that will provide them with a continuous measure of their students' learning.