* 0340299
* EITM: The Dynamics of Attitudes and Public Opinion: From Individual Beliefs to Cultural Norms
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Martin Bourgeois, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/2006
* USD 64,872.00

Dynamical systems approaches have been quite useful in describing and explaining
human behavior. This project studies two such theories--the catastrophe theory
of attitudes, which predicts that the degree and type of individual attitude
change will differ depending on issue involvement, and dynamic social impact
theory, which describes how individual social influence will lead to group level
self-organization of opinion. Each theory has been empirically supported and is
useful in describing either individual or group attitudes. However, the
catastrophe theory of attitudes does not address how individual change affects
group outcomes, and dynamic social impact theory does not predict how various
types of attitudes (e.g., those differing in involvement level) will change or
what effects different types of change (e.g., linear vs. nonlinear) will have
for the group. The researchers will conduct a pilot study, using computer
simulations and experiments to see if an integration of these two theories that
predicts attitude change at the individual and group level is possible.
Laboratory experiments and computer simulations will be used to assess
communication in electronic groups for issues at varying levels of involvement
(primarily operationalized as personal importance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; These
studies and the resulting theoretical integration will help us to better
understand, predict, and possibly even manage changes in public opinion at
various levels of analysis. Overall, the studies will provide valuable
information for those interested in interpersonal phenomena, ranging from
attitudes to small groups to culture. The studies will also provide research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups, at the University of Northern Iowa and the University
of Wyoming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;