* 0340764
* US-France Cooperative Research:  The Effect of Nutrient Limitation on Response of Marine Bacterioplankton to Solar Ultraviolet Radiation
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Wade Jeffrey, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 18,000.00

0340764&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is now strong evidence that
ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is increasing over certain locations on the earth's
surface due release of halocarbons in the atmosphere. Additional halocarbons
reduce stratospheric ozone resulting in an increased penetration of short-
wavelength UVB relative to UVA. However, UVR is a normal part of solar radiation
and organisms are exposed to significant amounts, even in the absence of ozone
depletion. Most UVR impact studies have been carried out in polar areas.
However, it is difficult to extrapolate results obtained in polar areas to other
aquatic ecosystems because of differences in biological, physical and optical
characteristics. Recent observations have demonstrated temporal and spatial
variations in bacterial response to UVR. This three-year award for U.S.-France
cooperative research between Wade Jeffrey of the University of Florida and
Fabien Joux of the Observatoire Oceanologique de Banyuls, Banyuls-sur-Mer,
France addresses the causes of bacterial response to UVR in aquatic ecosystems.
The project extends the U.S. investigator's research in the Gulf of Mexico and
Pacific Ocean to bacterioplankton communities of the Mediterranean
Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. investigator has expertise in ultraviolet
radiation effects on bacterioplankton in temperate lakes and the Southern Ocean.
This is complemented by significant French expertise of UV effects in the
Mediterranean. The project will further understanding of environmental
parameters that influence spatial and temporal differences and the response of
bacterioplankton to UV stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
jointly support this project. NSF provides funding for visits to France by the
U.S. investigator and a graduate student. The CNRS will cover the cost of travel
to the United States by the French investigator.&lt;br/&gt;