* 0340654
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Mathematical Modeling of Renal Physiology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Anita Layton, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 455,507.00

The urine concentrating mechanism (UCM), which gives mammals the capability to
produce &lt;br/&gt;hypertonic urine, is localized in the renal medulla. In the
outer medulla, the UCM is &lt;br/&gt;driven by active NaCl transport from thick
ascending limbs, coupled with a countercurrent &lt;br/&gt;flow configuration of
nephrons and vessels; in the inner medulla, the underlying&lt;br/&gt;principles
of the UCM remain to be determined. To better understand the mammalian UCM,
&lt;br/&gt;the PI seeks to develop a dynamic formulation of a highly-detailed
region-based mathematical &lt;br/&gt;model of the renal cortex and medulla of
the rat kidney. The ``region-based'' modeling approach &lt;br/&gt;represents
radial organization of nephrons and vessels, as revealed in anatomic studies,
and &lt;br/&gt;captures the preferential interactions among medullary
structures. The model will incorporate &lt;br/&gt;and evaluate experimental
findings not previously included in models, including the implications
&lt;br/&gt;of recent immunolabeling experiments. To investigate the interactions
between UCM and &lt;br/&gt;tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF) mechanism, the PI
will develop a dynamic epithelial &lt;br/&gt;transport model of the proximal
tubule, and incorporate that model into a TGF framework.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting
model may provide integrated insight into pathogenesis of diseases in which
&lt;br/&gt;dietary salt intake has a paradoxical effect on glomerular filtration
rate, and in which &lt;br/&gt;extracellular fluid volume or the regulation of
sodium transport are deranged.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, using the above models,
the PI will generate animations of distributions of &lt;br/&gt;filtered solutes
and develop user-friendly modeling packages for use by
experimentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is
to use analysis and computational mathematics &lt;br/&gt;to gain a better
understanding of a long-standing mystery in traditional physiology:
&lt;br/&gt;the mechanism by which mammals produce concentrated
urine.&lt;br/&gt;Indeed, although the passive mechanism is frequently given in
physiology&lt;br/&gt;textbooks as an explanation for the production of a
concentrated urine&lt;br/&gt;in mammals, it does not produce a satisfactory
concentration gradient in computer &lt;br/&gt;simulations. Through the
development of a series of mathematical models, the PI seeks&lt;br/&gt;to assess
the validity of certain modeling assumptions. Moreover, the models may provide
&lt;br/&gt;insights into questions such as: What are the impacts of unexpected
experimental findings &lt;br/&gt;that challenge accepted notions of the
concentrating mechanism?&lt;br/&gt;What is the role of the tubuloglomerular
feedback system (which regulates the rate&lt;br/&gt;of fluid entry into the
nephrons, which are functional units of the kidney)&lt;br/&gt;in the regulation
of sodium excretion in both healthy and hypertensive rats?&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, why does renal blood flow vary inversely with dietary salt in both
diabetic &lt;br/&gt;patients and rats with experimental diabetes, when the
opposite effect is expected?&lt;br/&gt;Another objective of this project is to
disseminate modeling methodologies and results, &lt;br/&gt;in part through the
applications of computer visualization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
modeling packages to be developed should encourage experimentalists to
&lt;br/&gt;use modeling techniques to gain a better understanding of the
significance of much &lt;br/&gt;new experimental data now emerging through
techniques involving computer-assisted &lt;br/&gt;micro-anatomy and transgenic
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;