* 0340948
* SGER:    Structure and Phase Behavior of Charged and Polymer-Containing Colloidal Dispersions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2005
* USD 110,647.00

Wu, Jianzhong&lt;br/&gt;U of Cal - Riverside&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;"SGER:
Structure and Phase Behavior of Charged Polymer-Containing Colloidal
Dispersions"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal dispersions are broadly applied in
the fabrication of modern materials such as photonic crystals, catalysts,
membranes, porous electrodes, and advanced ceramics. These applications require
theoretical guidelines for understanding interfacial and thermodynamic phenomena
such as colloidal stability, structural properties, and phase behavior that
depend on multiple parameters, including particle size and concentration, charge
density, ionic strength, properties of solvent and dissolved polymers, and
confining geometry. To meet this requirement, the present research combines
theoretical methods from statistical mechanics with small angle neutron
scattering (SANS) experiments to establish a unified molecular framework for
quantitative description of structural and thermodynamic properties of charged
and polymer-containing colloidal systems. This exploratory research project
consists of four major components: 1) a density functional theory for the
microscopic structures of colloidal dispersions; 2) calculating pair and
multibody colloidal forces and colloidal structure with an emphasis on those
containing multivalent salt ions and polymers; 3) calculating colloidal phase
behavior including structural ordering and metastable fluid-fluid equilibrium;
4) Experiments on poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAM) dispersions for the
calibration of calculated results. Thermally responsive PNIPAM dispersion is
selected in this exploratory research because the physiochemical properties of
the particles and the colloidal forces can be easily controlled by tuning the
preparation conditions and the composition of the aqueous solution. The
colloidal phase diagrams, structure factors, ionic distributions, osmotic second
virial coefficients, and particle size distributions of charged as well as
polymer-containing PNIPAM dispersions will be studied using small-angle neutron
scattering (SANS) and conventional static and dynamic light scattering (SLS and
DLS) measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory research holds significant intellectual merits for its synergetic
combination of novel theoretical approaches with SANS to represent the
interfacial structural and thermodynamic properties of complex systems. The
molecular models developed in this work will be useful, among numerous other
applications of soft condensed matter, for developing theoretical guidelines in
the selection of solution conditions during the fabrication of a new generation
of nanostructured materials using submicron building
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This SGER research
project can lead to a number of broad impacts. First, results from this work
will provide the essential basis for new courses on theory and experiment of
colloidal self-assembly that will be of interest to both undergraduate and
graduate students working in related fields. Students trained in this area will
be highly marketable and will be able to pursue highly productive careers in
nanotechnology. Second, this work will provide support for socioeconomically
disadvantaged students from the University of California at Riverside to
participate in research and gain interdisciplinary skills in theoretical
modeling and cutting edge experimental techniques such as neutron scattering.
Finally, the publications resulting from this exploratory work will have
significant impacts on both fundamental research and technological applications
related to materials at the interface.&lt;br/&gt;