* 0340780
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Developing a Program in Hydrologic Education and Research at Rutgers University
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ying Fan Reinfelder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2007
* USD 219,968.00

In this ADVANCE Fellows project, it is proposed to develop an integrated program
of education and research in hydrologic sciences at Rutgers University. The
broad objectives of the plan are threefold: (1) to provide a broad-based
education in hydrologic sciences for students in various earth science programs
across the university, (2) to develop a core research program in hydrologic
sciences that may bring together various expertise across the university campus
to address a wide range of water-related issues, and (3) to advance the PI's
academic standing toward a full-time, sustainable, and independent academic
career. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the plan is to
enhance the two existing courses (Hydrogeology, Groundwater Modeling) that the
PI currently teaches, and to develop two new courses (Introduction to Hydrology,
Hydrologic Research). These four courses together, offered in alternate years,
will provide a broad coverage of subjects in hydrology at both introductory and
advanced levels, and meet the needs of different earth science disciplines and
programs on campus (e.g., geology, ecology, and meteorology). The research
component of the plan is to continue and expand three of the PI's current
projects, and to build them into a core program that will bring together a
multidisciplinary research team. The first project is to develop a regional
hydrologic model that integrates surface and groundwater processes and
translates climate variability and resource management scenarios into stream
flow and groundwater levels. The second project focuses on the fundamental
understanding of groundwater flow and transport in fractured sedimentary rocks.
The third project examines the role of the water table dynamics in the
atmosphere-land coupling by directly incorporating the water table and
associated processes in a regional climate model. These research projects
attempt to answer fundamental science questions and at the same time contribute
toward building state-of-art research and application tools for answering future
questions. They will help build a center of gravity in hydrologic research that
may bring together various expertises in science and policy across the
university campus to address a wide range of environmental issues.&lt;br/&gt;