* 0340245
* SBIR Phase I:     Ultra Linear FM Transceiver Employing Delta Sigma Modulation in Silicon Germanium
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Keith Warble, Sensor Technologies & Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,448.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates a
novel digital approach for modulation and demodulation of FMCW signals in
precision radar systems and wideband radios. Recent availability of Silicon
Germanium technologies supporting clock speeds of 10 GHz make possible this
approach for potentially high volume 77 GHz automotive radar and 2 GHz cellular
wCDMA applications. Ultimately the SiGe technology will support all digital and
microwave circuitry so an entire RF product can be integrated on one low cost
silicon-based chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research
Phase I project combines two rapidly developing technologies, delta-sigma signal
processing of audio and video information, and silicon germanium(SiGe) wafer
processing. When the SiGe integrated delta-sigma technique is proven successful
for high performance microwave and millimeter wave radios, it has the potential
to enable new commercial radio architectures because of the low cost, power and
size of SiGe integrated circuits. Investigating the limits of clock frequencies
and digital&lt;br/&gt;signal processing speeds using SiGe applied to radio
modems will contribute greatly to this revolution. A successful delta-sigma
modem implementation at microwave frequencies will translate the extensive
knowledge of these techniques at lower frequencies to a significant new spectrum
of applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;