* 0340846
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Elasticity of Cobalt and Molybdenum and High Pressures Development of Inelastic X-Ray Scattering at High-Pressure
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Daniel Farber, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/29/2008
* USD 15,000.00

0340846&lt;br/&gt;Farber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research award, Daniel Farber of the University of California at
Santa Cruz and James Badro and Guillaume Fiquet at the Universite Paris VI will
investigate the elasticity and seismic anisotropy of the Earth's inner core.
Specifically, they will conduct experiments aimed at documenting the pressure
dependence of elastic moduli in cobalt and molybdenum using inelastic x-ray
scattering techniques and the x-ray beam at the European Synchrotron Research
Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble, France. The proposed experimental approach will
allow the researchers to place quantitative bounds on the nature of the
structure of Earth's inner core and to derive an absolute pressure scale. The
project will advance understanding of the composition of the Earth's core and
seismic properties of the core and mantle.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS) jointly support this project. NSF will cover the costs of visits to
France by the U.S. investigator. The CNRS provides funds to French investigators
for their visits to the United States. The proposal takes advantage of French
expertise in inelastic x-ray scattering and access to the ESRF, a world-class
facility in Grenoble, France. &lt;br/&gt;