* 0340729
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Multiple Scattering in QCD and Medium Effects in Relativistic Heavy Ion Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Xiaofeng Guo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2010
* USD 395,888.00

This work explores the dynamics of the Strong Interaction Force and the
properties of hot and dense matter produced in relativistic heavy ion collisions
at the newly built Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National
Lab in New York and the future Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Switzerland.
By colliding heavy ions at extreme energies, mesoscopic regions of sufficient
temperature are created with conditions favorable for creating quark gluon
plasma (QGP), a state of matter that existed during the first few microseconds
of our universe. By studying the QGP and how it was created, cools and expands,
we can gain new insights into the early universe and the relationship between
the most fundamental constituents of matter and the complex array of particles
and nuclei that make up the world around us today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research focuses on particle multiple scattering in dense nuclear matter. In
terms of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), an accepted theory for the strong
interaction force, various particle spectra and particle-particle correlations
are calculated. The resulting predictions can be compared with observations at
RHIC and LHC. Measuring such spectra and correlations will help experimentalists
to discover the QGP and enable us to study its properties. With support from
this Fellows award, the Principal Investigator also engages in undergraduate and
graduate teaching in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Iowa State
University, where she serves as a role model and mentor for women students, and
thus encourages young women to participate in science. &lt;br/&gt;