* 0340535
* US-France Cooperative Research:  A Quantitative  Assessment of Mineral Ballast in Marine Carbon Export and Remineralization
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Robert Armstrong, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 15,003.00

0340535&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year U.S.-France cooperative
research project between the State University of New York at Stony Brook and
Universite de la Mediterranee Laboratory of Marine Microbiology in Marseille,
France addresses the role of minerals on the export of carbon to the deep ocean.
Sinking particles, produced by organisms or introduced into the ocean by winds,
export carbon from the sea surface to the ocean interior and sediments. During
transit, most particulate organic carbon is returned to inorganic form and
redistributed in the water column. This redistribution affects the amount of
carbon that can be sequestered by the ocean and affects the rate at which the
ocean can absorb and store CO2 from the atmosphere. The ability to specify
quantitatively the depth profile of remineralization is critical to predicting
the response of the global carbon cycle to environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Stony Brook team of Cindy Lee, Robert Armstrong and J.
Kirk Cochran and the Marseille group of Madeleine Goutx and Richard Sempere will
construct a model capable of describing and predicting transport of particulate
organic matter and associated bioactive elements into the interior ocean. The
model will provide information to support a better assessment of the role of the
biological pump in the fate of anthropogenic CO2. Thus research will be
conducted at the French JGOFS time series site (DYFAMED) in the Mediterranean.
The Stony Brook team brings to the collaboration expertise in organic
geochemistry (Lee), radiochemistry (Cochran) and modeling (Armstrong). This is
complemented by the Marseille's group detailed knowledge of the DYFAMED site and
their specialty in marine microbiology. Microbiology expertise is needed to
understand the biological controls on organic matter remineralization in sinking
particles. The project will advance understanding of the role of the oceans in
controlling atmospheric CO2 and global warming. It also involves training of
students in international research teams and will assist the establishment of
international links early on in their career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF will cover the costs of visits
to France by the U.S. investigators and students. The CNRS provides funding for
visits to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;