* 0340750
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Multi-Wavelength Observations and Detailed Models of Cyanopolyyne Molecules in Astrophysical Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Mark Morris, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 19,206.00

0340750&lt;br/&gt;Morris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project in astrochemistry addresses the abundant and
ubiquitous cyanopolyyne family of molecules, which are found in a variety of
cosmic environments. These linear molecules emit strong and numerous radio
signals. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, their vibrations can be detected in warm
regions of the spectrum, which renders them excellent probes of star-forming
cloud cores, protoplanetary disks, and of gas outflows from dying stars. The
U.S. investigator, Mark Morris of the University of California at Los Angeles,
and the French investigator, Laurent Wiesenfeld of the Universite de Grenoble I,
will investigate the astrophysical value of the molecule family cyanopolyynes.
They will first calculate collision probabilities to construct a model of
cyanopolyyne line emissions, then, observe these molecules at radio and infrared
facilities in Europe and in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes
advantage of complementary expertise of the U.S. and French investigators and
provides access to a single-dish millimeter telescope, IRAM, located in Granada,
Spain. An American graduate student will participate in the theoretical
calculations and observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
support this joint project. NSF provides funding for visits to France and to
Spain by the U.S. investigator and his student. The CNRS will cover the expenses
of visits to the United States and Spain by the French investigator.&lt;br/&gt;