* 0341529
* An Audio-Tactile Curriculum to Support Visually Impaired Statistics Students.
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Karen Gourgey, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 12/31/2007
* USD 30,032.00

Mathematics (12). The ability to comprehend and manipulate graphical data is
crucial for mastery in STEM disciplines. In statistics, pictorial
representations illustrate data patterns in the form of graphs and probability
distributions; students need to understand the ways these representations denote
statistical concepts and numerical expressions important in the mastery of
statistics. For students who are visually impaired, bringing these strands into
a cognitive whole presents a significant barrier. Faculty who teach this
material to blind students often find themselves at a loss as to how to
proceed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adapts, tests and disseminates a
conceptually rich set of curricular modules for introductory applied statistics,
thereby creating a fully interactive accessible workbook useable by students
with visual impairments and the faculty who teach them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach calls for adapting an existing text for delivery via the Talking
Tactile Tablet, a new low-cost computer peripheral that presents tactile and
large-print graphics coordinated with audio description. The medium is
interactive, and students have random access to text, graphics, and a detailed
index. Guidelines are developed to assist faculty at other institutions who want
to develop their own accessible materials using the tablet format. The
statistics courseware is made commercially available through the completion of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;