* 0341150
* Collaborative Proposal:  CCLI-EMD - A WWW Based Autonomous Robotics Practicum for Engineering Undergraduates and STEM Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Richard Drushel, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 06/30/2009
* USD 68,214.00

Computer Science (31)

This project is based on a recently completed CCLI proof-of-concept project that
developed an undergraduate autonomous robotics class that was offered via the
World Wide Web. In this project a full-development effort producing versions of
the class for both (1) engineering and science undergraduates and (2) STEM
educators and those studying for careers in STEM education is the focus. In
addition to delivering these classes, tools and techniques that may be used to
enable the offering of other types of science practica online are produced.
Although all responsibilities are shared, primary responsibility for robots and
software tools for the courses rest with Wright State University in Dayton, OH
and primary responsibility for pedagogy and evaluation rest with Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH. This project directly addresses several of
the NSF CCLI merit criteria and impact areas listed in the call for proposals.
The work directly serves the educational needs of both science and engineering
undergraduates and STEM educators. It also studies how project based courses can
be offered online. Because many accrediting boards require project content,
knowing how to manage project courses online is a necessary part of moving many
degree programs online. This project contributes significantly both to a body of
educational material and to the base of knowledge about how to develop effective
online materials. The project significantly improves the content and pedagogical
preparation of STEM educators. Further, the project is appropriate for and
amenable to national distribution and adoption at a wide assortment of
educational institutions.