* 0341053
* US-France Cooperative Research:   Molecule/Surface Interaction  and the Formation of Ultra-Thin Layers During High-k Dielectric Growth on Silicon
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Yves Chabal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 9,000.00

0341053&lt;br/&gt;Chabal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project's goal is to develop new modeling tools to deal
with the initial growth of high k dielectrics at the microscopic level. The use
of high k dielectric is imperative for the microelectronic industry and will be
implemented well before the end of this decade. The urgency of this technology
requires a concerted effort combining molecular level simulations and advanced
characterization to uncover the elementary mechanisms fundamental to
technological processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at
Rutgers University led by Yves Chabal and researchers at the Laboratoire
d'Architecture et Analyse des Systemes in Toulouse, France, led by Alain Esteve,
combine theoretical and experimental expertise. The U.S. team brings to the
collaboration expertise in high-k dielectric characterization. This is
complemented by French specialization in modeling of high-k dielectric growth.
Their partnership builds on initial research on silicon substrates using Atomic
Layer Deposition (ALD) and takes advantage of novel Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC)
methods developed by the French team. The KMC methods will complement the more
established approaches, such as infrared absorption spectroscopy for
experimental input and ab-initio quantum chemicalcalculations for theoretical
vibrational mode assignment. The goal is to uncover new microscopic
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported jointly by the
National Science Foundation and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS). NSF provides support to the U.S. institution for annual visits to
France. This is complemented by reciprocal funding by the CNRS for visits to the
U.S. by the French research team. &lt;br/&gt;