* 0341884
* Symposium G:  Molecularly Imprinted Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2004
* USD 3,500.00

Pachavis, Robert H.&lt;br/&gt;Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Symposium G: Molecularly Imprinted
Materials"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2003 Materials Research Society (MRS) Fall
Meeting in Boston, MA, involves over 4400&lt;br/&gt;paper presentations in 38
topical symposia. It is a leading forum for scientists and engineers
all&lt;br/&gt;over the world who are involved in materials research. This
project will support graduate student awards and invited speakers' travel
expenses for the topical symposium on "Molecularly Imprinted Materials". The
lead organizer of this symposium is Professor Peter Kofinas of the Chemical
Engineering Department at the University of Maryland. Dr. Kofinas has obtained
NSF funding in the area of Molecular Imprinting (Grant # CTS0303951) "Isomeric
Sugar Recognition Using Molecularly Imprinted Polymeric Hydrogels"). He has
invited the top international researchers in the area of molecular and nanoscale
imprinting to participate in the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of materials that can bind
selectively to a target molecule is the key to unlocking a host of new
technologies. Molecular imprinting is an established technology, which allows
the&lt;br/&gt;synthesis of materials containing highly specific receptors sites
having an affinity for a target&lt;br/&gt;compound. Molecularly imprinted
materials can mimic some of the functions of enzymes, through the creation of
3-dimensional cavities of specific size and shape for biorecognition of
bioactive compounds. Promising applications for molecular imprinted
technologies, which have attracted much attention over the past decade, include
tailor-made separation materials, molecular recognition materials for
biosensors, catalysts, and antibody mimics for quantitative assay and molecular
recognition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will benefit
underrepresented minorities women and persons with disabilities who have a
harder time coming up with the finances needed to attend this major
international conference.&lt;br/&gt;