* 0341076
* Sheaves on Affine Flags, Springer Fibers, and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/30/2002,12/31/2004
* Roman Bezrukavnikov, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2004
* USD 15,180.00

Previous results of the investigator and collaborators establish&lt;br/&gt;a
relation between coherent sheaves on a Steinberg variety of a
complex&lt;br/&gt;simple algebraic group, and perverse sheaves on the affine
flag variety of&lt;br/&gt;the Langlands dual group. Since the latter are known,
by the work of Kazhdan&lt;br/&gt;and Lusztig, to be related to representations
of quantum groups at a root&lt;br/&gt;of unity, and hence also to
representations of algebraic groups in prime&lt;br/&gt;characteristic, our
results have implications for that theories. &lt;br/&gt;They also indicate that
there should be a relation between the geometry&lt;br/&gt;of perverse sheaves on
affine flag varieties, and non-restricted &lt;br/&gt;representations of quantum
groups or Lie algebras in prime characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of
the present project is to develop this kind of &lt;br/&gt;relationship, thus
providing a new tool for the theory of non-restricted
&lt;br/&gt;representations. It is expected, in particular, to yield a proof and
a&lt;br/&gt;conceptual explanation for recent numerical conjectures by Lusztig.
&lt;br/&gt;The methods and ideology of the present work are partly based on the
geometric&lt;br/&gt;approach to the Langlands program, due to Drinfeld. Another
goal of the project&lt;br/&gt;is to investigate consequences of the above
mentioned results to that theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A key to new
developments, and a source of inspiration in mathematics often &lt;br/&gt;lie in
discovery of parallelism (equivalence) between&lt;br/&gt;seemingly unrelated
objects or theories. Representation theory is a rich&lt;br/&gt;source of
examples of that kind: though formally being a branch of algebra,&lt;br/&gt;the
modern theory relies heavily on geometric disciplines, such as&lt;br/&gt;
topology and algebraic geometry. The principle goal of the present
project&lt;br/&gt;is to develop geometric language for a branch of
representation theory&lt;br/&gt;where it has been lacking so far, namely the so
called theory of non-restricted&lt;br/&gt;modular representations. In the
corresponding algebraic constructions
&lt;br/&gt;divisibility&lt;br/&gt;properties of integral numbers by a particular
prime number are relevant.&lt;br/&gt;The geometry apparently related to this
deals with particular infinite&lt;br/&gt;dimensional objects, encountered also
in mathematical physics&lt;br/&gt;(conformal field theory), and in number theory
(Langlands duality theory).&lt;br/&gt;This construction is expected to provide
new tools for the above mentioned&lt;br/&gt;branch of representation theory; in
particular, it is expected to yield a&lt;br/&gt;proof of certain conjectures by
leading experts in the field.