* 0341853
* Teaching by Choice: Addressing the National Teaching Shortage, Two National Conferences, Winter-Fall 2004
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Lynn Barnett, American Association of Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2008
* USD 728,128.00

The number of students enrolling in K-12 schools and community colleges is
increasing at the same time that teachers are retiring, resulting in a national
need for more teachers in classrooms at all levels. This two year project
consists of two national conferences that are examining barriers and strategies
for ways to produce more qualified teachers for the nation in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) K-12 and community college
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The first national
conference is Teaching by Choice: K-12. The American Association of Community
Colleges (AACC) , the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges
(AMATYC), and the National Association of Community College Teacher Education
Programs (NACCTEP) are co- hosting this conference and are being joined by other
professional societies representing science and technology. The conference
focuses on the role of community colleges in K-12 teacher preparation in
science, mathematics, and technology education. Participants represent K-12
schools, community colleges, four-year colleges and universities, and a number
of professional discipline-specific societies, including the American
Chemical&lt;br/&gt;Society, American Association of Physics Teachers,
International Technology Education&lt;br/&gt;Association, and Association for
Career and Technical Education. The conference is designed to foster discussions
among all of these sectors, with a goal of identifying key issues and solutions
in the development of effective STEM teacher preparation programs. The results
of the conference are being published in a report to be distributed nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second conference, Teaching by Choice: Community
Colleges, focuses on the need for STEM faculty to replace retiring community
college faculty. It provides a forum for community college administrators and
faculty as well as various discipline-specific and workforce associations to
discuss the challenges of retention and recruitment of future community college
STEM faculty. A summary of the conference results is being&lt;br/&gt;published
and distributed nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through the
two conferences and subsequent summary reports, the issues and suggestions are
impacting the development and implementation of community college teacher
education programs and the recruitment and retention of future community college
STEM faculty nationwide. There is a widely recognized need to update the system
of STEM teacher education to produce highly qualified teachers, and the
recognition of the national need for highly qualified community college STEM
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;