* 0341341
* Domain Wall Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Marcel den Nijs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2008
* USD 363,000.00

This award supports theoretical research on fundamental aspects of collective
stochastic processes with many degrees of freedom. The focus is on building
novel interrelations between such phenomena and enhancing existing ones. The
principal investigator typically formulates specific models that address
specific issues and allow for a detailed study combining numerical and
analytical tools. Examples include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Reconstructed rough
phases exist in equilibrium, but during KPZ-type surface growth, the
reconstruction order fluctuates critically at short length-scales because domain
walls become trapped to the ridge lines. These types of coupling can now be
tailored to serve as tools for investigating the statistics of specific
topological surface aspects, and thus to improve our fundamental understanding
of staionary growing states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The avalanche dynamics in
an unloading sandbox model maps exactly onto KPZ-type surface growth. This new
example of self-organized criticality can now serve as a benchmark to explore a
unifying picture for absorbing-state criticality, surface growth, and avalanche
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Dissociative dimer surface dynamics gives
rise to anomalous equilibrium surface roughness and maps exactly to polymers on
random lattices. The role of non-local deposition and extremal statistics needs
further investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Driven stochastic flow through
narrow channels with an obstruction leads to macroscopic queueing, but only
above a critical strength of the slow bond. Below this dynamic phase transition
the queue takes a power law shape with a novel scaling exponent. This has
intriguing links to other driven phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
ties together a number of fields of study. The principal investigator also has
close connections with related experimental groups. Graduate students will be
trained and the PI also teaches regularly on this research at various
schools.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research focuses on
statistical phenomena on surfaces (two-dimensions) with strong connections to
both applied mathematics and experiments. The PI is able to work at the
intersection between fields and make unique connections between phenomena and
models. This research program provides an excellent training for
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;