* 0341973
* Investigation of New Sensor Concept Using Non-Adiabatic Energy Transfer and "Chemicurrent" Production from Gas Adsorption and Reaction on Ultrathin Metal Films
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Eric McFarland, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John R Regalbuto
* 01/31/2007
* USD 410,000.00

The detailed mechanisms and process dynamics by which the transfer of energy
occurs during adsorption and reaction on catalytic surfaces are of fundamental
interest. In experiments investigating energy transfer during chemisorption we
were able to show experimentally that electronic excitations were a significant
component of chemisorption energy transfer associated with atomic hydrogen or
atomic deuterium on Ag and Cu ultrathin films (Phys. Rev. Letters 82 (2),
446-449 (1999)). With subsequent NSF support we demonstrated the ubiquitous
presence of chemically induced charge transport for a variety of chemical
interactions on a variety of different metal surfaces (Science 294 (5551)
2521-2523 (2001)). That energy transfer from chemisorption can proceed by direct
electronic excitation is a departure from the conventional dogma which holds
that multiple phonon excitation is the primary means through which reaction
energy is dissipated. We observe the electronic excitations using ultra-thin
metal films (~10 nm) deposited onto semiconductors in a Schottky diode detector
structure as a "chemicurrent" resulting from reaction induced excited charge
carriers which travel ballistically across the metal film and traverse the
Schottky barrier. Though many questions were answered during this initial grant
period many others were raised with significant implications for our
understanding of surface catalyzed reactions and how we might link chemical
processes at surfaces and electronics ("chemielectronics"). In our continuing
investigations we will work towards: i) measuring the energy distribution of
electrons excited in the metal surface, ii) characterizing the dependence of the
electronic excitation probability and energy distribution on the kinetic energy
of the adsorbate, iii) investigating the role of electronic excitations in
surface mediated energy transfer, iv) investigate new device structures with
applications to sensors, and v) developing a comprehensive theoretical model to
understand and interpret the electronic excitation probabilities and energy
distributions. The intellectual merit of our work is in developing a better
understanding of the reaction associated electronic excitation phenomena.
Broader impacts include potential applications for new sensors and
chemielectronic devices as well as in the general area of heterogeneous
catalysis. This project will impact basic surface science by helping to clarify
our view of surface energy transfer and the connections between chemical and
electronic observables. The immediate application will be in the practical area
of sensor technology where we will have introduced a new class of solid-state
sensor and photovoltaic device while the long-term significance will be in
helping to improve our understanding of a basic process in nature. Most
importantly, funds from this project will allow the continued high quality
education of outstanding young scientists and engineers.