* 0341271
* SGER:      Optimized Catalyst Layer Structure for PEM Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Trung Nguyen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2005
* USD 50,633.00

The catalyst layer, being the power-producing component, is considered as the
most important component in a PEM fuel cell. It is a region where all three
important phases must be brought together to enable the power generating
reactions to occur. Currently, the catalyst layers in a PEM fuel cell are made
of platinum on carbon support, Nafion ionomer and Teflon. The solid Pt/C
catalyst phase acts as the electro-catalyst for the hydrogen oxidation or oxygen
reduction reactions at the anode and cathode and provides electronic conduction
to and from the reactive sites. The Nafion ionic phase provides the ionic
conductivity or pathways for the protons to migrate to and from the membrane
electrolyte and acts as a binder for the catalyst particles. Teflon creates the
hydrophobic gas region for reactant gas transport to and from the catalyst
surface within the catalyst layers. To achieve high performance in a PEM fuel
cell, the three major sources of voltage loss (activation, ohmic and transport)
in a PEM fuel cell must be minimized. The voltage loss due to the activation
resistance in the catalyst layer can be reduced by increasing the electro-active
catalyst surface area. The voltage loss due to the ohmic resistance can be
reduced by increasing the ionic and electronic conduction in the catalyst layer.
Finally, the voltage loss due mass transport can be reduced by minimizing the
thickness of the region through which the slowest transport process occurs
(Nafion film) and minimizing the barriers (like liquid water) to the transport
processes of reactants to and from the catalyst surface. &lt;br/&gt; The
intellectual merit of this proposed process is its ability to create a catalyst
layer with well-defined and controlled structure necessary to satisfy the
requirements needed to achieve high performance in a PEM fuel cell as described
above. If this process is successful, it will result in membrane and electrode
assemblies and fuel cells with superior performance. The broader impacts of this
work are that the use of fuel cells will help reduce environmental problems and
the U.S.'s dependence on foreign oil. Consequently, technology that increases
its performance will increase its competitiveness and help accelerate the
commercialization of this technology. Furthermore, the process developed here
could also be used to create ideal catalyst layer structures for electrodes used
in other electrochemical applications. &lt;br/&gt;