* 0341435
* Development and Evaluation of Computerized Multi-access Taxonomic Keys for Undergraduate Biology Laboratory Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Earlene Armstrong, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 05/31/2008
* USD 74,618.00

Biological Science (61). This CCLI Educational Materials Development proof-of-
concept project supports the development and evaluation of a prototype
electronic key to the insects of eastern North America. Unlike traditional
identification methods that use dichotomous taxonomic keys in print format, this
student-friendly computer-based tool can be entered at multiple access points,
thereby encouraging exploration and accommodating the uncertainty often found
among introductory users. The assertion that the flexibility of this electronic
key increases students' speed, accuracy and confidence in identification of
insects is evaluated by comparison of the performance of students using the two
approaches (the multi-access key versus dichotomous keys), and involves diverse
courses with students ranging from non-science majors to those choosing
entomology as a specialization. The results provide important information for
educators considering the incorporation of biodiversity modules in their
laboratory or field course curricula. This project serves as a model for the
development of electronic keys for other taxa. The internet availability of this
easy-to-use professionally-produced identification tool should be of value to
educators, extension agents, researchers and the average citizen, and fosters a
greater interest in taxonomy, a more intimate awareness of the environment and
the diversity of organisms found there, and an enhancement in scientific
literacy.