* 0341874
* Computer Simulations of Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

This award supports research that will utilize methods of computer simulation to
complement traditional theoretical and experimental approaches to the study of
diverse, important problems in statistical physics. The basic techniques to be
used include Monte Carlo and spin dynamics simulations, the actual
implementations of which are already quite sophisticated. A broad range of
models will be examined, including those with relevance to magnetic materials,
binary semiconductor alloys, growing films, and disordered media. In this latter
class of systems are models with intrinsic local frustration, e.g., magnetic
spins on a pyrochlore lattice. Both static and dynamic critical phenomena for
systems in equilibrium will be carefully examined, and simple non-equilibrium
models related to film growth and superionic diffusion (driven diffusive
systems) will be studied as well. Several of the systems will allow particles to
move continuously in space, subject to elastic interactions, whereas others will
be confined to rigid lattices (including classical spins with continuous degrees
of freedom) with discrete near neighbor interactions. In some cases, finite
geometries and/or the presence of walls will be responsible for behavior which
is fundamentally different from that which is found in the bulk. The over-
arching objective of the research will be to discover new phenomena and to
provide a fundamental understanding of the behavior of all of the systems
studied. Part of this effort will also focus on the development and refinement
of new simulation methods that will further enhance our ability to study phase
transitions in systems that cannot be treated analytically. Whenever possible,
results will be compared with those from theory and/or experiment. The
combination of the discovery and explanation of physical phenomena together with
the anticipated methodological developments forms a coherent activity with
substantial intellectual merit. Broader impacts of this research will result
from the applications of the models studied to other fields, as well as the
development of methods that can also be widely applied. In addition, students at
all levels will benefit. Some funds will be used to support student
participation in an annual workshop on simulational
physics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research that will utilize
methods of computer simulation to complement traditional theoretical and
experimental approaches to the study of diverse, important problems in
statistical physics. The basic techniques to be used include Monte Carlo and
spin dynamics simulations, the actual implementations of which are already quite
sophisticated. A broad range of models will be examined, including those with
relevance to magnetic materials, binary semiconductor alloys, growing films, and
disordered media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research will
result from the applications of the models studied to other fields, as well as
the development of methods that can also be widely applied. In addition,
students at all levels will benefit. Some funds will be used to support student
participation in an annual workshop on simulational
physics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;