* 0341205
* 2003 International Workshop on IT-Enabled Supply Chain Management and Logistics; December 14-16, 2003; Bangalore, India
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2004
* USD 8,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Given the increasing importance of Information Technology in enabling
leading&lt;br/&gt;businesses and supply chains and the rapidly evolving
structure of private sector and&lt;br/&gt;public sector organizations driven by
constant innovations in the field of IT, there are&lt;br/&gt;tremendous scope
and value for ground-breaking research in various aspects of
IT-&lt;br/&gt;enabled logistics and supply chain management. To bring together
some of the finest&lt;br/&gt;researchers in this area to present their
perspectives, an international workshop is being&lt;br/&gt;proposed in the IT
capital of India, Bangalore, later this year. Thought leaders
and&lt;br/&gt;accomplished researchers from across the world will congregate to
share their findings,&lt;br/&gt;unearth path-breaking approaches to shared
problems and discover common research&lt;br/&gt;interests in the closely inter-
related areas of supply chain management, IT enabled&lt;br/&gt;logistics,
E-business and manufacturing automation. This collective learning process
will&lt;br/&gt;definitely lead to significant new findings that shall further
aid the development and&lt;br/&gt;deployment of new IT solutions in
Industry.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be organized over a period of 2 days with
a total of 8 sessions that&lt;br/&gt;shall be dedicated to exploring the
frontiers of IT-enabled logistics and supply chain&lt;br/&gt;networks. A pre-
workshop tutorial on the basics of IT-enabled logistics and supply
chain&lt;br/&gt;management will be organized for the benefit of interested
workshop participants. A&lt;br/&gt;total of 40 prominent speakers will be
invited to present their results and share their&lt;br/&gt;perspectives. The
total number of participants including speakers will be around 150
(40&lt;br/&gt;speakers, 40 faculty members from Indian Universities, 30 Industry
participants and&lt;br/&gt;about 40 research students). Some of the companies
that are expected to participate in&lt;br/&gt;this event are i2 Technologies,
SAPLabs, Samsung, Motorola, Infosys, Satyam,&lt;br/&gt;MindTree, IBM India
Research Labs, and GM India Science Labs.&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve the
ambitious goals of this workshop, the participation of
international&lt;br/&gt;experts particularly from the US is absolutely
essential. In this regard, NSF funding to&lt;br/&gt;provide partial support for
the travel and accommodation of US-based researchers&lt;br/&gt;attending the
event will go a long way in making the event a grand success. It
is&lt;br/&gt;estimated that support will be required to facilitate the
participation of around 10 US-&lt;br/&gt;based academicians.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed workshop is that it brings together
leading&lt;br/&gt;researchers and industrial thinkers for technical
presentation, brainstorming discussions,&lt;br/&gt;industrial visit, and
workshop publication. The speakers will share some of their
most&lt;br/&gt;recent research findings to addresses both the IT and the
modeling issues, and this will&lt;br/&gt;have broad impact on both traditional
industries such as automotive, aerospace, apparel,&lt;br/&gt;petrochemicals,
etc. and also e-business companies. The outcomes of the Workshop
will&lt;br/&gt;be widely disseminated to scientists and engineers in academia,
manufacturing and&lt;br/&gt;service industries, and the supporting IT industries
through Workshop Proceedings and&lt;br/&gt;personal contact. Visits to leading
Indian software houses and research institutes and&lt;br/&gt;technical
discussions among participants would facilitate a better understanding of
India&lt;br/&gt;IT industry by US researchers, and the establishing an
international research network will&lt;br/&gt;then have a far and broad impact
on international collaboration between the two&lt;br/&gt;countries.