* 0341791
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  The Crystal Ball at MAMI Project
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Bernard Nefkens, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2005
* USD 24,000.00

0341791&lt;br/&gt;Nefkens&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Bernard Nefkens and
students from University of Californis-Los Angeles in a collaboration with
Reinhard Beck of the Institute for Nuclear Physics at the University of Mainz,
Germany. This award supports a new program of study being undertaken at the
Mainz Microtron (MAMI) in Mainz, Germany with the Crystal Ball (CB) detector,
the TAPS spectrometer as a forward endcap. Additional equipment includes the
Glasgow photon tagger, the Mainz/Bonn polarized target, and the DAPHNE wire
chamber. This apparatus will enable a multifaceted physics program involving the
measurement of several fundamental quantities related to the structure of the
nucleon. Nucleon structure models make specific predictions for not only the
masses and decay branching ratios of the states, but also their magnetic
moments. The collaboration in Mainz is uniquely situated to measure the magnetic
moments of D+(1232) and N+(1535). The only similar previous study is a
measurement of uD++(1232) performed at Los Alamos in 1978. The intellectual
merit of this program lies in the ability to relate measurements of fundamental
quantities such as the magnetic moments of the D(1232) and the N(1535) to the
structure of the proton and the neutron, the two basic particles that together
make up well over 99% of the visible mass of the known universe. The UCLA group
is well qualified to participate in this endeavor, having led an international
collaboration using the Crystal Ball detector at the Brookhaven AGS for similar
studies with pion and kaon beams. The German group at the Mainz facility plans
to devote 2000 hours of beam time per year to this effort over the next five
years. The impact of this research will extend far beyond the goals stated in
this proposal. In addition to training several physics Ph.D. students engaged in
original research projects, this program will contribute to the education of
many undergraduate and masters-level students. The Crystal Ball Collaboration
has an excellent record of diversity; the students who earned their doctoral
dissertations with this detector include not only a woman, but also students
from Bangladesh, Thailand, Canada, and Russia. By participating in this program,
the various member institutions will enhance their laboratory and data analysis
capabilities, thus improving their research and educational
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;