* 0341633
* Development of Project-Based Introductory to Materials Engineering Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Stacy Gleixner, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 04/30/2008
* USD 349,978.00

Modules in introductory materials science and engineering are being developed
that engage early engineering students in design experiences. These classroom
modules help teach materials science and engineering within the context of
modern technologies. Laboratory modules are being developed to emphasize how
materials engineers function in industry. Forms of the modules appropriate for
high school demonstrations are also being
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development is being carried out by faculty from
research universities, comprehensive universities, and community colleges who
have significant curriculum development experience and diverse materials science
and engineering research interests. The modules are being structured around
learning objectives and include active learning exercises, design problems, open
ended project labs, and assessment tools. During the development of the modules,
feedback is being solicited from an industry advisory board and a community
college partnership. The modules are being beta tested by community colleges,
research universities, and teaching colleges. Assessment is being done on
whether the learning objectives are achieved and on the ease of adaptability of
the modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
engineering departments, including community colleges, require their students to
take an- Introduction to Materials - course. With annual course enrollments of
over 50,000 in the U.S., innovations in the curriculum have widespread
applicability. The assessment of the modules contribute to educational research
on the effectiveness of design problems and project based labs. The results of
the assessment are being presented at national conferences and published in
engineering education journals. National dissemination of the modules is being
supported by McGraw-Hill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;