* 0341922
*  Student Travel Support for the 2003 Internet Measurement Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Mark Crovella, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 02/29/2004
* USD 15,000.00

IMC is the primary venue for presenting new research results on collecting and
analyzing mea-surements of the Internet. Last year's workshop, held in
Marseille, France, had more than 100 attendees, with a waiting list of
additional people wishing to participate. This proposal requests funding to aid
graduate students enrolled in institutions in the United States in attending
this premiere conference. Attending conferences such as IMC is of paramount
importance for graduate students pursuing research in the field. Authors have
the opportunity to present their work and all attendees have a chance to
interact with many others performing leading-edge research in the field.
Intellectual Merit: This proposal will serve to widen the audience attending the
Internet Measurement Conference, raising the level of interaction and the
potential for new collaboration, new investigations, and higher quality
research. Broader Impact: This proposal, by enabling students to attend who
might not otherwise be able, will increase the dissemination of the conference's
research results to a larger and more diverse audience. By giving preference in
grant awards to women and minority students, we hope to widen the participation
among these underrepresented groups. Furthermore, by advertising to a wide range
of colleges and universities, participants from a more diverse set of
institutions should be able to attend and benefit from the conference.