* 0341409
* Workshop: Genomic Sequence Resources  for Tomato and the Solanaceae to be Held in Washington, DC, November, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Steven Tanksley, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Jane Silverthorne
* 03/31/2004
* USD 24,644.00

The purpose of this gathering is to make a cost-benefit analysis of sequencing
the tomato genome as a reference for the family Solanaceae and other closely
related plant families. An international contingency of scientists will be
invited who can address:

1. The current status of tomato-potato research including aspects of plant
biology for which Solanaceous species are a preferred model; 2. The potential
impact of sequencing the tomato genome on research in the Solanaceae
specifically and plant biology in general; 3. What sequencing strategy might be
best in terms of cost and utility; 4. To what extent and through what mechanisms
might such a sequencing project be conducted as part of a multinational
consortium; 5. How might information derived from such a project be managed,
curated, and made available to the public.

The meeting will be held in November of 2003 in Washington DC and will include
representatives from academia, government and the private sector coming from
(but not necessarily limited to) China, France, Germany, Holland, Israel, Italy,
Spain, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Currently, all of these
countries have active genomics research activities in one or more Solanaceous
species or have expressed interest in participating in a sequencing project of
the tomato genome. In addition to individuals actively working on solanaceous
species, we will also invite representatives from other plant genome sequencing
projects (e.g. Arabidopsis, rice, Medicago) so that they might provide
insights/advice into the organization/execution of such a project. The meeting
will last one day and will result in a summary document that will be distributed
to all participants as well as any other interested parties.