* 0341008
* Designing the Human Experience: Folio Thinking in Theory and Practice within a Freshman Engineering Seminar
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Larry Leifer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 74,999.00

Engineering education faces persistent shortcomings in the recruitment and
retention of women and minorities. One factor contributing to this multifaceted
problem is a lack of student confidence in abilities and knowledge related to
engineering practice. Our theory-of-change predicts that three experiential
elements must be integrated to build confidence; students must:1) experience
their own thinking in engineering activities; 2) create and see tangible
evidence that they have formulated and solved interesting engineering problems;
and 3) be guided to maximize the benefits of elements 1 and
2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, we are providing freshmen with
a learning experience that will allow them to make informed choices in favor of
engineering before they have acquired the fundamentals. We are accomplishing
this by developing and evaluating a new instructional strategy-Folio Thinking-in
a freshman engineering seminar at Stanford University, Designing the Human
Experience: Design Thinking Theory and Practice. Folio Thinking is an innovative
pedagogical paradigm aimed at increasing the intellectual self-confidence of
prospective engineering majors by raising their awareness of their engineering
aptitudes, knowledge, and skills by guiding students through the process of
creating learning portfolios. Creating the portfolio is itself an important
learning experience and our primary assessment instrument. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;We are collaborating with engineering faculty members from other
institutions to develop a rubric for evaluating the student portfolios. This
project will deliver: a detailed online case-study; a corpus of data open to
study by educators and engineering faculty; and a model of Folio Thinking
pedagogy (assignments, supporting tools, and materials) for re-use, re-design,
and re-deployment nationally and internationally. We expect that students will
seek out these courses and that faculty will find the above materials useful in
a wide array of introductory and advanced engineering courses that attract and
maintain a diverse engineering student body.&lt;br/&gt;