* 0341601
* PROJECT EMD-MLR: Educational Materials Development through the Integration of Machine Learning Research into the Senior Design Projects
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Philip Chan, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 04/30/2009
* USD 99,996.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focused on Machine
Learning (ML) and has the following objectives &lt;br/&gt;1) the development of
educational material in the form of software implementations of ML algorithms
and the compilation of accompanying documentation; &lt;br/&gt;2) the creation of
an on-line ML Repository via the archiving of the developed products;
&lt;br/&gt;3) the authoring of 3-4 chapters of an undergraduate ML textbook;
&lt;br/&gt;4) the introduction of ML research in the participating institutions
curricula and; &lt;br/&gt;5) the dissemination of the developed material through
the on-line outlet, the affiliated academic institutions and
industries.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are achieved by forming Student Design
Project teams consisting of undergraduate students from the partnering
Universities and Community Colleges. Each team works on the implementation of a
ML algorithm and its documentation and on a related research topic supervised by
their assigned PI. A team of PIs with strong teaching and research experience in
ML, as well as extensive experience on supervising senior design teams achieves
the project's objectives. EMD-MLR's objectives impact 80 students, some of which
are members of underrepresented groups (in particular UCF and SCC students).
Furthermore, the project's focus enhances partnerships amongst 4 neighboring
institutions, and many more affiliate Universities dispersed within the US and
abroad. The University partnerships constitute the anchor of an elaborate
dissemination plan that is multi-faceted and self-sustained.&lt;br/&gt;