* 0341702
* ITR/AP:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   A Simulation Based Computational Approach using Machine Learning to Study Stochastic Business Games
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Abhijit Gosavi, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2004
* USD 58,555.00

The objective of this research is to extend the knowledge of the single player
stochastic decision problems, which have been studied for years, to develop new
methodologies for multi-player games and test them on large-scale problems from
the domain of e-commerce and supply chain management. Such a methodology, when
developed and tested, will provide a much needed resource to the corporate world
for examining business policies. The Internet revolution has brought about
tremendous changes in the marketplace by tearing down the barriers of time and
distance. The competition among the providers of goods and services for luring
the customers has reached an epic height. Consider, for example, a homebuyer's
request for a mortgage loan, which is now available to virtually every lending
institution (e.g., a bank) in the world. All the banks (players, in generic game
theory nomenclature) seeking to capture this customer are involved in a
stochastic game, where they form their bids in anticipation of other players'
actions. Based on the outcome of their bids, the players try to learn a strategy
for the subsequent customers. In the above example, the game environment is
highly stochastic and the game return is not necessarily of the zero-sum type.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main purpose of modeling and examining such problems
is to foresee the equilibrium point(s) of a game, the path of the game evolution
which tells us about the game returns in finite time horizons, and also the time
taken by a game to reach an equilibrium point. In today's volatile market
situation, short-term game returns could be of much more immediate importance.
Standard game theoretic analysis, when available, is geared toward
characterizing the equilibrium points. Through simulation-based approaches to
the study of stochastic games, as presented in this project, one can also
examine the evolutionary paths a game can
follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;