* 0342381
* Territorial Expansion and Administrative Consolidation in the Inka Heartland, Cusco, Peru: The Xaquixaguana Plain Archaeological Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Ronald Covey, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 88,236.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. R. Alan Covey and a team
of American and Peruvian colleagues will conduct two field seasons of
archaeological and ethnohistoric research on the Xaquixaguana Plain, located to
the west of the city of Cuzco in the Andean highlands. This interdisciplinary
research comprises an intensive regional survey and the study of unpublished
sixteenth-century documents housed in Peruvian archives. Researchers will use
settlement pattern data and geographic information from archival documents to
delimit territorial divisions, evaluate the complexity of local settlement
hierarchies, and identify Inka imperial infrastructure in the study region. The
new data will advance our understanding of how the Inka polity conquered the
many polities and ethnic groups living around the Cuzco Valley, as well as the
means by which the Cuzco region was transformed into a highly integrated
imperial heartland.

The new field research on the Xaquixaguana Plain will build on existing
archaeological and ethnohistoric data to test a suite of hypotheses regarding
Inka expansion strategies during early campaigns of territorial expansion (c.
A.D. 1200-1400), and the nature of political and economic consolidation during
the imperial period (c. 1400-1532). Previous research suggests that early Inka
expansion targeted groups of moderate political complexity, especially those
living along important routes between different ecological zones. Following the
conquest of local groups, the Inka empire appears to have used two strategies to
consolidate control in their heartland: the development of imperial
infrastructure (roads, waystations, and production enclaves), as well as the
construction of new agricultural and herding resources directly controlled by
royal Inka lineages. By studying settlement pattern change in a region known to
have pre-Inka groups of varying complexity, as well as imperial infrastructure
and royal estates, this project will yield new insights on Inka expansion and
imperial administration.

The intellectual merit of this research rests on its contribution to the study
of how Inka imperial strategies developed. The field survey will add to three
previous projects, providing settlement pattern data for most of the area within
about 25-30 km of the Inka capital. The new data will enable researchers to
evaluate the accuracy of historical accounts of ethnic diversity and political
complexity in the study region, as well as to determine the degree to which
local economies were reorganized as the Inka resettled provincial retainer
populations in the region to serve the royal lineages. An interdisciplinary
interpretation of early Inka expansion and administrative strategies will
advance our understanding of how the Inka built the largest (and most
ecologically and ethnically diverse) empire in the prehispanic Americas.

The broader impact of this research is the training of American and Peruvian
students. Graduate students will learn archaeological survey methods, and will
be encouraged to use the new regional data as a point of departure for designing
independent projects for professional degrees and doctoral dissertations.
Project data and archival documents will also be used to train undergraduate and
graduate students through the many educational outreach programs maintained by
the American Museum of Natural History.