* 0342325
* Collaborative Research:    Towards an Integrative Mechanistic Theory of Within-Host Disease Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Marilyn Smith, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 31,840.00

Abstract

Awards: DMS 0342388, 0342239, 0342325 Principal Investigators: Yang Kuang, Val
Smith, Marilyn S. Smith

This multi-campus team is studying processes within a single biological host
that can be described by models inspired by ecological stoichiometry, the study
of the balance of energy and multiple chemical resources (usually elements) in
ecological interactions. These concepts have been broadened by their extension
to biological stoichiometry, which has proven to be an important new lens
through which we can view and understand complex biological interactions. Within
this general theory, the cycling and utilization of energy and multiple
nutrients by organisms and their constituent cells occupies a central position.
With its emphasis on the flow of elemental matter, such as carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorus, stoichiometric theory covers multiple biological scales. It also
allows, via rigid physical and chemical constraints, the construction of robust
mechanistic and predictive models. Originally formulated and verified in the
fields of limnology and plant ecology, biological stoichiometry has recently
been applied at physiological scales to such diverse areas as organism
development and tumor growth. In this proposal we aim to synthesize and apply
theoretical and empirical approaches to biological stoichiometry within the
grand framework of internal disease. Recent headline-grabbing findings that
connect nutritional factors to disease dynamics indicate there is an increasing
need for stoichiometry-based mathematical models of internal disease that track
the effects of potentially limiting resources. The proposed work weaves together
threads of theoretical and experimental research. Our primary aim is the
construction of predictive and verifiable theoretical models which can begin to
explicitly deal with the effects of stoichiometric interactions in within-host
disease dynamics. Such models will be built in a modular fashion, starting with
simple deterministic models, and then progressively adding stochasticity,
spatial heterogeneity, and genetics. At each step the models will be challenged,
calibrated, and tested by in vitro laboratory experiments.

The proposed work will have a broad impact in both science research and
education, and eventually in internal disease management and treatment.
Regarding the former, our research team is truly interdisciplinary, with group
members in mathematics, theoretical physics, ecology, and biomedicine. Our
collaborative efforts will provide undergraduate and graduate students and
junior scientists of diverse ethnic/racial backgrounds with first-hand
educational experience in cross-disciplinary communication and exploration. The
current proposal is a step towards new ways to understand disease, aiming to
develop robust and experimentally calibrated mathematical theories of disease-
host interactions that can be applied to a wide variety of diseases. We firmly
believe that such theories have a central role to play in present and future
research. These grants for proposals submitted as a collaborative proposal from
three institutions are made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support
Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition
sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Directorate for
Biological Sciences at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health.