* 0342651
* Cloud Drop Size Distribution Measurement Using Phase Doppler Interferometry during Rain In Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Patrick Chuang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2008
* USD 194,924.00

This project will use a new instrument to measure the size distribution and
concentration of cloud droplets in trade-wind Cumulus clouds over the ocean. The
instrument, based on the technique of phase-Doppler interferometry, will provide
better size resolution and more stable calibration than instruments normally
used on research aircraft. The project is part of the "Rain in Cumulus over the
Ocean" (RICO) field experiment, which will collect measurements during December
2004 and January 2005. One important objective of RICO is to understand the
"warm rain" process, in which rain is formed without involvement of the ice
phase. Accurate measurement of the droplet size distribution is important if
this objective is to be realized, so the measurements from this new instrument
promise to provide key data for RICO. Specific topics to be investigated include
the importance of "ultra-giant" (>50 micrometer) aerosol particles in the
formation of rain, the influence on the cloud droplet size distribution of
entrainment of environmental air into the cloud, and the possible enhancement of
collision rates among droplets caused by turbulence. The measurements should
also be widely used by other RICO investigators in their own studies of related
aspects of warm-rain formation. An important potential impact of this research
will be the provision of a needed measurement technique for future studies in
cloud physics. Other broad impacts include graduate student training in this
area of research, planned inclusion of under-represented minorities and
undergraduates in the related educational activities, and contributions to a
graduate-student seminar series that will be part of RICO.