* 0342279
* RCN: Invasion Biology of Insects--Collections and Approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* George Roderick, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 04/30/2010
* USD 500,241.00

This research coordination network synthesizes approaches to understand and
predict biological invasions. The work involves 39 participants and pulls
together data from molecular genetics, insect museum collections, and
statistical computation. Networking activities include: (1) database
development, (2) workshops on particular invasive species, (3) research
exchanges to develop methodology; (4) annual symposia; and (5) focus groups to
address urgent and emerging issues associated with invasive species.

Biological invasions are of major ecological and economic concern and their
impacts are likely to increase as a result of global transportation and trade.
However, the development of the field of invasion biology into a predictive
science is hampered by incomplete information: for most alien invasive species
broad-scale spatial and temporal patterns are unknown and for many species even
their identity is uncertain. This project studies terrestrial arthropods
(particularly insects) because of their impact in a variety of natural and
managed habitats and the need to coordinate efforts of researchers at
institutions with different missions (e.g., basic research, applied management,
education). The RCN will provide training at a range of levels both nationally
and internationally. The project will benefit the fields of natural science,
agriculture, and biosecurity, and will also provide web-accessible information
on alien invasive species for students, researchers, and policy makers.