* 0342553
* Fifth International Workshop on Ordered Intermetallics and Advanced Metallic Materials; Chendu, P. R. China; October 5-8, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Stephen Sass, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

The grant supports an international workshop planned to provide a forum for
materials scientists and engineers from various countries to participate in an
in-depth discussion of recent advances and critical issues for the structural
use of ordered intermetallic alloys and advanced metallic materials. The
objective of the workshop is to provide a forum for experts from various
countries to discuss (1) fundamental variables controlling deformation and
fracture of ordered intermetallics at ambient and elevated temperatures, (2) the
design of ductile intermetallic alloys for structural uses, (3) further
improvements in low-temperature toughness and high-temperature strength by a
composite approach, and (4) the processing of intermetallic alloys and
composites by both conventional and innovative methods. In addition, experts in
emerging areas of advanced metallic materials, such as nanophase and
nanostructured materials, are invited to give talks. The Proceedings of the
workshop will be published in Intermetallics.

This international workshop is co-organized by Prof. Guoliang Chen from the
State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, Beijing University of
Science and Technology, Prof. Yafang Han from Beijing Institute of Aeronautical
Materials, Dr. C. T. Liu from Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Prof. Stephen
L. Sass from Cornell University. It will be held in Chendu, P.R.China from
October 5 - 8, 2003. Participation in this workshop will be by invitation only.
It is expected to have 20 - 25 scientists from outside China and 25 - 30
scientists from China. Sources for funding of the workshop are from the National
Advanced Material Committee of China, Chinese NSF, and DOE while the NSF funds
are requested to support young scientists who are within 5 years of their
doctoral degree.