* 0342560
* High Resolution Studies of Solar Activity and Space Weather
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Philip Goode, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 03/31/2008
* USD 890,182.00

The New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) has been operating Big Bear Solar
Observatory (BBSO) since July 1, 1997. The current three-year NSF grant started
on March 1, 2001, and this grant provides primary, backbone support for BBSO.
BBSO telescope time and data are available to all. The observatory has produced
over 100 scientific papers under the first two years of this NSF support. At
present, the PI is building and implementing a high-order adaptive optics system
for BBSO, and he has begun to build a new 1.6-m clear aperture, off-axis
telescope for BBSO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed three-year program of
solar physics research at BBSO would cover the decaying phase of solar cycle 23.
The program would emphasize sustained campaigns of high resolution and high
cadence studies of magnetic fields and the solar atmosphere - efforts for which
BBSO is ideally suited. BBSO staff also plans to engage in instrument
development to better carry out the proposed high resolution and/or high cadence
observations. The PI notes that the scientific work proposed can be done with
the current BBSO instrumentation and telescope, but would yield more probing
results with the new instrumentation and telescope. All on-going instrumentation
projects would be completed before, or early in, the period covered by this
proposal - except the 1.6 telescope project, which is not required for the
science proposed here, because the new telescope would not be completed until
late in the period of the proposed work.