* 0342225
* Disaster Research in the Social Sciences: Future Challenges and Opportunities
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2006
* William Anderson, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2006
* USD 397,342.00

The U.S. is vulnerable to a wide variety of natural, technological
and&lt;br/&gt;human-induced hazards. While local decision-makers have the
final&lt;br/&gt;responsibility for coping with the threat of disaster, federal
agencies have&lt;br/&gt;developed science-based activities, such as the National
Earthquake Hazards&lt;br/&gt;Reduction Program (NEHRP), that are intended to
help further effective&lt;br/&gt;disaster reduction efforts in at-risk
communities throughout the nation. The&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation
(NSF) has been a major supporter of social&lt;br/&gt;science disaster research,
including such research carried out as part of the&lt;br/&gt;NEHRP effort. The
objective of this study is to provide NSF with a detailed&lt;br/&gt;appraisal of
the short and long-term challenges facing the social science&lt;br/&gt;disaster
research community and new and emerging opportunities for
advancing&lt;br/&gt;knowledge in the field and its application for the benefit
of society. The&lt;br/&gt;study is intended to provide a basis for planning
future social science and&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary research related to
natural, technological and willful&lt;br/&gt;disasters in response to challenges
and opportunities presented by a changing&lt;br/&gt;nation and world. A
committee of distinguished experts in the field will be&lt;br/&gt;established to
carry out the study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;