* 0342713
* Pillars of Chemical Engineering: A Block Scheduled Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Robert Enick, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,317,557.00

This project will undertake department level reform of the Chemical Engineering
program at the University of Pittsburgh. The goals of the new curriculum are to
(a) Give the students a strong fundamental foundation by concentrating on the
essential core of scientific and engineering basics in a given discipline.(b)
Enhance systems thinking by helping students to integrate their knowledge across
courses and disciplines so that they are better prepared to address open-ended
problems; and (c) Prepare and provide for continuing education and life-long
learning. Specifically, the project will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Modularize and
integrate the critical "core" of Chemical Engineering (including
mass&lt;br/&gt;balances, thermodynamics, kinetics, separations, transport
phenomena, process systems,&lt;br/&gt;control, laboratory, and design) into six
Pillar courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Re-evaluate and re-align supporting
courses (mathematics, chemistry, physics, and&lt;br/&gt;biology) and elective
courses into application-focused tracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Re-align each
individual course so that, in addition to the traditional macroscopic
and&lt;br/&gt;continuum-level descriptions, we also include "sub-continuum",
molecular or "fundamental unit" analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit in the proposal lies both in the integration of
successful&lt;br/&gt;pedagogical techniques from K-12 education -- Block
Scheduling -- into the University&lt;br/&gt;environment, as well as in our
state-of-the-art assessment of these efforts. Overall the&lt;br/&gt;proposal
will introduce emerging Chemical Engineering knowledge/practice (molecular
and&lt;br/&gt;multi-scale focus as well as track-based case studies/electives),
eliminate legacy&lt;br/&gt;material, expose students to practical computational
methods (including integration of&lt;br/&gt;CAD-based macroscopically focused
software -- e.g., ASPEN -- as well as molecularly&lt;br/&gt;focused software --
e.g., Accelrys -- into most courses), and allow the time
to&lt;br/&gt;effectively incorporate modern teaching methods (team-based and
experience-based learning, computer simulation, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the work lies in integration of research and teaching,
enhancement&lt;br/&gt;of diversity, infrastructure development, and the
fostering of partnerships. During the&lt;br/&gt;course of the project numerous
undergraduate students will work closely with faculty
and&lt;br/&gt;instructional designers. The courseware developed to support the 6
Pillar courses will be made readily available on our departmental web site, so
that it may be utilized (and modified) by other institutions -- fostering
partnerships. The proposed work will enhance infrastructure through the
generation of course materials that are easily portable to many institutions.
Findings of the research will be disseminated at national societal conferences
(AIChE, ASEE) as well as on our departmental web page (http://www.che.pitt.edu).
Additionally, results will be published in traditional engineering education
journals (JEE, CEE, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;