* 0342918
* REVSYS: RUI: Diversity Beyond Morphology: A Revision of the Frog Genus Leptodactylus (Amphibia, Anura, Leptodactylidae).
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* W.Ronald Heyer, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 05/31/2009
* USD 435,724.00

Our planet is currently experiencing an alarming rate of species disappearance,
commonly referred to as the 'Biodiversity Crisis.' Among the problems observed
by scientists is the declining of frog populations around the world, and hence
the increased possibility of species extinction. Consequently, one of the clear
tasks that biologists are faced with is answering: why is this happening? In
order to answer this question properly, we must first know how many species
currently exist. Furthermore, we must assess the evolutionary relationships
among them if we are to understand the historical components that resulted in
their origin and current distributions.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the present
proposal is to decipher genetic diversity and evolutionary relationships in a
large group of South and Central American frogs, the genus Leptodactylus. These
frogs exhibit an array of different reproductive strategies that undoubtedly
have contributed to their success and survival over the last several million
years. Understanding the genetic diversity among the species of Leptodactylus is
a prerequisite to understanding their evolutionary relationships and identifying
conservation priorities, both in terms of groups and geographic areas that would
be critical to protect. A major result will be a revision and summary of our
current knowledge on this frog genus in the form of a final monograph. These
results will also be distributed and available in CD and Web formats.
&lt;br/&gt;The genetic data will be integrated with previously available and
newly gathered morphological data. Undergraduate science students will have the
opportunity to learn molecular techniques, morphological methodologies,
statistical models, and web computer designs within a participatory creative
process of scientific inquiry. This scientific training (based on logic and
reason) will accompany students in future endeavors, whether those be further
studies in basic biology, environmental issues, dentistry, human or veterinary
medicine, or indeed, any career path.&lt;br/&gt;