* 0342388
* Collaborative Research:     Towards an Integrative Mechanistic Theory of Within-Host Disease Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 1,223,345.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Awards: DMS 0342388, 0342239,
0342325&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Yang Kuang, Val Smith, Marilyn S.
Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-campus team is studying processes within a
single&lt;br/&gt;biological host that can be described by models inspired by
ecological&lt;br/&gt;stoichiometry, the study of the balance of energy and
multiple&lt;br/&gt;chemical resources (usually elements) in
ecological&lt;br/&gt;interactions. These concepts have been broadened by their
extension to&lt;br/&gt;biological stoichiometry, which has proven to be an
important new lens&lt;br/&gt;through which we can view and understand complex
biological&lt;br/&gt;interactions. Within this general theory, the cycling and
utilization&lt;br/&gt;of energy and multiple nutrients by organisms and their
constituent&lt;br/&gt;cells occupies a central position. With its emphasis on
the flow of&lt;br/&gt;elemental matter, such as carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorus,&lt;br/&gt;stoichiometric theory covers multiple biological scales.
It also&lt;br/&gt;allows, via rigid physical and chemical constraints, the
construction&lt;br/&gt;of robust mechanistic and predictive models. Originally
formulated and&lt;br/&gt;verified in the fields of limnology and plant ecology,
biological&lt;br/&gt;stoichiometry has recently been applied at physiological
scales to&lt;br/&gt;such diverse areas as organism development and tumor growth.
In this&lt;br/&gt;proposal we aim to synthesize and apply theoretical and
empirical&lt;br/&gt;approaches to biological stoichiometry within the grand
framework of&lt;br/&gt;internal disease. Recent headline-grabbing findings that
connect&lt;br/&gt;nutritional factors to disease dynamics indicate there is
an&lt;br/&gt;increasing need for stoichiometry-based mathematical models
of&lt;br/&gt;internal disease that track the effects of potentially
limiting&lt;br/&gt;resources. The proposed work weaves together threads of
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;and experimental research. Our primary aim is the
construction of&lt;br/&gt;predictive and verifiable theoretical models which can
begin to&lt;br/&gt;explicitly deal with the effects of stoichiometric
interactions in&lt;br/&gt;within-host disease dynamics. Such models will be
built in a modular&lt;br/&gt;fashion, starting with simple deterministic models,
and then&lt;br/&gt;progressively adding stochasticity, spatial heterogeneity,
and&lt;br/&gt;genetics. At each step the models will be challenged, calibrated,
and&lt;br/&gt;tested by in vitro laboratory
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have a broad impact in
both science research&lt;br/&gt;and education, and eventually in internal
disease management and&lt;br/&gt;treatment. Regarding the former, our research
team is truly&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary, with group members in mathematics,
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;physics, ecology, and biomedicine. Our collaborative
efforts will&lt;br/&gt;provide undergraduate and graduate students and junior
scientists of&lt;br/&gt;diverse ethnic/racial backgrounds with first-hand
educational&lt;br/&gt;experience in cross-disciplinary communication and
exploration. The&lt;br/&gt;current proposal is a step towards new ways to
understand disease,&lt;br/&gt;aiming to develop robust and experimentally
calibrated mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theories of disease-host interactions that can
be applied to a wide&lt;br/&gt;variety of diseases. We firmly believe that such
theories have a&lt;br/&gt;central role to play in present and future research.
These grants for&lt;br/&gt;proposals submitted as a collaborative proposal from
three&lt;br/&gt;institutions are made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to
Support&lt;br/&gt;Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a
joint&lt;br/&gt;competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences
and the&lt;br/&gt;Directorate for Biological Sciences at the National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences
(NIGMS) at the&lt;br/&gt;National Institutes of Health.&lt;br/&gt;