* 0342242
* Research Coordination Network: Integrating Ecology and Endocrinology in Avian Reproduction
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* John Wingfield, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2010
* USD 299,942.00

Research Coordination Network: Integrating Ecology and Endocrinology in Avian
Reproduction. &lt;br/&gt;John C. Wingfield &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
network will coordinate research activities of ecologists, and endocrinologists
on a specific theme - reproduction in birds. Research will cover the full
spectrum from field ecology to molecular mechanisms. A critical goal is to
develop a framework whereby organismal biologists can communicate effectively
with cell/molecular biologists (endocrinology) and bridge a conceptual rift that
has been widening for several decades. Avian reproduction provides an ideal
focus because of extensive literature from genes to ecosystems. The proposed
collaboration and the resulting network will have direct application to programs
integrating organisms and molecules throughout biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;The network will allow educational revision at K-12, undergraduate
and graduate levels and will facilitate a truly integrative, biology curriculum
including conservation biology. Activities will include workshops aimed at
developing ecologically based studies at physiological, cell and molecular
levels. Technical meetings will identify mechanisms that can be brought to bear
on novel investigations including those with conservation emphasis. Laboratory
exchange visits involving faculty and students will follow workshops. A web site
will be developed to promote this new framework as well as collect databases
that can be used for research analysis and education. Links to this web site
will be made with other national and international groups so that network
resources will be available to all of the scientific community, K-12 schools and
the public at large. Faculty and student participants have been identified that
represent diversity and more will be specifically invited to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;