* 0342283
* Dynamic Regulation of the Cell Cycle by the Proliferation Control (Rb) and Death Control (p53) Oncogenes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2010
* John Tyson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2010
* USD 773,144.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0342283&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Paul Brazhnik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to elucidate
dynamical principles and to&lt;br/&gt;formulate mathematical models of control
mechanisms associated&lt;br/&gt;with certain genes in mammalian cells, in order
to organize&lt;br/&gt;available experimental information into a
systematic,&lt;br/&gt;quantitative framework and to evaluate the ability of
current&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses to explain experimentally observed phenotypes.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the principal investigator and collaborators
will&lt;br/&gt;investigate cell proliferation control via Rb-E2F, and DNA
repair&lt;br/&gt;and cell death control via p53-Mdm2. Models of the behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;these biological modules can be tested against a
substantial&lt;br/&gt;supply of available experimental data, and within the
models one&lt;br/&gt;can test and refine ideas about mechanisms and pathways,
perhaps&lt;br/&gt;exploring scenarios which are hard to test in real
molecular&lt;br/&gt;biology experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical
methodologies useful in exploring important problems&lt;br/&gt;in molecular cell
biology include the theories of dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems and bifurcation.
Dynamical systems are models for&lt;br/&gt;natural phenomena that change
continuously with time, while&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation theory studies models of
phenomena that may change&lt;br/&gt;dramatically in an instant after evolving
continuously for a&lt;br/&gt;while (think of a balloon popping after it
gradually inflates to&lt;br/&gt;an overfull state). Cellular processes regulated
by particular&lt;br/&gt;genes can exhibit both steady and suddenly changing
behavior, and&lt;br/&gt;the principal investigator and collaborators are
studying&lt;br/&gt;important cellular cycles (proliferation, plus DNA repair
and&lt;br/&gt;death control) with mathematical and computational tools.
This&lt;br/&gt;grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to
Support&lt;br/&gt;Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is
a&lt;br/&gt;joint competition sponsored by the Division of
Mathematical&lt;br/&gt;Sciences and the Directorate for Biological Sciences at
the&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation and the National Institute of
General&lt;br/&gt;Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health,&lt;br/&gt;and the present award is funded jointly by NSF/BIO and
NSF/DMS.&lt;br/&gt;