* 0342632
* SGER:    Optimal Strategies for Moving Droplets in Digital Microfluidic Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Karl Bohringer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2005
* USD 64,908.00

Microfluidic systems are devices that can manipulate (e.g., handle, store, sort,
and analyze) very small amounts of liquids (often much less than a microliter)
with very high accuracy. Over the past decade, much progress has been achieved
in miniaturizing components such as valves, pumps, and channels, and integrating
them onto silicon, glass, or plastic chips. The anufacture of these systems
often uses techniques derived from the integrated circuit and microprocessor
industry. The goal is to create a &lt;br/&gt;complete lab on a chip, which could
be employed in particular for novel biomedical and chemical tasks, including
genomics and proteomics research, pathogen detection, and homeland
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first generation of microfluidic devices has
mostly used designs that are downscaled versions of conventional components,
such as micro valves, micro pumps, and micro channels. However, recently a new
generation of microfluidic systems has been introduced. These so-called digital
microfluidic systemsexploit effects that are only available at very small
scales. Electrowetting is such an effect: when a voltage is applied near a
droplet that forms a bead on a hydrophobic surface then this droplet deforms in
response to this voltage. By appropriate design, one can build systems that can
move tiny droplets very rapidly and precisely across a surface. The big
advantage of this approach is that the handling of liquid is performed by
software and re-programmable at any time, depending on the task one wants to
perform. This provides a level of flexibility that does &lt;br/&gt;not exist in
traditional lab equipment or even first generation
microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that these digital
microfluidic systems could handle hundreds or thousands of droplets
simultaneously, resulting in massively parallel performance of experiments.
However, controlling such a large number the droplets is highly non-trivial:
moving hundreds or thousands of droplets between reservoirs, analysis sites,
reaction sites, and waste bins could be compared to a parking lot where some
cars arrive, others want to &lt;br/&gt;leave, and yet others maybe want to find
a better, shady spot. Our goal is to find the optimal motion plan for all
droplets, resulting in a strategy that minimizes the time it takes to perform
all experiments simultaneously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theorists have shown that
similar problems (such as the traveling salesman problem) are very difficult to
solve optimally. Thus, our task in this project are to (a) develop a good
theoretical understanding of the problem, (b) derive methods and computer
software to automatically generate optimal solutions, and (c) if part b proves
to be too hard, then find &lt;br/&gt;approximations that are close to optimal
but easier to compute. The end result should be a system that takes as input a
description of a digital microfluidic system plus all the start and goal states
of all droplets, and generates as output a plan that moves all droplets from
start to goal in (near) optimal time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;