* 0342138
* High Rate Determinations of Dimethyl Sulfide and Sulfur Dioxide during Rain In Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Alan Bandy, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 02/28/2007
* USD 331,624.00

Dimethyl sulfide (DMS) is produced in and released from the ocean but decays
slowly in the atmosphere (primarily by oxidation to sulfur dioxide). It is also
nearly insoluble in cloud water, so it provides a good tracer for boundary-layer
air in oceanic clouds. In contrast, sulfur dioxide dissolves readily in cloud
water so the decay of sulfur dioxide in clouds can provide a measure of cloud
lifetime. In this study, the investigators will measure DMS and sulfur dioxide
as part of the broader "Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO) experiment, a
multi-investigator study of warm-rain formation and the characteristics of
trade-wind Cumuli. They will use DMS to track boundary-layer air as it moves
into clouds and mixes with DMS-free air from above, and they will use sulfur
dioxide concentration as an indicator of cloud lifetime. A primary objective of
RICO is to understand the rate of warm-rain formation, so the measurement of
cloud age will be a valuable contribution to that broader study. The DMS
measurements will also indicate how much dilution of cloud parcels occurs by
mixing with drier air from above. In addition, the investigators will examine
the oxidation processes in and near clouds and the roles of such processes in
the formation of new particles or the growth of existing particles.

If successful, these measurement techniques can have broad applications in
future studies of clouds. Other contributions to future capabilities include the
training of a new investigator in this area of research and a contribution to
the planned RICO graduate-student seminar that will expose graduate students to
many of the leaders in this field of research.