* 0342049
* Individualized, Scalable, and Interactive Assessment and Instruction for Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Eva Baker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Domestic engineering graduates continue to decline in numbers just as the nation
enters a period of increasing need for engineers to address new threats to
national security and to continue the growth of our technology driven economy.
An increasingly urgent concern is the low diversity in the engineering
workforce. For example the evolution of demographics indicates that college-age
individuals will increasingly comprise ethnic minorities. For example, these
minority students represent over 80 percent of the K-12 Los Angeles Unified
School District, but represent only 6 percent (for Latino students) and 3
percent (for African American students) in the UCLA freshman class. Thus, with
inadequate ability to recruit and retain underrepresented students, overall
engineering production will be reduced yet further. This urgent issue has lead
to the recent development and successful use of Individualized, Interactive
Instruction (3I) tools by collaboration between the UCLA Graduate School of
Education and Information Studies (GSEIS), the Henry Samueli School of
Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS), and the Center for Excellence in
Engineering Diversity (CEED).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning program focuses
on the development of individualized instruction with interactive methods that
link large student groups with instructors in the class room to provide real-
time assessment to guide the instructional process. This planning program will
focus on 1) Expansion of individualized real-time assessment methods (that are
supportive of students and instructors) to all engineering and supporting
disciplines with a task force of experts in education and engineering, 2)
Scaling of individualized methods from its current application to about 20
students to classes of over 200 students. This will be accomplished by
incorporation of network-based automated reasoning capability at the student
client devices providing a summary of student progress to the instructor. 3) the
development of a Community that shares 3I content, algorithms, planning, and
assessment results. Broad societal impacts of these program goals are to
increase the production of engineers through fundamental improvements in our
ability to successfully instruct and support students. This program also
inherently provides broad educational impact through creation of infrastructure
supporting all students and in particular, underrepresented students. This
program will also engage underrepresented students in the actual technology
development and verification effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;