* 0342486
* Experimental and Numerical Investigations of Spectral Broadening and the Onset of Precipitation in Warm Rain In Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO) Cumuli
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* R. Paul Lawson, SPEC, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 02/28/2007
* USD 311,279.00

The "Rain in Cumulus over the Oceans" experiment will be a multi-investigator
study of warm rain formation and the nature of trade wind Cumulus clouds. One
hypothesis being investigated in that experiment is that turbulent air motions
in clouds increase the collision rates among cloud droplets and so accelerate
the formation of rain. These investigators will participate in that study by
contributing measurements of the spatial inhomogeneities in droplet locations in
the clouds. Using those measurements, they will evaluate the possibility that
such inhomogeneities lead to faster rain formation than would be present without
turbulence. Unique instruments will include a new "2D-S" (Two-Dimensional
Stereo) imaging probe, an updated version of a cloud particle imager that can
provide information on the spatial distribution of hydrometeors with fine
resolution, and an instrument that measures the location of each droplet
encountered with high resolution. These instruments promise to provide reliable
measurements of quantities previously difficult to measure from aircraft,
including the drizzle size range and the clustering of droplets. If they are
shown to be reliable, they have the potential to contribute to many future
studies of microphysical processes in clouds. The 2D-S probe in particular could
make a major contribution to research objectives of all RICO investigators if it
provides good documentation of the 30-200 micrometer droplet size range because
this is of crucial importance to the project objectives and is poorly measured
by standard instruments. The instrumentation development and testing that will
occur as part of this project may benefit future measurement programs as well.
Analysis efforts in subsequent years will include collaboration with modelers to
represent microphysical processes in clouds in ways that are consistent with the
observed characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;