* 0342200
* Implementation of a New Undergraduate Curriculum in Materials Science and Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This project supports planning for a new undergraduate curriculum in Materials
Science and Engineering (MSE) at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). Based on
several recent reports that call for renewing the emphasis on inquiry- and
research-based learning in higher education that enables students to experience
science and engineering from the perspective of a researcher, undergraduate MSE
curriculum will integrate research and education at multiple levels using a
common theme of Energy and the Environment into the core curriculum, and
establish several "Materials Tracks" for the upper level courses. The proposed
tracks are: Ceramic Materials, Magnetic Materials, Metallic Materials, Polymeric
Materials, Biomaterials, and Semiconductor Materials. The energy theme has been
identified as one of the main strategic research interests at CMU, and is of
central importance to nearly all engineering disciplines. The proposed program
builds on the strong history of the integration of research and education at
CMU, and will create opportunities for undergraduates from all engineering
fields to participate in materials research, starting in the Freshmen year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a strong collaboration with the Eberly Center for
Teaching Excellence, the proposed program will use sound pedagogical and
cognitive principles to develop, implement, and evaluate the proposed curriculum
changes. One of the outcomes of this program will be a materials laboratory
teaching reference, a manual for faculty and teaching assistants, which will be
disseminated in print and on-line. This manual can also be used by faculty of
other engineering disciplines, and will be created by the MSE faculty, closely
guided by experts in cognitive science. The implementation of the new curriculum
will enable cognitive psychologists to acquire data about student learning in
newly designed courses and lab experiments.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will
also integrate computational methods with materials courses, using the energy
theme as a common thread. Computational methods at various length and time
scales will be coupled to one another, to reflect the widely different scales at
which materials processing and manufacturing are used in industry. The
undergraduate students will acquire important computational skills, which will
benefit them in their redesigned senior year capstone course, as well as in
their engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will
significantly impact several societal and industrial needs. Through a
collaboration with Chatham College, a women-only college near the CMU campus, a
new "Teaching Track" will be created, which will enable materials engineering
undergraduates to obtain a Pennsylvania teaching certificate. When these
students graduate and commence teaching, they will be able to transfer some of
their knowledge of materials engineering and adapt it to a high school audience.
The materials laboratory teaching reference will include lab experiments
developed in collaboration with chemistry faculty of Chatham College. Students
from Chatham will be able to take a Summer lab course at CMU, and
instrumentation for these lab experiments will be located at both
schools.&lt;br/&gt;