* 0343561
* SGER: Studies on the Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal Vent Chemoautotrophic Symbioses
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* James Childress, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,981.00

This SGER award will allow the Investigator and students to participate in a
cruise of the RV Keldysh and the two Mir submersibles to the hydrothermal vents
of the East Pacific Rise off Mexico. This cruise will depart Acapulco on about
Sept 23, 2003 and end at Cabo San Lucas on about Oct. 20, 2003. This cruise will
be filming an IMAX film about the hydrothermal vents and about research on those
vents, directed by James Cameron. The PI's group will both conduct research and
participate in the film.

Intellectual Merit: The research is a continuation of the PIs investigations on
the physiology of vent organisms. The investigators will be measuring the
metabolic fluxes of major vent species as part of their overall program to
estimate the production of the East Pacific Rise vent communities. This will
involve bringing the animals to the surface alive and then placing them in high-
pressure respirometer systems that simulate conditions at depth. Using this
system the researchers will measure the fluxes of oxygen, carbon dioxide,
sulfide, protons, and nitrate as a function of these variables as well as
temperature. Their work, to date has shown very high rates of primary production
by these communities, rivaling the most productive terrestrial systems. They
will also maintain animals alive in a pressure aquarium system with the goal of
bringing them back to Santa Barbara alive at the end of the cruise. In addition
the researchers will be collecting samples for analysis of heat-shock proteins
to gain insight into the thermal limits of these species. They will also
collaborate with the other Russian and US scientists who are participating in
the cruise.

Broader Aspects of proposed work: In addition to the exciting research that will
be conducted, this is an exceptional opportunity for outreach and education due
to the production of the 3-D IMAX film and the eminence of James Cameron. The
potential outreach impact of this film on the general public is enormous. The
PI's experimental set-up is a complex, highly instrumented high-pressure system
that is far different from the usual view of marine biology that is shown in the
media. This is also a particularly exciting outreach and education opportunity
because of Dr. Childress' experience as someone who was on the first
hydrothermal vent expedition in 1979 and has continued to be active in this
field up to the present. The PI will provide the depth and breadth of his
knowledge and experience to the production. This SGER award will also support
the thesis research of two graduate students on the cruise. One of these
students is woman of color who will also participate in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
cruise with Earthship productions and is likely to feature prominently in the
film.