* 0343552
* Collaborative Research: Using Prior Kurtosis Information to Improve Confidence Intervals for Standard Deviations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Douglas Bonett, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 50,307.00

This research will apply meta-analysis and the Theil-Goldberger mixed estimation
method to improve the standard error of a sample variance. The study will show
how kurtosis information from previous studies can be combined using a new meta-
analytic kurtosis estimator and that this estimator is less biased than the
standard meta-analytic kurtosis estimator. The study also will show how to apply
the Theil-Goldberger method to mix a meta-analytic kurtosis estimate with a
sample kurtosis estimate to obtain an asymptotic distribution-free standard
error of a sample variance. The asymptotic distribution-free standard error will
then be used in three basic confidence intervals for standard deviations: 1) a
confidence interval for a single standard deviation, 2) a confidence interval
for a ratio of two standard deviations in independent-samples designs, and 3) a
confidence interval for a ratio of two standard deviations in paired-samples
designs. This research will examine the small-sample coverage probabilities of
the three basic confidence intervals for several sample sizes and a wide range
of realistic distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confidence intervals for a
standard deviation or a ratio of standard deviations can be used to answer
fundamental questions in psychometrics, behavior genetics, and quality control.
Currently available methods are based on unrealistic assumptions, such as
normality or equal kurtosis, and can perform poorly if these assumptions are
violated in subtle ways that would be difficult to detect using standard
diagnostic tools. The results of this study will provide scientists with a new
set of statistical tools that can be used to assess variability in a wide range
of applications and can be expected to perform well under realistic conditions.