* 0343813
* Genetic Dissection of Phagocytosis in Tetrahymena Thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Lawrence Klobutcher, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 461,859.00

The proposed studies seek to further understanding of phagocytosis, the process
by which cells engulf and process particulates. Past studies indicate that
phagocytosis is a multi-step process involving scores of proteins. Nonetheless,
the identity and/or function of many of these proteins remain unknown or poorly
understood. The proposed studies will utilize the ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena
thermophila as a model for dissecting phagocytosis. T. thermophila has long been
used as a model organism for the study of many eukaryotic processes, and a
strong array of genetic and molecular genetic tools exist for the organism. In
nature, Tetrahymena efficiently engulfs other microorganisms to meet its
nutritional needs, but the process is conditionally non-essential, as growth
without phagocytosis is possible on nutrient medium. The specific aims for the
project are to: (1) Isolate and characterize a panel of phagocytosis mutants. An
efficient antisense ribosome mutagenesis procedure will be used in combination
with two screening/selection procedures to identify genes that affect a variety
of steps in the process of phagocytosis. (2) Characterize mutants in
phagocytosis. This will include identifying the affected gene in mutants, and
generating gene knockout strains to determine the phenotype of null mutations.
In addition, mutants will be analyzed using a number of cytological procedures
to gain insight into which stage of phagocytosis is affected, to quantitate the
level of the defect in phagocytosis, and to determine the subcellular location
of identified gene products. (3) Initiate studies aimed at identifying and
characterizing the major protein components of the Tetrahymena phagosome
proteome. Two types of studies are planned. First, the role of phagosome
proteins already identified in the mouse will be investigated by isolating gene
homologs in Tetrahymena and then constructing and analyzing gene knockouts.
Second, methods of phagosome purification have been adapted to Tetrahymena, and
a preliminary analysis of the Tetrahymena phagosome proteome by mass
spectrometry will be carried out. This will ultimately lead to the
identification of the conserved set of phagosome proteins, and set the stage for
functional analysis of many phagosome components. The project will serve as a
vehicle for the scientific training of graduate students, as well as providing
summer research experiences for students at earlier stages of their careers.