* 0343871
* Adaptation of Photoreceptor Physiology to Life History Stage in Ontogenetically Migrating Deep-Sea Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Tamara Frank, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 11/30/2007
* USD 286,135.00

A number of marine species have a difficult problem to deal with, in that they
live in vastly different light environments during the course of their
lifetimes. These species are ontogenetic migrators, in that the young juveniles
stages live in relatively brightly lit shallow waters, while the older adult
stages may live 1000 m deeper, where there is very little light. Virtually
nothing is known about how these two life history stages adapt to these
dramatically different light environments. Is it a matter of possessing an eye
that works in both bright and dim light, but isn't really the best design for
optimal vision under either condition? Or are there mechanisms in place that
allow for the conversion of an eye designed to function well in bright light to
one that functions well in very dim light, over a timeframe of less than a year?
This proposal seeks to examine whether deep-living adults are substantially more
sensitive to light than shallow-living juveniles, as well as the mechanisms
involved in producing these sensitivity differences, if they exist, in a variety
of crustacean species. This will be done by using combination of physiological,
molecular and histological techniques to examine various characteristics of
their eyes, namely their sensitivity to light, their structure and optics, and
their visual pigments. Many of these crustacean species are major components of
the oceanic food webs that support the major commercial fisheries, and
understanding whether and how they adapt to different light environments is
critical to modeling what effect a change in their light environment (such as a
change in water clarity due to pollution) may have on their distribution
patterns. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, the enormous dorsal eye of hydrothermal vent
shrimp will be examined. To date, the dorsal eyes of all the hydrothermal vent
shrimp that have been collected show signs of significant light damage. This has
given rise to the concern that these eyes may be remarkably sensitive structures
that are being destroyed by light, and led to the suggestion that a majority of
the vent shrimp at heavily studied vent sites are being permanently blinded by
repeated exposure to ROV and submersible. Unfortunately, all the shrimp that
have been examined have been collected under extremely bright artificial lights,
and it has been impossible to determine whether all the light damage occurred
during the collection, or was due to some past exposure to artificial lights as
well. With newly designed collecting techniques that will allow collection of
these species without exposure to light, this proposal seeks to study the
sensitivity of a dorsal eye that has never been exposed to light, as well as the
cumulative effects of repeated exposure to floodlight illumination in the
laboratory. This research will provide data to address the issue of whether
sanctuary type no-visit zones need to be designated in order to study the
ecological impact of blinding a majority of the mobile organisms in an
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;