* 0343766
* Distinguishing Root from Soil Contributions to Soil Respiration: Exploration of a New Approach
* BIO,EF
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* James Raich, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Over recent decades concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere have increased
steadily, primarily due to the combustion of fossil fuels. This finding has
generated substantial debate concerning the possible consequences for our global
environment, since CO2 is a greenhouse gas. Of the CO2 emissions from fossil
fuel combustion and cement manufacture, about 30% is absorbed by the oceans and
about half remains in the atmosphere. The remaining 20% is assumed to be
absorbed by plants and soils. Since that process is not well understood, a major
gap in understanding how Earth will respond to increasing atmospheric CO2
concentrations exists. To fill this gap, we need a better understanding of the
processes of plant growth and decomposition in soils. That need remains because
of our perpetual lack of tools for investigating robustly that dark, dirty, and
obscure world belowground. We have developed a new approach that takes advantage
of precise measurements of isotopes of carbon, physiological differences among
plant species, computer modeling, and a combination of experimental field and
laboratory studies, to divide the belowground ecosystem into its major
components. We propose that we can distinguish, and thus investigate
independently, the separate but simultaneous processes of plant (root) growth
and organic matter decomposition, and thus provide a new tool for understanding
what we cannot see. Living soils are where organisms, land, water, and
atmosphere interact the most. By shedding light on this murkiest of ecosystems,
we expect to advance significantly our capacity to investigate a host of
biogeochemical processes that influence our waters, our air, the productive
capacity of our land and, potentially, our climate.&lt;br/&gt;