* 0343953
* Collaborative Research: Diversity, Distribution, and Demographic Effects of Seed-Associated Fungi in Neotropical Cecropia
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Anne Arnold, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2007
* USD 156,410.00

Fungal pathogens are increasingly recognized as an important source of adult-
plant and seedling mortality in tropical forests, influencing tree demography,
distributions, and diversity. However, very little is known regarding hidden
effects of seed-infecting fungi, which influence seed survival. Seed-infecting
fungi are likely to be especially important for tree species depending upon seed
survival in soil (seed banks) for successful recruitment. We will undertake a
detailed ecological and molecular characterization of seed-infecting fungi
(endophytes, saprophytes, pathogens) associated with focal seed-bank-dependent
tropical trees (Cecropia, Urticaceae) in three tropical forests (Costa Rica,
Panama, Ecuador). Using field experiments, we will assess seed mortality
attributable to fungi for 12 species, and the roles of local vs. foreign fungi
in seed survival for three old-growth forest species. We will use molecular
sequence data to identify fungi, and re-inoculation trials to assess
pathogenicity of seed-infecting species. In so doing, we will test three primary
hypotheses: (i) seed persistence in soil differs among tree species, reflecting
differential susceptibility to fungal infection; (ii) tropical seed-infecting
fungi are diverse and adapted to local hosts; (iii) nonpathogenic fungi protect
seeds against disease.

This project promises a deeper understanding of factors underlying recruitment
by a diverse and abundant group of tropical tree species, which in turn has
important implications for management and restoration of forest ecosystems and
maintenance of tropical biodiversity. Broader impacts include training for a
doctoral student in field ecology and molecular techniques, improved
collaborative links at an international level, and dissertation support and
training for U.S., Ecuadorian, Panamanian and Costa Rican undergraduate
students. We anticipate that this study will provide the first insights to the
complexity of seed-fungal interactions in any natural system, and will provide
much-needed training for young researchers in tropical molecular ecology.