* 0343464
* Collaborative Research: Genetic Architecture of Thermal Selection in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* David Rand, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 02/29/2008
* USD 298,998.00

Temperature is one of the most important environmental variables affecting the
survival and reproduction of organisms. This research program aims to identify
specific genes that underlie adaptation to distinct thermal regimes. Preliminary
results have shown that the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster rapidly evolves
resistance to high temperature stress, and that key genes affecting this trait
are located on the X chromosome. Three approaches will be used to identify the
specific genes involved: 1) artificial selection at distinct temperatures, 2)
fine scale molecular genetic mapping of the chromosomal regions associated with
the selection response, and 3) corroboration of the mapped genes with
latitudinal temperature variation in nature. Drosophila melanogaster is an ideal
system for such work, offering a wealth of genetic and genomic tools. The PI's
have different areas of expertise and are collaborating on the project.

This study will demonstrate the genetic basis of adaptation to a changing
climate and may offer important insights into the management of pest species as
they invade new areas. This study supports research by undergraduates and the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The PI's will offer
public lectures on how scientific research links genetics with environmental
issues of international concern. High school students will participate in the
research through summer enhancement programs at William & Mary and at Brown.