* 0343836
* Lessons Learned from Research on Systemic Reform
* EHR,DRL
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Iris Weiss, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 10/31/2006
* USD 349,210.00

Project Abstract 0343836

Horizon, Inc. proposes to organize a conference to bring together key
researchers most active in monitoring, assessing, evaluating, and conducting
research studies on the NSF-funded systemic initiatives (SIs). An organizing
committee will meet to develop a framework for capturing what can be learned
from current research followed by a conference in Washington, DC for
representatives for each site that participated in a research study. The intent
is to bring together researchers and implementers to discuss perspectives and
evidence of the impact of systemic reform.

Intellectual Merit

The aim of the conference is to use findings from research to determine if
systemic reform was effective in narrowing the achievement gap among
subpopulations of students. Thus, by looking at the impact of the building a
better education infrastructure and on assessing the impact on teaching and
learning science and mathematics, the results can be used to advance
methodologies and in identifying reliable measures for gauging progress of
system wide reform.

Broader Impact

Horizon, Inc. envisions that the outcomes from the conference to be useful in
guiding the science and mathematics community and assisting those who do
research on large-scale science and mathematics programs. Moreover, jointly
synthesizing the studies in one place will enhance their overall use while
building a consensus framework and instruments of demonstrated reliability and
validity are likely to be used by other researchers nationally.



