* 0343214
* A National Model for Engineering Mathematics Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Kuldip Rattan, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This planning grant for departmental reform at Wright State University focuses
on developing a National Model for Engineering Mathematics Education. The
project seeks to re-define the way engineering mathematics is taught, with the
goal of increasing student retention, motivation and success in engineering.

The proposed solution strategy starts with the development of a freshman-level
engineering mathematics course (EGR 101). Taught by engineering faculty, the
course will include lecture, laboratory and recitation components. Using an
application-oriented, hands-on approach, the proposed course will address only
the salient math topics actually used in a variety of core engineering courses.
These include the traditional physics, engineering mechanics, electric circuits
and computer programming sequences. While the above core courses are
traditionally reserved for the sophomore and junior years, this project will
move them earlier in the curriculum, with EGR 101 as the only math pre-
requisite. It is finally proposed to develop a new Engineering Calculus sequence
to be taught by the math department later in the curriculum, in concert with
college and ABET requirements.

The intellectual merit of the proposed pedagogical research lies in its novel
approach to engineering mathematics education, to be implemented by an
interdisciplinary team of award-winning educators. In particular, a hands-on,
application-oriented approach is generally lacking in engineering mathematics
education. Moreover, by removing traditional math pre-requisite requirements and
moving core-engineering courses earlier in the program, the approach will entail
a significant restructuring of the engineering curriculum. The result will shift
the traditional emphasis on math pre-requisite requirements to an emphasis on
engineering motivation for math, with a "just-in-time" structuring of the new
math sequence. The proposed research team includes award-winning teachers and
innovators in curriculum development representing each of the four College of
Engineering & Computer Science departments, as well as the Department of
Mathematics and Statistics.

The hands-on laboratory component of EGR 101 will provide an opportunity to
infuse modern scientific tools and research methods into the undergraduate
curriculum at the freshman level. More importantly, the proposed restructuring
of the engineering curriculum will allow student exposure to engineering
research activities prior to the completion of the traditional math sequence.
This will provide students with an opportunity to get "hooked" on the excitement
of research and discovery in engineering, regardless of whether they have
successfully advanced through the traditional mathematics sequence. Low
retention is of particular concern for members of traditionally underrepresented
groups. As such, the introduction of EGR 101 and the restructuring of the
engineering curriculum will have the greatest effect on retention rates for
women, minorities, and other traditionally high-risk students.