* 0343865
* CAREER: Behavior and Design of FRP-Decked Concrete Bridges in Cold Regions
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Zhongguo Ma, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 10/31/2005
* USD 437,717.00

Absract &lt;br/&gt;The research deals with an integrated research and education
plan to evaluate and develop a durable bridge system for use in cold regions.
The bridge system consists of glass fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composite
deck and precast/prestressed concrete I-girders. The primary objectives are: (1)
understanding the synergistic effects of low temperature and low-temperature
thermal cycling combined with fatigue loading on the performance of FRP
composite bridge decks in cold regions, and (2) quantifying the horizontal shear
stiffness of typical deck-to-girder connection systems and developing the
connection design criteria based on the shear stiffness rating of the
connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the technical barrier to the use of
composite materials in infrastructure applications is lack of data on
environmental durability specific to typical infrastructure environments and for
the types of composite materials that are likely to be deployed in the
infrastructure. This project could potentially provide a basis for making long-
term predictions about FRP composite material properties behavior under cold
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The basic knowledge obtained is likely to be
of long-lasting value. It can especially advance the knowledge base for
application of structural materials, including effects derived from interaction
with a natural environment. By using the appropriate materials and structural
forms, the research will ultimately extend beyond Alaska and will benefit other
regions.&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance graduate student education through
curriculum development and give undergraduate students an opportunity for
research experience in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at
University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) by involving them in the research project.
Another objective of the educational program is to involve K-12 students through
UAF Alaska Summer Research Academy. These students will be exposed to structural
engineering, and especially women and minority students in high schools will be
mentored to encourage careers in structural engineering and to improve
enrollment of traditionally underrepresented groups in engineering fields. With
enrollments down and retirements up, what will our future engineering look like?
A key part of the answer lies in the underrepresented majority, as pointed out
in the recent ASEE 2003 Annual Conference &amp; Exposition. This project also
involves the development of a seminar series accessible through the World Wide
Web (WWW) for remotely located professional engineers in the area of structural
composite and precast concrete as alternative construction materials, which can
extend the construction season in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve
engineering research, education, and, ultimately, the engineer resource pool in
cold regions. This project is congruent with the mission of UAF in that it will
advance knowledge of natural and technological systems and include a northern
perspective on research and education. The PI is a member of the engineering
faculty at an EPSCoR institution, and this project will support the development
of advanced material testing facilities at UAF, thus enhancing our
infrastructure for future research and education goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;