* 0343463
* SGER: The Fate of Duplicated Genes in an Invasive Polyploid Species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Kristina Schierenbeck, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2006
* USD 52,043.00

Homeologous genes, or those genes duplicated by polyploid events, may be
expressed at levels reflective of their duplication, or their expression may be
changed dramatically. The techniques proposed here have been very recently
described with the application toward the differentiation of gene expression in
allopolyploid species. Specific questions to be addressed to assess the dynamics
of the Waxy gene in the allopolyploid invasive species, Spartina anglica are:
1.) Are there sequence differences between the different copies of Waxy in:
Spartina anglica; its diploid progenitors S. maritima, S. alterniflora; the
sterile F1 hybrid from which S. anglica arose, S. x townsendii; and the newly
discovered F1 hybrid, S. x neyrautii? 2.) Does variation in expression of the
Waxy locus vary between Spartina anglica, its parental species or diploid
ancestors? 3.) Is there differential variation of Waxy within Spartina anglica?
A combination of PCR, cloning and sequencing of DNA and single stranded
conformation polymorphisms (SSCP) of cDNA will provide more precision than
previously used techniques to provide data on genic organization and function in
an invasive allopolyploid species. Direct sequencing of RT-PCR products will be
performed for confirmation of all results. The analyses performed will provide
insight into the dynamics and subsequent genotypic and phenotypic changes due to
the hybridization between historically allopatric taxa, homeologous genes, and
allopolyploidization.