* 0343761
* CBA: QEIB: Estimation and Interpretation of Allele Frequencies: Novel Theoretical Analyses and High-Throughput Quantitation by DNA Pooling
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Bruce Weir, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 185,666.00

Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are repetitive sequences of DNA that have been
found throughout the genome. SSRs are studied in diverse scientific settings in
many kinds of organisms. Relative to the standard approach of individual
genotyping, protocols using SSR DNA pooled from multiple individuals have the
potential to improve laboratory efficiency (in terms of time and money) for many
kinds of population genetic studies. This study investigates laboratory methods
for estimating SSR allele frequencies using pooled striped bass DNA to determine
optimal protocols. A complementary set of mathematical analyses will investigate
the estimation of associations among alleles, the assessment of genetic
structure among subpopulations, alternative stochastic models for genetic drift,
and the spatial rate of spread of novel, advantageous genes into structured
populations.

Allele frequency estimation by DNA pooling has the potential to facilitate a
wide variety of genetic investigations, including applications in disease
mapping, forensic science, virology, and microbial ecology. Moreover, striped
bass is economically important in the fishing and aquaculture industries, and
the mathematical analyses will facilitate population genetic studies concerning
the management of this and other species whose populations are of conservation
and/or economic importance. Finally, this research is interdisciplinary,
involving investigators with experience in statistics and genetics, physiology
and biotechnology, and population ecology and genetics, and the expectation is
that the senior personnel and their students, as well as their science, will
benefit from the interaction.