* 0343078
* Investigations into the Developmental, Genetic and Molecular Events Underlying Changes in Floral Morphology Associated with Speciation and Sex in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Steven Tanksley, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 12/31/2007
* USD 432,500.00

Title: Investigations into the Genetic, Developmental and Molecular Events
Underlying Changes in Floral Morphology Associated with Speciation and Sex in
Plants

P.I. Steven D. Tanksley (Cornell University)

Reward Abstract

Sex in plants and animals has presumably evolved as a way to control mating and
(in the long term) to avoid inbreeding depression and maintain genetic
variation. For this reason, most animal species possess both male and female
sexes. In contrast, most plant species do not display discrete sexes.
Nonetheless, plants have evolved very effective mechanisms to promote cross
fertilization and avoid self-fertilization. One of these mechanisms involves
changes in flower structure that can promote either self pollination or cross
pollination. The developmental and molecular processes underlying these changes
in floral structure are not well understood. Using tomato, and its wild
relatives, as a model, we will begin to isolate and characterize the genes and
developmental mechanisms underlying the changes in floral morphology that affect
mating behavior in plants. Moreover, we will try to determine whether common
developmental processes have been involved in the evolution of mating systems
throughout the plant kingdom. Hence, this work will provide a starting point for
researchers interested in the genetic and ecological bases for mating behavior
in plants. On the practical side, understanding the basis for mating control is
key to agriculture as all plant breeding techniques and most commercial hybrids
rely on controlling mating behavior.

