* 0343739
* Rab GTPases and Neuroendocytosis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Lisa Elferink, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 03/31/2009
* USD 492,028.00

Internalization and recycling of cell surface receptors by endocytosis regulates
the intensity and duration of a cell's response to environmental signals.
Perhaps nowhere is endocytosis more important than in the nervous system. Here
the balance between regulating receptor internalization with recycling back to
the cell surface is crucial for modulating neuronal communication and cell
function in general. Early, and Pericentriolar Recycling Endosomes are critical
sorting compartments that receive endocytosed receptors from the cell surface.
However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms regulating the transit
of endocytosed receptors through these distinct compartments. Endosomal rab
GTPases have emerged as critical regulators of endocytic trafficking. They
function by recruiting unique combinations of membrane specific effectors that
underlie the distinct functional properties of each endosomal compartment. The
novel GTPase Rab15, has formed the focal point for ongoing studies in this
laboratory because of its unique localization to Early Endosomes and
Pericentriolar Recycling Endosomes, and its demonstrated importance in
regulating receptor transport through these compartments. When over expressed in
cells, Rab15 inhibits receptor transport through both types of endosomes,
suggesting that Rab15 function at these distinct compartments requires specific
effector interactions. Consistent with this hypothesis, two novel endosomal
proteins, RBP15 and REP15, have been identified, which specifically interact
with Rab15 in Early Endosomes and Pericentriolar Recycling Endosomes
respectively. The proposed experiments will define the individual roles of these
novel endocytic proteins in receptor trafficking, and delineate the molecular
steps in which they participate. These aims will be achieved using a combination
of complementary molecular, cellular and optical approaches. The proposed
studies will increase our fundamental understanding of how Rab GTPaes and their
effectors regulate receptor transport through Early Endosomes and Pericentriolar
Recycling Endosomes, a process pivotal for synaptic function and cell function
in general.