* 0343444
* Structure, Function and Substrates of the ClpP/R Proteolytic Machinery in Plastids of Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Giulia Friso, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2007
* USD 522,439.00

Proteolysis in chloroplasts and non-photosynthetic plastids is poorly
understood, but is critical for plant development and plastid function. Clp
protease complexes were identified in non-photosynthetic plastids in roots and
petals, as well as in chloroplasts, by biochemical purification and mass
spectrometry. The complex contains 11 different gene products (ClpP1, 3-6,
ClpR1-4 and ClpS1-2) in one or more copies, totaling 16 subunits, whereas plant
mitochondria contain homotetradecameric ClpP2 complexes. Thus plastid Clp core
complexes are of unusual complexity, as compared to Clp core complexes in
bacteria and plant mitochondria. Three-dimensional homology modeling showed that
the ClpP/R proteins fit well together in a tetra-decameric ring structure and
also suggest unique contributions for each subunit. Yet, it is not clear why the
plastid Clp complex has evolved to such complexity and little is known about the
substrates of the plastid Clp machinery. Preliminary data suggest that most, if
not all, of the ClpP and ClpR genes are essential. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this project are: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Determine tissue
specific gene expression with promoter GUS fusions for the ClpP and ClpR genes
across different developmental stages. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Characterize the phenotype
of T-DNA insertion lines in ClpP and ClpR genes, grown under autotrophic and
heterotrophic conditions. This includes analysis of growth, development, ultra-
structure (by TEM) and photosynthetic activity and comparative proteomics
analyses &lt;br/&gt;(3) Determine stochiometry and nearest neighbors in affinity
purified Clp complexes from different tissues, using epitope tagged transgenic
plants, crosslinking and mass spectrometry. Compare the experimental information
with the generated high resolution 3-D models,&lt;br/&gt;(4) Determine
structure/function relationships of the individual ClpP/R plastid proteins and
identify Clp substrates, through complementation of knockout lines with mutated
ClpP/R epitope tagged transgenes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Proteolysis in the plastid is poorly understood, but is also critical for plant
development. This project will provide insight into the precise role of Clp
driven proteolysis for plant growth and development. Controlling plastid
proteolysis will be important to improve the chloroplast as the site for
overproduction of such products. This multi-disciplinary project will also
provide an excellent training ground for undergraduate and graduate students in
this project and the area of plant proteomics and mass spectrometry. The project
will also participate in a recently established outreach program for high school
students.