* 0343404
* Conference: 2004 Sensory Transduction in Microorganisms Gordon Conference to be held in Ventura, California
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Katherine Borkovich, Gordon Research Conferences
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Research into the mechanisms involved in the sensing and responses of
microorganisms to changes in their environment is currently very active in a
large number of laboratories in the U.S., Europe, Japan, Korea and Israel. A
wide range of eukaryotic and prokaryotic species are being studied with regard
to their sensing of chemical changes, light and redox signals and intercellular
signaling, leading either to changes in motile behavior, gene expression or
development. It has become apparent over the past few years that microbial
signal transduction can provide useful models for probing sensing and motility
at a fundamental level, allowing the development of a model for sensing a
response from the conformational change of a sensory protein through to the
behavior of a population of cells. The central goal of this conference is to
bring together investigators using a wide range of approaches and different
systems to compare data, share ideas and approaches and seek to understand the
fundamental principles underlying sensory responses. This conference has always
encouraged a broad participation in expertise and in seniority (from graduate
students to senior professors), resulting in a vitality and a breadth of
discussion that has fostered the development of collaborations and new
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;