* 0343208
* Collaborative Research: Biogeographic Isolation and Morphological Convergence in Scleractinian Corals, Suborder Faviina
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Ann Budd, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 213,147.00

The purpose of this collaborative research by Prof. Ann Budd at University of
Iowa and Prof. Nancy Knowlton at University of California, San Diego, is to
clarify evolutionary relationships among reef-building corals. The plan for
research includes a detailed re-analysis of four related families, which
together comprise about one half of the major groups (genera) of reef-building
corals. Preliminary research suggests that current assumptions about
relationships and corresponding definitions of families and genera are seriously
flawed. In particular, one third of all Atlantic corals belong to a previously
unrecognized family that is distinct from many other conventionally recognized
families in the Pacific. In a particularly extreme example, Atlantic corals
currently assigned to different families are in fact more closely related to
each other than they are to their supposed close relatives in the Pacific. The
investigators will use modern molecular and morphological methods to study
taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships of these corals. Mitochondrial and
nuclear genes will be sequenced, and coral skeletons will be sectioned in order
to observe fine details (microstructure). Molecular and morphological characters
will then be analyzed using computer-based methods to derive a family tree. The
results will be made available on web sites as well as in the scientific
literature (including an illustrated taxonomic monograph), and the investigators
will also host a workshop at the International Coral Reef Symposium that is held
once every four years.&lt;br/&gt; Coral reefs are the most diverse of all marine
habitats, and among the most threatened. As such, there have been numerous
suggestions for how to prioritize conservation efforts. Most of these are based
on species numbers, and for that reason Atlantic corals have been considered
relatively trivial from a biodiversity perspective. In a recent high-profile
paper, for example, only 4 of 18 identified biodiversity hotspots were in the
Atlantic. However, scientists and the public have long recognized that
evolutionary distinctiveness is also an important criterion for making
conservation decisions; hence, for example, the interest of the public in
coelacanths and other living fossils. This research will for the first time
provide a modern evolutionary framework for these reef-building corals, so that
evolutionary distinctiveness as well as species numbers can be considered when
evaluating conservation options. This is particularly important in light of the
discovery of a major radiation of corals limited to the Atlantic, since Atlantic
corals have declined by 80% across much of their range over the last three
decades.&lt;br/&gt;