* 0343405
* Enhancing Community College Pathways to Engineering Careers: A Guide for Key Actors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Mary Mattis, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2006
* USD 206,833.00

The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and the National Research Council
Board on Higher Education and Workforce (BHEW) are establishing an ad hoc study
committee to oversee a series of fact-finding activities that describe the
evolving community college pathway in engineering education. Two committee
meetings are being held with expert presentations to review the background
information and to guide discussions and deliberations. Key stakeholder groups
including two- and four-year college faculty, public officials, educational
administrators, industry managers, and leaders of professional societies are
being interviewed. The Academy is also collecting and analyzing existing data
engineering graduates who have community colleges in their pathway to a
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After the period of fact-finding and analysis, a
two-day conference showcases programs that have demonstrated the ability to
successfully produce engineering graduates with community college experience.
The conference focuses on (1) the success of students that transfer between
community college and four-year engineering programs, (2) effective management
of intermittent matriculation at community college campuses, (3) mutually
beneficial interactions between community college and four year engineering
school faculty, (4) the curricular content of community college engineering
programs, (5) data collection requirements for effective program evaluation, and
(6) effective use of community college campuses to achieve student and faculty
diversity goals in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: This NAE/NRC project is identifying key research questions that will
inform funding and policy officials who wish to carry out activities that
strengthen community college pathways leading to baccalaureate and doctoral
degrees in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The project is
developing a plan to leverage the unique qualities of our community college
infrastructure to achieve engineering workforce objectives. Current enrollment
statistics support the fact that community colleges provide meaningful economic
and educational supports for women, racial minorities, and non-traditional
students. Each of these groups is underrepresented among the current pool of
baccalaureate and doctoral graduates in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;