* 0343731
* MRPG:      Geotechnical Parameters of Soil Using Electrical Sensor Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* L. Sebastian Bryson, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 18,000.00

The primary objective of this research is to develop a proof-of-concept for the
application of electrical sensor technology in geotechnical engineering. The
focus of this work will be a comprehensive literature review and pilot
laboratory experimentation. Simple electrical sensors will be used to obtain the
internal soil properties of a soil specimen. These properties will be evaluated
graphically using a three-dimensional tomographic image developed from spatial
electrical resistivity measurements. Upon establishing the proof-of-concept for
this technology using very simple sensors, more sophisticated electrical sensors
will be investigated with regards to suitability for geotechnical applications.
This research will be used to develop a fundamental understanding and
investigate possible unique relationships that exist between electrical
properties of soils and engineering behavior. The research will establish a
base-line reference of applications and limitations of electrical sensors, from
which additional laboratory and in situ applications can later be extrapolated.

It is anticipated that electrical sensors will provide an efficient means of
acquiring a broad spectrum of quality data as pertaining to the geotechnical
properties and the expected engineering behavior of a soil mass, whether the
mass is an individual laboratory specimen or the larger in situ media.
Electrical sensors are routinely used in geotechnical engineering and geophysics
for site characterization and some macro-scale characterization of soil samples
(i.e. bulk porosity, degree of saturation, and density). However, only a few
researchers have used electrical resitivity for micro-scale characterization of
soil to investigated heterogeneity effects (McCarter and Desmazes, 1997; Abu-
Hassanein et al., 1996). In addition, most of this research pertains to
evaluating hydraulic flow behavior. This research will further investigate
heterogeneity effects by using tomography and will expand the electrical soil
sensor knowledge base to include strength and deformation behavior of soils. The
particular emphasis of this research is to perform an experimental study on the
factors that affect the electrical properties of soils and their measurements
and relate those factors to behavioral responses.