* 0343700
* HBCU Student Exchange Program with European Universities
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Sanjiv Sarin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 118,921.00

Current trends in communication and information technologies, government
deregulation, and&lt;br/&gt;interest in environmental concerns and data sharing
have led to globalization of the engineering&lt;br/&gt;profession. Employers are
increasingly stressing the need for a global perspective in
engineering&lt;br/&gt;curricula. In recent years, engineering accreditation
requirements have been revised to&lt;br/&gt;emphasize, among other things, an
ability to understand societal and global issues of importance&lt;br/&gt;to
engineers. In response, the engineering academic community is reconfiguring its
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;One commonly used tool is to offer engineering students an
opportunity to study abroad and&lt;br/&gt;work on projects in multinational
companies in collaboration with students in foreign countries.&lt;br/&gt;The
feasibility and benefits of this approach have been well documented. The
participation of&lt;br/&gt;students from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) in international programs is&lt;br/&gt;generally very
limited, especially in the engineering disciplines. This proposal is aimed
at&lt;br/&gt;promoting and facilitating study abroad programs for engineering
students at HBCUs. Barriers&lt;br/&gt;to student engagement in international
programs include travel and other associated costs, fear of&lt;br/&gt;losing
time and loss of academic credits, effort involved in learning a new language,
and general&lt;br/&gt;ignorance of international programs at the curriculum
advisor level. The proposed project will&lt;br/&gt;attempt to minimize the
effect of these barriers. The project will involve collaborative
work&lt;br/&gt;among major HBCUs that have ABET-accredited engineering programs
and selected institutions&lt;br/&gt;in France, Germany and Spain through the
support of the Global Education for European&lt;br/&gt;Engineers and
Entrepreneurs (GE4) organization, corporate partners and research
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;By effectively using the intervening summer periods, the
program will be structured to fit within&lt;br/&gt;current curriculum
requirements without significantly increasing the time-to-degree.&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to enable HBCUs in the US and universities in Europe to
promote&lt;br/&gt;international exchange of engineering students, to enhance the
foreign language skills and the&lt;br/&gt;ability of students to understand
different social and technical cultures, and to learn how to work&lt;br/&gt;in
multi-national engineering teams. The evaluation of the curricula, development
of special&lt;br/&gt;foreign language and cultural immersion courses and
promotion of the program to potential&lt;br/&gt;students are the main activities
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal is centered on a
better understanding of the educational&lt;br/&gt;systems in Europe in an effort
to align curriculum requirements for engineering students to
allow&lt;br/&gt;them to spend a semester or more abroad without delaying
graduation. The team assembled to&lt;br/&gt;work on the project consists of
faculty and administrators in colleges of engineering at several&lt;br/&gt;HBCUs
and European universities, representatives from GE4, and directors of study
abroad&lt;br/&gt;programs at the campuses. If successful, the project will lay
the foundation for significant&lt;br/&gt;increases in the number of
underrepresented engineers who experience international study and&lt;br/&gt;work
as part of their education. The broader impact of the project is rooted in the
fact that the&lt;br/&gt;student participants in the exchange program belong to
underrepresented minorities that have&lt;br/&gt;traditionally not participated
in international programs. The proposed course development to&lt;br/&gt;enhance
traditional foreign language courses to include cultural issues especially
targeted to&lt;br/&gt;engineering students will be of value to students in other
universities also. The course material&lt;br/&gt;will be made available to other
universities on request.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;