* 0343646
* SGER:     Investigating Recursive Plastic Heating in Third Body Regions during Friction Stir Welding
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Stephen Cupschalk, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 06/30/2005
* USD 71,643.00

Conditions within the third body region during Friction Stir Welding (FSW) are
crucial for resolving asymmetries and minimizing the inherent tendency to form
voids on the advancing side of the tool. Despite being recognized as an
important part of the FSW process, very little work has been done on modeling
the third body to explain how it emerges from system variables or its role in
generating heat during the FSW process. In this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER), a theory of recursive plastic heating (RPH) is proposed to show
that plastic work within the third body region sustains FSW through important
inertial effects which originate from a chip forming mechanism and produces a
significant portion of the heat required. The new framework suggest that
friction is mainly a catalyst for recursive plastic heating which may be
enhanced by hybrid FSW strategies. The goal of the investigation is to formulate
and verify RPH theory within the third body and investigate hot cavity
approaches for augmenting FSW to create conditions which allow the third body to
appear sooner and move faster than possible with friction as the sole means of
heat input. This research includes experimental verification, combining RPH
theory with a framework for orthogonal cutting, and formulation and solution of
a mathematical model using RPH theory to predict how the third body develops
under processing conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RPH theory suggests that
volumetric heating and thermo-mechanical hot channels can influence third body
conditions and minimize demands on tool materials. As efforts continue to extend
FSW to a wider range of materials, RPH theory provides an alternative to
producing tools with increasing hardness to meet the demands of increasingly
tough workpiece materials. The notion of recursive plastic heating as the
dominant mechanism for reducing flow stresses during FSW represents a paradigm
shift away from a framework where frictional heating from the FSW tool is the
central mechanism. Within RPH theory, frictional energy is recast as a catalyst
for plastic flow; therefore, verification offers the potential to broaden the
interpretation of hybrid FSW technology to hot cavity methods like Laser
Assisted Stir Welding and Plasma Assisted Stir Welding. In addition, strong
interaction with the shipbuilding industry should lead to rapid technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;