* 0343079
* SGER:    Are High Carbon Fly Ashes (HCFAS) Effective Stabilizers for Soft Organic Soils?
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Craig Benson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 85,965.00

Cementitious Class C fly ashes, as well as other cementing agents, have been
found to be very effective stabilizers for soft inorganic soils, but are
essentially ineffective at stabilizing soft organic soils. However, preliminary
test data developed by the PIs has shown that soft organic soils can be
effectively stabilized with cementitious high-carbon fly ashes (HCFAs), i.e.,
fly ashes with organic carbon content > 3%. The objective of this SGER is to
explore the feasibility of using HCFAs for stabilizing soft organic soils. This
concept is novel because a long-standing unsolved problem (stabilization of soft
organic soil) is being solved by a new approach with a material (HCFA) that is
currently landfilled. The concept is also high risk, because a very limited data
set has been developed showing that HCFAs are indeed effective stabilizers for
soft organic soils. However, the potential rewards are substantial. Successful
results from this study could make HCFAs the material of choice for stabilizing
soft organic soils (a problem heretofore unresolved), foster sustainable
development and sustainable construction practices, reduce construction costs,
and improve the environment by reducing the volume of fly ash being landfilled.

The hypotheses to be tested are as follows: (i) soft organic soils can be
effectively stabilized with HCFAs and (ii) the organic carbon in HCFAs is the
primary factor responsible for successful stabilization of organic soils with
HCFAs. A research program consisting of four tasks is proposed to test these
hypotheses. The tasks include physical and chemical characterization of three
soft organic soils and three HCFAs that represent a broad range of organic
matter (soil) and organic carbon (fly ash) contents, unconfined compression
testing of mixtures of the organic soils and HCFAs, microstructural analyses to
evaluate cementation in these mixtures, and an evaluation of curing rates to
indirectly assess how the organic matter content and organic carbon content
affect cementation kinetics.

