* 0343774
* Composite Colloidal Particles Produced by Carbon Dioxide Assisted Microencapsulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Matthew Yates, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 09/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Microencapsulation is the process of embedding an additive in a colloidal
particle.&lt;br/&gt;This technology is widely used to provide extended release
of entrapped compounds such&lt;br/&gt;as drugs or fragrances. However,
microencapsulation may be used to produce composite&lt;br/&gt;particles with
controlled optical, chemical, or physical properties for a wealth
of&lt;br/&gt;applications. Current microencapsulation technology typically
requires organic solvents&lt;br/&gt;that are difficult to remove from the
polymer. Residual solvent is especially undesirable for&lt;br/&gt;food and drug
applications where the maximum allowable concentration is very low.
We&lt;br/&gt;propose to study the transport of additives into colloidal polymer
particles dispersed in an&lt;br/&gt;emulsion of liquid or supercritical carbon
dioxide and water in an effort to reduce or&lt;br/&gt;eliminate the need for
organic solvents. At elevated pressures, carbon dioxide swells
and&lt;br/&gt;plasticizes the polymer particles, facilitating mass transport.
Surfactants are used to&lt;br/&gt;stabilize the emulsion of CO2 and water. The
surfactants also adsorb on the surface of the&lt;br/&gt;particles to enhance
colloidal stability. After depressurization, the polymer particles
return&lt;br/&gt;to their original size and shape, entrapping the additive. The
adsorbed surfactant remains&lt;br/&gt;on the surface and thus offers a route to
controlling the surface chemistry of the particles.&lt;br/&gt;Biodegradable and
biocompatible polymer colloids will be impregnated with
drugs,&lt;br/&gt;chromophores, and luminescent nanoparticles with the aid of
CO2, water, and non-toxic&lt;br/&gt;surfactants. In addition, we propose to
couple CO2 processing with traditional&lt;br/&gt;microencapsulation techniques
to lower residual solvent content and sterilize polymer&lt;br/&gt;particles. The
proposed research will provide a flexible, biologically and
environmentally&lt;br/&gt;friendly route to the production of composite
particles used as devices for drug delivery,&lt;br/&gt;tracers and indicators
for drug discovery and genomics, and other composite
colloidal&lt;br/&gt;particles useful for catalysis, coatings, and optical
materials. To broaden the impact of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research, a computer
based instructional module on microencapsulation&lt;br/&gt;technology will be
developed and incorporated into the course 'Interfacial Engineering'
at&lt;br/&gt;the University of Rochester with the assistance of a commercial
educational software&lt;br/&gt;vendor. The software vendor has expressed
interest in incorporating the module into their&lt;br/&gt;existing software for
broader distribution. Undergraduate and graduate students from&lt;br/&gt;diverse
backgrounds will be recruited to work on the project through existing programs
at&lt;br/&gt;the University of Rochester.