* 0343636
* Attractors and Criticality in Cortical Slice Cultures
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* John Beggs, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 09/30/2008
* USD 346,839.00

The physical sciences have had great success in describing how complex phenomena
can emerge from the collective interactions of many similar units. Waves,
synchrony, phase transitions, and self-organization are all examples of this.
Although the brain is tremendously complex, it is composed of many units,
neurons, which appear to be similar. This resemblance has led many researchers
to borrow concepts from physics in an effort to explain neural function.
Simulations indicate that stable states can be used to store information, and
that the critical point maximizes both information transmission and information
storage. While this body of theory has prospered, experiments to test it have
been few. New advances in technology have allowed thousands of interconnected
neurons to be grown in culture on microfabricated arrays of many electrodes.
These cultured brain slices can be kept alive for weeks while their spontaneous
electrical activity is recorded. The large data sets produced by these
experiments allow many of the hypotheses inspired by statistical physics to be
examined in real neural tissue. A series of experiments to test hypotheses about
stable states and the critical point are proposed to advance this research. The
data from these experiments will be used to construct complementary network
simulations that should to lead to further testable predictions. Knowledge
gained from these experiments is expected to advance the understanding of
computational principles used by networks of living neurons and to be useful in
designing synthetic devices that exploit these principles. These studies are
expected to have broader impact in two areas. First, analysis tools developed
for these culture experiments are expected to be applicable to data from whole
behaving animals as well. Second, this research will contribute to training
interdisciplinary scientists who are expected to be valuable in interpreting the
deluge of neural data that will certainly come as recording technology and
computer capacity continue to improve.