* 0343744
* The Ear Regions of Archosaurs: The Transition to the Modern Avian and Crocodilian Conditions and Functional Implications for Hearing and Balance in Dinosaurs
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Lawrence Witmer, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Adam P. Summers
* 01/31/2008
* USD 280,293.00

The Ear Regions of Archosaurs: the Transition to the Modern Avian and
Crocodilian Conditions and Functional Implications for Hearing and Balance in
Dinosaurs

Lawrence M. Witmer Ohio University

The ear region is a complex area of the head that is concerned with two
fundamental functions, hearing and the sense of balance (equilibrium). This
project examines the anatomical organization of inner, middle, and outer ears of
archosaurs (the group of animals including birds and crocodilians today, and
dinosaurs, pterodactyls, and other extinct forms in the Mesozoic Era). The
overarching goal is to combine information from animals living today and in the
distant past to document the evolutionary changes in the ear that, on the one
hand, help us understand how the modern condition arose in ancestors of existing
birds and crocodilians, and, on the other hand, provide insight into the
behavior, sensory biology, and ecology of fossil groups like dinosaurs. Fossils,
however, preserve only hard parts (bones and teeth), and thus a key element of
the project is to reconstruct the soft-tissue components of the ear regions of
extinct archosaurs, which will then provide a basis for functional
interpretation. Hypotheses about the soft tissues in the ear region will be
tested in the context of the extant phylogenetic bracket (EPB) approach, whereby
the modern relatives (birds, crocodilians, lizards) of the fossil group
(dinosaurs) provide information on the relationship between soft tissues and the
signatures they leave on the bones. Pertinent soft tissues (inner ear labyrinth,
air sinuses, ear drum) will be studied in the modern animals using methods such
as dissection, injection, histology, and radiologic imaging to discover the
signatures of the soft tissues on bone. Fossil archosaurs will then be surveyed
for these specified bony features. CT scanning of literally dozens of pivotal
fossil specimens will be a critical tool in that it will not only provide data
on features embedded within the skull (inner ear, air sinuses) but also will
yield 3D digital datasets from which highly accurate measurements can be made
automatically. Some of the specific ear systems studied include (1) the inner
ear canals because they are broadly correlated with activity and agility, and
their orientation allows reconstruction of preferred head postures; (2) the
cochlear duct of the inner ear because it has bearing on broad categories of
hearing performance; and (3) the middle and outer ear, including the ear drum,
air sinuses, and sound conducting apparatus because they relate to acoustic
properties of the ear, and ultimately hearing. This study will impact a number
of areas. Numerous undergraduate and graduate students will receive technical
and analytical training. The project is highly collaborative, involving many
paleontologists and experimentalists worldwide. The extensive radiologic imaging
will require development of refined imaging protocols, standardized analyses,
specialized workstations, and bioinformatics innovations to deal with the
voluminous multi-format digital data. Internet-based means of not only
disseminating the data but also manipulating the data will be essential, and
will take place in connection with existing bioinformatics hubs. Given the
continual K-12 interest in all things dinosaurian, the attention this project
will attract will provide new opportunities to use dinosaurs as tools to teach
about science in general, with expected venues being media outlets, school or
other public appearances, and the internet.