* 0343011
* SGER:    Optimal Stochastic Unit Response Subject to Ramp and Network Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Eyad Abed, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2004
* USD 87,209.00

Unit commitment (UC) is an important optimization problem for power utilities to
economically schedule generating resources to achieve cost minimization in the
regulated environment. Although the electricity industry is moving toward
deregulation, the importance of the UC does not diminish along with the
restructuring trend. On the other hand, new features and requirements are now
considered in UC models such as price uncertainty, which significantly increase
the complexity of the problem. Some centralized markets (such as the PJM) still
perform UC-like optimization to conduct electricity auctions. Also the industry
is recently considering "re-regulation" due to incidents such as California
crisis and Enron and emphasizing centralized unit
commitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the optimal response
of a thermal plant to price and network uncertainties. In the problem, the
operator of a power plant maximizes total profit by optimally committing the
unit to generate power to sell in spot markets via transmission network. The
unit commitment is subject to physical constraints including the ramp
constraints. These operational constraints can impact the capability of how the
unit can quickly respond to profitable
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merits&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of
this research is twofold: the ramp constraints have been notorious for making
the unit operation problem non-separable in time even without considering
uncertainty, and the large dimensionality of the network uncertainties
considered, such as nodal and transmission prices, and transmission congestion.
We intend to develop an efficient and theoretically sound approach with a
polynomial time complexity to solve the deterministic ramp-constrained operation
optimization. We will also develop a new approach integrating the Monte Carlo
method and the least squares regression to solve this stochastic unit response
optimization. The proposed new method is general, effective, and efficient for
large-scale multi-stage stochastic optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact of the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;Through the proposed research, the
capacity expansion process in a deregulated power market will be studied. The
research has many benefits:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The solution procedure
developed in this proposal can be used to help independent power producers
achieve optimal commitment and dispatch decisions in the competitive
marketplace. It can also contribute to the traditional UC optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;2. This research will provide an efficient yet theoretically sound
approach to handle the notorious ramping constraints in the unit commitment
problems. Recently the electric industry is being considered "re-regulated" due
to incidents such as California crisis and Enron, and is refocusing on
centralized unit commitment. This research will make a fundamental contribution
to the development of more efficient solution algorithms. Furthermore, since we
will develop a polynomial time algorithm, it will be practical and applicable
for large-scale real cases.&lt;br/&gt;3. We will tackle this research from both
technical and financial perspective. In the technical side, we will develop
efficient algorithms to aid optimal operation. In the financial side, we hope to
provide a fair valuation tool to help investors to make appropriate investment
decisions. In the long run, customers also benefit from the improved societal
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;