* 0343887
* Molecular Genetic Analysis Of Plant Circadian Rhythms
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* C. Robertson McClung, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2008
* USD 653,000.00

Increased understanding of plant responses to environmental input and to
endogenous temporal cues has agricultural importance. The clock integrates
temporal information and coordinates many aspects of biology, including basic
metabolism and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. Additionally,
environmental cues and the circadian clock contribute to the photoperiodic
flowering. Proper coordination of the endogenous timing mechanism with the
external day confers adaptive advantage, and impaired circadian function is
associated with reduced fitness. The model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, offers a
powerful and experimentally tractable system in which to investigate the
molecular mechanisms of circadian rhythmicity. Because plants are closely
related, it is quite likely that understanding derived from Arabidopsis studies
will be readily transferred to agronomically important species. In the context
of climate change and the need to exploit increasingly marginal habitats, fuller
understanding of clock mechanism may offer strategies to improve crop
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the Arabidopsis thaliana family
of five Pseudo-Response Regulators (PRRs). Mutational analysis indicates that
each is important to the circadian system, although individuals play distinct
roles. Indeed, the first bona fide clock mutant in Arabidopsis was prr1, known
also as toc1. This mutant was isolated on the basis of a shortened circadian
period as monitored by leaf movement and by gene expression. toc1 mutants also
exhibit defects in photoperiodic induction of flowering. This project focuses on
PRR9 and PRR7. Mutation of these loci confers phenotypes distinct from those of
the other PRR loci-prr9 exhibits lagging phase and prr7 exhibits long period,
whereas mutation of the other three family members, including TOC1, shortens the
period. The double prr7 prr9 mutant has an exaggerated phenotype in white light
(very long period, very lagging phase), which suggests partial functional
redundancy between PRR7 and PRR9. The clock defects of PRR7 and PRR9 are seen
following entrainment either to light-dark cycles or to temperature (warm-cool)
cycles. This argues for a central role of PRR7 and PRR9 in the perception or
transduction of environmental signals. It is also possible that these PRRs may
act within the central oscillator, analogously to TOC1 (PRR1), which is accepted
as a crucial component of the Arabidopsis clock. This project employs genetic
and biochemical approaches to elucidate the roles of PRR7 and PRR9 as components
of input pathways or of the oscillator itself. These include overexpression, use
of double and triple mutants to assess genetic interaction, and screens for
second mutations that enhance or suppress prr7 or prr9 mutant phenotypes.
Physical interaction between PRR7 and PRR9 will be tested, and other interactors
with PRR7 and PRR9 will be sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;