* 0343934
* ATX1, an Epigenetic Regulator of Plant Development:  Functional Biochemical Studies
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Zoya Avramova, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 02/29/2008
* USD 442,500.00

Multiple plant developmental processes appear to be under epigenetic control.
However, the molecular mechanism(s) involved in the epigenetic regulation of
target genes is largely unexplored. This project will focus on the molecular and
biochemical functional characterization of a chromatin regulator in Arabidopsis
thaliana, the product of the ATX1 gene. In contrast to several relatively well-
characterized polycomb group members acting as repressive regulators of plant
development, ATX1 is the first example of a plant epigenetic regulator with
activating function upregulating several flower homeotic genes. It is also a
first example of a plant enzyme with histone H3-lysine 4 methylating activity.
The goal of the project would be to contribute to the understanding of
epigenetic mechanisms that regulate plant development. It will focus on the
functional biochemical activity(ies) associated with ATX1 and the resulting
biological outcomes, like the methylation pattern of the nucleosomes around
targeted homeotic genes in their active/nonactive state and the profile of the
entire methylated proteome of wild type and mutant atx1 plants. Analyses will
involve 'in vitro' biochemical characterization of the ATX1 gene product and 'in
vivo' characterization of the biochemical function of ATX1. These studies of an
epigenetic modifier in parallel with the activity of the genes under its control
will contribute to the understanding of epigenetic regulation of gene expression
in eukaryotes.