* 0343479
* RUI: Differential Phosphorylation of Nur77 In Immature and Mature T Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Jennifer Punt, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* LaJoyce Debro
* 03/31/2008
* USD 434,469.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T lymphocytes (T cells) regulate a body's defense against
infection and recognize pathogens through receptors on their surfaces (T cell
receptors) that bind to minced pieces of proteins (peptides) from viruses,
bacteria, or other invaders. New T cells are produced every day in an organ
called the thymus, and every new T cell produced expresses a novel T cell
receptor. Because these novel T cell receptors cannot intrinsically discriminate
between proteins made by an invading pathogen and proteins made by the body's
own cells, autoimmunity is a constant threat for an organism. However, the body
has ways to destroy autoreactive T cells as they browse the thymus during their
development in the thymus. Specifically, if an immature T cell binds strongly to
any thymic peptide it encounters, its T cell receptor will generate signals that
induce the cell to die. An immature T cell that does not bind to a self-peptide
strongly is permitted to mature into a functional T cell and exit from the
thymus. At this point a mature T cell responds to strong T cell receptor signals
not by dying, but by dividing and initiating an immune response. The molecular
switch(es) responsible for this marked change in interpretation of a strong T
cell receptor signal between an immature and mature T cell are not known, yet
are the basis for our understanding of how organisms protect themselves against
autoimmunity. This project is designed to improve our understanding of the
differences in response to T cell receptor stimulation and builds upon findings
that a protein that regulates cell death, known as Nur77, is treated differently
in mature versus immature T cells. Whereas both cell types respond to T cell
receptor signals by increasing production of Nur77, only the mature T cells
respond additionally by altering the protein through the attachment of phosphate
molecules (phosphorylation). Investigators will determine what internal signals
are responsible for these alterations and how and why they differ between the
two cells. They will also work to understand the impact of phosphorylation on
the function of Nur77 and have specifically hypothesized that the changes
disable Nur77, preventing it from turning on a set of genes that coordinate the
cell death program. This work will clarify our understanding of how a T cell
population that is screened against responsiveness to 'self' proteins develops
the ability to respond to pathogens it encounters outside the thymus. The PI has
a strong mentoring program in undergraduate laboratory research. Her students
co-author papers and present their findings at meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;