* 0343167
* Investigating Structure, Function, and Evolution of a Plant-Specific Nuclear Envelope Targeting Domain.
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Iris Meier, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 04/30/2008
* USD 525,000.00

The long-term goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanism,
biological function, and evolutionary history of a nuclear-envelope targeting
mechanism that may be unique to the plant kingdom. RanGAP is an accessory
protein of Ran signaling, which functions in nuclear transport, mitotic spindle
assembly, and post-mitotic nuclear assembly. RanGAP is targeted to the nuclear
envelope in interphase and to the spindle in metaphase in higher plants and
mammals, but not in yeast. A domain unique to plant RanGAP (WPP domain) is
responsible for its targeting to the plant nuclear envelope. The overarching
hypothesis of this project is that two distinct targeting mechanisms for RanGAP
have evolved in the plant and animal kingdom, which might reflect - and
therefore provide tools to investigate - broader differences in the molecular
mechanisms of plant and animal open mitosis. Experiments to be carried out in
this project will: (1) Test if nuclear envelope targeting is required for the
function of plant RanGAP. (2) Identify if members of the Arabidopsis MAF protein
family (a family of small, plant-specific proteins that resemble an unattached
WPP domain) are involved in targeting RanGAP to the plant nuclear envelope. (3)
Establish conditions for determining the structure of the WPP domain. A high-
resolution structure of this novel, plant-specific domain would provide powerful
information for prediction-driven future investigations into structure-function
relationships and evolutionary diversity. (4) Identify domain structure and
localization of RanGAP in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a green alga with closed
mitosis. The broader impacts of this project will include teaching and training
of the next generation of scientists at the postdoctoral, graduate student, and
undergraduate level. This project will further contribute to multidisciplinary
activities and add an evolutionary and a biophysical aspect to already
established areas of plant molecular biology, cell biology, proteomics, and
computational biology. Dissemination of results will be through publications,
reviews, seminars, scientific meetings, and through innovative classroom
teaching. A learning tool for the broad public will be developed.