* 0344034
* REVSYS: Classification, Phylogeny, and Biology of the Parasitic Wasp Family Scelionidae
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Norman Johnson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2009
* USD 499,969.00

Natural enemies are one of the major factors controlling the population size of
insect pests. The minute parasitic wasps of the family Scelionidae attack and
kill the eggs of other insects and spiders, including many pests of
agricultural, forestry, medical, and veterinary importance. Proper appreciation
of the role that these wasps play in the natural control of insects and
effective use of them as biological control agents relies on the ability of
accurately identify them. Scelionidae is a large group, with over 3,000 known
species and perhaps as many as 10,000 in all. The goal of this project is to
revise the existing classification of these wasps. This will be a worldwide
study, encompassing over 200 genera. The work will be based upon the extensive
new material, hundreds of thousands of specimens, that has accumulated in the
world's natural history collections over the past 25 years. The evolutionary
history of the group will be analyzed using the techniques of phylogenetics so
as to develop a predictive and stableclassification. The result of this analysis
will also provide the scientific community with the framework within which to
understand the biology and host relationships of these wasps. Modern information
technologies, including relational databases, digital libraries, electronic
identification tools, and image banks, will play a critical role in both the
research and dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans share the
planet with millions of different species of plants, animals, fungi and microbes
and depend on them for food, fiber, and a myriad of ecological services.
Thousands of new species are discovered each year, each one of which has the
potential for benefitting society. However, the number of people capable of
recognizing and identifying these organisms decreases every year. Training in
the study of biodiversity is an integral part of this project, and the work will
involve substantive contributions from high school students, undergraduates, and
graduate students. At a practical level, the results will significantly enhance
the ability to identify these wasps and make use of them as a natural and
ecologically safe method of pest control. The results of this study will be
important in a broader scientific context through the development and
implementation of a modern information infrastructure for the study of
biodiversity. The public will have free access to all information on scelionids
emerging from this project through the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;