* 0344620
* The Impact of Late Quaternary Climate Change on Mammals Along an Elevational Gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Eric Charnov, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2008
* USD 326,121.00

This study investigates the response of Neotoma (woodrats) to climatic change
over the last 15,000 years along a severe elevational and environmental
gradient. During the Pleistocene, lake Manly covered much of Death Valley; its
abrupt draining in the mid-Holocene led to dramatic shifts in temperature and
aridity. Today this area is the hottest and driest in the Western Hemisphere. By
combining fieldwork, examination of museum specimens, and collection of
paleofossils, this project will reconstruct the divergent evolutionary histories
of animals from the Valley floor and along a nearby mountain gradient (-84 to
&gt;3400m). The investigators predict fundamental differences in the adaptive
abilities of woodrat species related to elevation of the site and local
microclimate. Predicted responses include: i) local extirpation when temperature
thresholds are exceeded, ii) generation of novel adaptations, such as new life
histories, and iii) morphological alterations, such as phenotypic changes in
body size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the work include the
ability to characterize the relationship between the magnitude and rapidity of
temperature shifts, the position in the geographic range, and the type of
elucidated response. Such information about the responses of organisms to past
climate change is invaluable for scientists studying anthropogenic warming.
Moreover, the project will generate a high quality spatial and temporally
resolved climate proxy that can be integrated with other paleodata. The
characterization and interpretation of late Quaternary climates is a major
research effort of governmental and geoscience agencies.&lt;br/&gt;