* 0344738
* Control of Phyllotaxy in Maize by ABPHYL1, a Cytokinin Inducibe Response Regulator Homolog
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* David Jackson, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 02/28/2007
* USD 420,000.00

Plant shape or architecture has a major impact on agricultural yields.
Architecture is the end product of morphogenesis, which in plants, as in
animals, commences during early embryogenesis with the development of distinct
organ and tissue types. Plant development proceeds through the continuous
initiation of organs from groups of stem cells called meristems. All of the
shoot organs, such as leaves and flowers, are initiated from the shoot meristem
in regular patterns known as phyllotaxies. How these patterns are generated has
been a subject of interest for centuries, and has been of interest to
mathematicians, physicists and biologists. Initiation of organs in regular
patterns can optimize light capture for efficient photosynthesis, and in some
plants generates architectural support. In this proposal Dr. Jackson will study
the ABPHYL1 (ABPH1) gene of maize. Loss of ABPH1 function causes plants to
develop with opposite and decussate phyllotaxy rather than the alternating or
distichous pattern that is normal for maize. The ABPH1 gene encodes a cytokinin
inducible response regulator homolog, and though this gene family has been known
for several years this is the first report of a loss of function phenotype in
one of these genes. Response regulators were first discovered in bacteria and
function in signaling pathways. Therefore these studies will investigate the
link between a unique developmental question and a novel function for a gene
predicted to transduce cytokinin signals in plants. In particular, the
expression of ABPH1 protein and mRNA will be described in relation to its role
in phyllotaxy, and the effect of cytokinins on its expression will also be
documented. The hypothesis that cytokinins may regulate phyllotaxy will also be
tested, by growing shoot explants or embryos on medium containing exogenous
cytokinin. Finally, microarray analysis will be used to identify genes that are
regulated by ABPH1, and some of these will be characterized by genetic analysis.
These studies should contribute to several areas of biology, including
developmental regulation, morphogenesis, signaling and activity of growth
regulators. Importantly, they should foster interactions between hormone
biologists and developmental biologists. The proposed studies will also be of
interest to researchers in other disciplines, such as mathematics and
biophysics.