* 0344018
* Genetic Regulation of Peptidergic Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Randall Hewes, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 02/29/2008
* USD 351,807.00

Neuropeptides are chemical signals that are secreted by nerve cells to control
the functioning of the brain and many other tissues. They are key regulators of
diverse processes, including growth, reproduction, stress, sleep, body weight,
pain, and circadian (daily) rhythms. Disruptions in neuropeptide signaling are
associated with human diseases, such as obesity, diabetes and cancer. Thus,
there is a critical need for basic research on neuropeptide systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is to understand complex
molecular mechanisms underlying long-term regulation of neuropeptide secretion.
To support normal signaling, peptidergic (neuropeptide-secreting) cells must
develop the capacity to produce and store large quantities of neuropeptides. In
mature cells, neuropeptide synthesis is regulated in response to diverse
internal and external cues in order to adjust the strength of neuropeptide
signaling. For many cell types, the genes and cell signaling pathways underlying
these processes, and their physiological and developmental regulation, are
almost completely unknown. With the powerful tools recently developed for the
genetic manipulation of peptidergic cells in the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster, these mechanisms are now experimentally accessible. In previous
work, the Drosophila gene dimmed (dimm) was shown to control accumulation and/or
storage of secretory proteins in diverse peptidergic cells. This result suggests
that dimm is an essential component of a cell signaling pathway controlling the
robustness and timing of neuropeptide synthesis. To test this hypothesis, this
project will address two key questions. First, what are the roles of dimm in
developing versus mature cells? Second, what other proteins interact with Dimm,
the protein product of the dimm gene, to control neuropeptide levels?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the first question-what are the roles of dimm
in developing versus mature cells-the first aim of this project is to define the
contributions of the dimm gene in the regulation or maintenance of neuropeptide
synthesis throughout the life cycle of the fly. Using transgenic animals, and a
new temperature-dependent gene expression system, a re-introduced copy of the
dimm gene will be turned on or off during specific stages of development. This
system also allows peptidergic cell-type specific control over the expression of
the dimm gene. Thus, transient and spatially restricted expression of the dimm
gene will be used to determine the effects of post-embryonic increases in dimm
expression on neuropeptide levels in dimm mutant and in normal cells. To address
the second question-what other proteins interact with Dimm to control
neuropeptide levels-the second aim of this project is to perform genetic screens
to identify mutations of genes encoding other elements in the Dimm molecular
signaling pathway. Genes will be identified by virtue of their ability to modify
the effects of dimm misexpression in transgenic animals. Genetic interactions
will be detected using two dimm-sensitive processes: molting and neuropeptide
synthesis. Selected mutants then will be tested for effects on neuropeptide
levels in developing and mature cells, and the mutated genes will be identified
using standard Drosophila molecular cloning methods. Together, the proposed
experiments will lay a foundation for defining key molecular pathways
controlling neuroendocrine signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
continue to provide unique opportunities for several undergraduate and graduate
students to participate in the research. Students in Oklahoma have few options
for non-agricultural training in the sciences. This project provides hands-on
experiences in molecular biology and genetics that are not otherwise readily
available and that complement traditional lecture-format courses. These research
experiences will continue to enable and inspire talented students from the State
of Oklahoma to pursue professional careers in industry, medicine, and scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;