* 0344595
* The Role of Serine Protease Inhibitors in Nervous System Development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Haig Keshishian, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 01/31/2008
* USD 408,524.00

Abstract: In the developing nervous system many key proteins are modified or
activated by proteolytic enzymes or proteases. These enzymes act both within the
neuron as well as in the extracellular environment near growing processes and
synapses. By cleaving key regulatory proteins the nervous system proteases
influence the development of connections between nerve cells and their targets,
and control the processing of secreted hormones and signaling molecules that are
necessary for synapse function. The "serine proteases" are an important class of
proteolytic enzymes in neurons. The serine proteases are widely conserved in
evolution, and are important for both development as well as for changes
associated with learning and memory. Understanding how these enzymes are
controlled is the central goal of this project. Serine proteases are often
regulated by a special class of proteins known as "serpins" (serine protease
inhibitors). The serpins and serine proteases function as an interdependent
system. In order to understand these proteins better Dr. Keshishian will examine
their biological functions in a model genetic organism, Drosophila. In
Drosophila Dr. Keshishian has already characterized the key serpins of the
nervous system (Spn4), and has noted that Spn4 is expressed at connections
between motoneurons and muscles. He has also discovered a second role for Spn4
in the enzymatic processing of precursor forms of secreted peptides and
hormones. One variant of Spn4 binds to and regulates peptide processing serine
proteases in vitro. When it is experimentally expressed in vivo the protein
disrupts endogenous peptide hormone maturation, resulting in developmental
abnormalities. A major goal will be to examine serpin functions at both
developing neuromuscular connections, and in the processing of peptide hormones,
and to test the effects of both its loss and overexpression. Studying Drosophila
Spn4 will be of value in understanding how these regulatory molecules influence
nervous system development and function in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;