* 0344531
* Fungal Recognition of Host Isoflavonoids in Xenobiotic Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* David Straney, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaJoyce Debro
* 04/30/2008
* USD 314,556.00

The metabolic flexibility of fungi has allowed them to adapt to diverse
environments. One source of this flexibility is the cytochrome P450
monoxygenases used to detoxify xenobiotic compounds. Filamentous fungi possess a
large family of cytochrome P450-encoding (CYP) genes that are absent in the
model yeasts. A particularly large number of CYP genes present in plant-
pathogenic fungi may reflect a diversification required to counteract plant
defense compounds. Since detoxification-associated CYP genes are not usually
expressed until the xenobiotic compound is present, regulatory mechanisms would
also need to evolve in these fungi. What signaling pathways allow fungi to
recognize and respond to specific xenobiotic compounds? In animals,
detoxification-associated CYP genes are regulated by nuclear receptors, proteins
that both bind the inducing xenobiotic compound and directly induce gene
transcription. Fungi lack the nuclear receptor gene families so highly conserved
among animals. In order to study the signaling used in fungi, this project
focuses upon a well-characterized CYP gene (PDA1) in the plant pathogen Fusarium
solani. The PDA1 product detoxifies a fungistatic isoflavonoid defense compound,
pisatin, specifically produced by the host plant. A transcriptional regulator of
PDA1 has been identified that mediates pisatin induction. The research will
determine if this regulator acts either through a mechanism where it directly
binds pisatin, or through a broader recognition of the physiological stress
imposed by this defense compound. Testing for physical interactions between the
transcriptional regulator and pisatin or with other cellular proteins will be
used distinguish between these modes of action and indicate signaling pathways
involved. The results will provide a model for how an organism develops or
recruits regulatory circuits that function to chemically perceive other
organisms in such co-evolving systems. Understanding the molecular mechanisms
that control xenobiotic signaling in plant pathogenic fungi will have broader
societal impact in the potential control of plant disease. The results may lead
to novel strategies that interfere with the signaling that regulates resistance
to natural defense compounds, and possibly to synthetic fungicides as well. The
research also strengthens the ability of the P.I. to integrate research and
teaching on a campus that provides education for minority students, and to
incorporate undergraduates and high school students into research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;