* 0344523
* Change in Gene Expression in a Forb and an Annual Grass in Response to Elevated CO2, Warming, Precipitation Increase and Nitrogen Deposition in a Mediterranean Annual Grassland.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Shauna Somerville, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2006
* USD 305,307.00

SOMERVILLE ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans rely on ecosystems for critical
goods and services. In the coming decades, ecosystems will be exposed to a novel
range of human impacts, including altered climate. To anticipate the
consequences of these changes on the biosphere, detailed knowledge of how
various ecosystems respond to global change parameters is needed. This project
is a component of a large, long-term, interdisciplinary study, the Jasper Ridge
Global Change Experiment (JRGCE), of an annual Mediterranean grassland
ecosystem. The broad goals of the JRGCE are to develop a mechanistic
understanding of ecosystem changes to realistic combinations of elevated CO2,
altered precipitation, increased nitrogen deposition and warming, and to develop
predictive models of future ecosystem change. The general goal of this portion
of the project is to provide some insight into the underlying physiological
processes in plants that contribute to ecosystem change in this grassland. With
this project, the work will move from the current methods development phase to
the data collection phase. Microarrays will be used to measure transcript
abundance for two dominant species, Avena barbata and Geranium dissectum. Lists
of genes showing significant changes in expression in response to the four
global change parameters or their interactions will be determined yearly and, in
a summary analysis of the data from four years, in the final year of the
project. These data will be mined to identify whether genes associated with
specific biological processes are over- represented in any of the gene clusters.
In addition, covariance analysis will be performed with selected genes or genes
sets and the various ecological (e.g., net primary productivity), biochemical
(e.g., soil phosphatase activity), and biogeochemical (e.g., soil nitrogen
compounds) parameters that are measured in the same JRGCE plots. The microarray
technology was selected as it is the best currently available method for
surveying a very large number of parameters (genes) in a largely unbiased
fashion. From these experiments, genes or groups of genes whose expression
patterns closely reflect one or more of the global change factors, will be
identified and genes that are diagnostic for some of the ecological and
biochemical processes measured on the JRGCE plots will be determined. Some of
these gene sets may suggest the involvement of biological processes that had not
been implicated in prior research, which has focused on carbon and nitrogen
metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This exploratory project is expected to
lead to a number of specific hypotheses about plant responses and ecosystem
level changes to global change factors, which will be tested in future
experiments. The research will involve training and other outreach activities
that will be coordinated by the "Carnegie Outreach Coordinator", who will be
supported in part by this grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;