* 0344432
* RUI: Comparative Structure/Function Analysis of Phosphagen Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Paul Edmiston, College of Wooster
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2008
* USD 320,307.00

Phosphagen kinases (PKs) are highly conserved enzymes found in all animals
examined to date. They play a key role in energy homeostasis by maintaining
stable ATP concentrations during times of high activity. Creatine kinase (CK) is
the exclusive PK found in vertebrates, whereas arginine kinase (AK) is found in
invertebrates. Unlike CK, the native state of AK is monomeric, except in a few
cases. The reasons for this difference in quaternary structure is currently
unknown, but may be based in differing requirements of physiological function or
stability. The overall goal of this research is to utilize a comparative
biochemical approach to extend current understanding of how structure determines
function in PKs. These projects specifically focus on the interplay between
substrate binding, inter-subunit cooperativity and bimolecular reaction
mechanisms in PKs. PKs offer some unique advantages to the study of these issues
given that they have evolved along different tracks, yet still perform the same
basic physiological function. The specific goals of this research are to 1)
investigate the amino acid determinants of inter-subunit communication (negative
cooperativity) observed in rabbit muscle CK; 2) determine the minimal set of
residues sufficient to generate a functional homodimeric form of horseshoe crab
AK; 3) determine the structure and function of novel, putative PKs from Gram
positive bacteria that appear to be missing the structural components necessary
for guanidino-substrate specificity; 4) determine the structure and function of
five, novel, putative AKs from Caenorhabditis elegans as a means of establishing
a foundation for future experiments for placing these studies within a
physiological context. Completion of these goals will provide an understanding
of how the differences in primary structure between AK and CK give rise to the
observed differences in quaternary structure, subunit cooperativity, substrate
specificity and catalysis of phosphate transfer within this important and
widespread protein family. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The
College of Wooster has a national reputation for its Independent Study program.
Excellent scientific training in modern biochemical and molecular biology
techniques for a significant number of young potential scientists will be
enhanced by this research. In addition, these projects serve as a model of
collaborative research for undergraduate students in biology, chemistry and
biochemistry / molecular biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;