* 0344189
* Collaborative Research: Microbial Communities as Biochemical Inputs to Forest Soil Humification Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* William Horwath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2009
* USD 275,056.00

The formation of soil organic matter (SOM), humification, encompasses a complex
suite of biochemical processes. While microorganisms are known to be involved in
humification, little information exists on how microbes regulate the conversion
of plant material into humic substances. An often-overlooked influence of soil
microorganisms on humification is that their bodies, or biomass, are primary
building blocks of humic substances. Since microbial communities can differ
substantially in their biochemical composition and activity across ecosystems,
we hypothesize that soil microbial community composition influences rates of
humification and the amount and stability of humic substances formed. Defining
the role of microbial community composition will enhance our conceptual
understanding of SOM formation, an important step in reliably predicting C
dynamics in forest ecosystems. The fate of C in microbial bodies will be
followed from four distinct fungal and bacterial groups isolated from a
temperate and a tropical forest soil. The microbial groups (whole, dead cells)
will be biochemically characterized, then reciprocally applied to each of the
two soils to compare the SOM formation processes in two dissimilar forest
ecosystems. The fate of microbial litter will be tracked for three years to
determine which microbial group(s) forms the greatest amount and most stable
SOM. This research will define the microbial controls on humification that are
critical to sustainable forest production and environmental issues including
global warming. The results will identify key characteristics of the microbial
community that influence humification processes and its products, thereby
substantially increasing our understanding of the mechanisms involved in C
storage.