* 0344892
* The role of auditory feedback in sequence production
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Peter Pfordresher, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 03/31/2007
* USD 137,880.00

When we speak and sing we not only produce sounds, but also hear the sounds we
produce. The importance of monitoring our own sounds is dramatized by the speech
of deaf persons, or the difficulty experienced when singing the national anthem
in a large, reverberating hall. However, puzzling evidence from past research
would suggest that perceptual feedback plays a limited role in the execution of
actions. Dr. Peter Q. Pfordresher will further explore this puzzle with support
from the National Science Foundation. The key question of his research is to
what extent does fluency in action rely on perceiving the results of one's
actions? The funded research focuses on the sounds people hear while they play
melodies on the piano. In this research, participants perform short melodies
from memory while listening to themselves over headphones. During certain
performances, the sounds the performer hears deviate in various ways from the
produced actions. For example, one might hear the wrong musical pitch when a key
is pressed, might hear the correct pitch after a delay, or hear nothing at all.
Past research of this sort has revealed that some deviations are more disruptive
than others, and different kinds of deviations disrupt different characteristics
of performance. The Broader Impacts of the funded research will ultimately
include understanding the way coordination goes awry in certain disorders such
as stuttering.