* 0344768
* Mechanisms of Endocytosis in Adrenal Chromaffin Cells.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Corey Smith, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 06/30/2009
* USD 603,479.00

Mechanisms of Endocytosis in Adrenal Chromaffin Cells Corey B. Smith Case
Western Reserve University

Stress is a physiological response to a hostile environment. Stress causes
chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland to increase their release of chemical
transmitters, including adrenaline, into the blood stream. This release is
achieved by fusion of transmitter containing packets, called secretory granules,
with the inside cell surface, causing their contents to be expelled from the
cell. Under normal conditions, chromaffin cells release low levels of adrenaline
and set the organism in a 'breed and feed' state of energy storage by directing
blood flow to the internal organs, focusing the eye on nearby objects and
increasing insulin release from the pancreas. With stress, chromaffin cells
release elevated levels of adrenaline, contributing to the 'fight or flight'
response. In this state, the elevated adrenaline diverts blood flow to skeletal
muscle, focuses they eye on distant objects and increases blood sugar levels. In
addition, stress-activation causes chromaffin cells to release analgesic
compounds, termed enkephalins. Together these signaling molecules place the
organism into a state for escape or defense. Thus, regulated transmitter release
from chromaffin cells plays a critical role in determining the physiological and
metabolic status of an organism. It is the overall goal of this laboratory to
provide a fundamental understanding of the chromaffin cell as a primary
contributor to the 'breed and feed' as well as the 'fight or flight' state. This
proposal focuses on the mechanisms utilized by chromaffin cells for transmitter
release under basal versus stress activation.

Sustained transmitter release requires the recycling of the transmitter-
containing secretory granules. Without recycling the cell would soon exhaust its
supply. Specialized granule components are retrieved from the cell surface and
refilled with transmitter molecules for re-use. It was assumed that this
recycling occurred by the same mechanism under all conditions. However, it was
recently demonstrated that differences in recycling processes exist under basal
versus stress-activation. This proposal outlines a series of experiments
designed to test signature events that delineate recycling mechanisms under
conditions of basal versus stress activation in mouse adrenal chromaffin cells.
It provides experiments that will test the degree of granule fusion and collapse
during transmitter release and the degree to which the granule and cell surface
components mix, thus defining the complexity of the recycling process required
prior to re-generation of viable secretory granules. It will also determine the
role of key molecules involved in the recycling mechanism, thus defining points
of potential regulation for the re-generation of secretory granules. Techniques
employed in these experiments include electrophysiological measures of the
surface area of single cells, electrochemical determination of the amount of
transmitter released, quantitative fluorescence imaging of cell surface
components and molecular disruption of the recycling mechanism. Thus a
fundamental description of the mechanisms utilized by adrenal chromaffin cells
for the sustained release of adrenaline and enkephalin during the normal 'breed
and feed' as well as the 'fight or flight' stress-activated state will be
provided.

