* 0344288
* REVSYS: A Holistic Approach to a Holarctic Group: Subgeneric Relationships Within the Genus Andrena Fabricius (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae) with a Revision of the Subgenus Callandrena
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Leah Larkin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2008
* USD 332,335.00

REVSYS: A holistic approach to a holarctic group: Subgeneric relationships
within the genus Andrena Fabricius (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae) with a revision of
the subgenus Calandrena&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr.
Leah L. Larkin of the University of New Mexico to study the bee genus Andrena.
This genus is extremely large, with over 1400 species that are native to areas
throughout the northern hemisphere. The genus has been divided into between 95
and 98 groups (subgenera), but recent analyses of DNA data indicate that these
groupings are not accurate; some species that look morphologically similar are
not actually closely related to one another. This project will expand on these
DNA findings by including approximately 550 species from throughout the
distribution of Andrena. The data will be analyzed using techniques that
identify the evolutionary relationships (phylogeny) of the species. The results
will allow Dr. Larkin and her international collaborators in Europe, Japan,
Mexico and the United States to regroup the species into subgenera that
accurately reflect the relationships of the species. Another aspect of the study
will focus on a single subgenus that is found exclusively in North America. The
subgenus Callandrena is an example of a group of species that look similar but
are not closely related. The appropriate groups of related species will be
identified and the 40 or more species in Mexico that are new to science will be
named and described. In addition, a "key", which aids in the identification of
species, will be created in an electronic format so that biologists and the
curious can access it via the internet and use it to identify species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will benefit the scientific community in a
number of ways. It will compare new computational methods for analyzing large
datasets and result in a global phylogeny of one of the largest genera of bees.
The electronic keys will allow easy identification of species from North
America. The phylogeny will aid in the future study of interesting ecological
interactions of the bees, including their pollen host-plant preferences, seasons
of emergence, parasite relationships, and the historical aspects of their
current geographic distributions. Because bees are the most important insect
pollinators of plants, the results may potentially benefit both agriculture and
ecological conservation. Undergraduate students will participate and be trained
in a number of skills, including field collecting techniques; identifying bees;
describing new species; extracting and sequencing DNA; and analyzing both DNA
and morphological data. University of New Mexico is designated a Minority-
Serving Institution, and undergraduate involvement will likely increase minority
participation in science.&lt;br/&gt;