* 0344665
* Collaborative Research: The Evolutionary Transition From Solitary to Gregarious Development in Parasitoid Wasps
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Paul Ode, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 03/31/2007
* USD 98,009.00

Collaborative Research: The evolutionary transition from solitary to gregarious
development in parasitoid wasps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paul Ode1, James
Whitfield2, and George Heimpel3&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1North Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;2University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;3University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of clutch
size is one of the oldest and most productive fields in behavioral ecology and
life history theory. A central theme is the conflict between parents and
offspring over the allocation of limiting resources and optimal clutch size.
Parasitic wasps (parasitoids) have been favored organisms for clutch size
studies because their hosts represent well-defined resources on which offspring
develop. Parasitoids are classified as solitary if only one, typically
siblicidal, larva completes development per host or gregarious if more than one
non-siblicidal offspring develops per host. Phylogenetic patterns suggest that
solitary development is ancestral to gregariousness and that this transition has
occurred many times. Population genetic models suggest the conditions favoring
the spread of non-siblicidal behavior are stringent but may be relaxed if one or
more of the following factors occur: sex allocation behaviors increase within
brood relatedness, loss of larval mobility, acquisition of the ability to
distinguish relatives from non-relatives, inbreeding, or reduced
superparasitism. While the phylogenetic relationships of most parasitoid taxa
are not well understood, the well-studied phylogeny of the braconid genus
Cotesia allows detailed study of whether the aforementioned factors were
associated with the evolution of gregariousness within this genus. Collection of
DNA sequences from additional Cotesia species will further strengthen the
phylogeny. Behavioral studies will assess the role of siblicide, mobility, sex
allocation, and kin-discrimination in the evolution of gregariousness. Field and
laboratory studies will determine the effects of inbreeding and superparasitism
on the evolution of gregariousness. This project will provide novel insights
into the mechanisms operating during the evolution of major life history traits
and will foster ongoing international collaborations and opportunities for
graduate and postdoctoral students. &lt;br/&gt;