* 0344853
* Phylogeny and Evolution of the True Thistles, Genus Cirsium (Compositae-Cardueae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Bruce Baldwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 203,101.00

The true thistles (genus Cirsium) are highly diverse, taxonomically
problematic, and ecologically and economically important components of north
temperate floras worldwide. Minimal genetic variation across species has
hampered resolution of relationships in Cirsium but can now be overcome with the
identification of three highly variable, nuclear gene regions that provide
phylogenetic information at fine-scale levels within the genus. Phylogeny of the
true thistles will be studied by comparing DNA sequences from three nuclear gene
regions (G3pdh, the B1 promoter, and histidine kinase). Hypotheses to be tested
include: (1) Do the ecologically diverse New World thistles constitute a natural
group? (2) Are the New World species (especially the Californian endemics) good
examples of adaptive radiation? (3) Did the New World thistles arise from a
common European or Asian ancestor? (4) Is Cirsium distinct from the closely
related genus Carduus? Resolution of natural groupings within Cirsium also will
be used to replace the prevailing, highly unnatural, sectional classification of
the genus. Achieving a natural classification of Cirsium is critically important
to provide a biologically meaningful framework for future basic and applied
research on true thistles.&lt;br/&gt; This research will have the broader
impacts of enriching undergraduate education at the University of California,
Berkeley. Undergraduate students will be enlisted in the efforts and will
participate in laboratory research. The project will also involve at-risk,
ethnically diverse high school students, who will be introduced to biological
research and will participate in growing research plants. By defining natural
species groups within Cirsium, this research will aid biological-control
researchers in choosing new agents for controlling non-native weedy thistles.
Land resource professionals and the lay public will be instructed in the
conservation of rare thistles by means of a field workshop, and a larger group
will have access to results on the Jepson Online Interchange website, thereby
obtaining information on the importance of modern systematic approaches to
understanding regional plant diversity and classification.&lt;br/&gt;