* 0344522
* Collaborative Research:  Origin of the Hawaiian Pteridophyte Flora
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Thomas Ranker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 210,728.00

Collaborative research by Dr. Thomas Ranker of the University of Colorado and
Dr. Jennifer Geiger of Carroll College, Montana, will investigate the
biogeographical and evolutionary origins of the fern flora of the Hawaiian
Islands. Molecular studies of species within several selected genera will be
conducted to understand evolutionary relationships. Comparative analyses of the
evolutionary relationships and biogeographical histories of the groups studied
will allow for the testing of climate- and weather-based hypotheses of wind
dispersal of spores to the Hawaiian Islands. Such comparisons will allow for an
assessment of the possibility that long-distance wind dispersal to the
archipelago has been essentially random across groups or if there are common
patterns across groups due to the existence of common dispersal routes. The
proposed research will make a significant contribution to our understanding of
the historical biogeography of an evolutionarily and ecologically important and
under-studied group of plants in the Hawaiian Islands and around the Pacific
region. Because&lt;br/&gt;the ancestors of many native Hawaiian plants, fungi,
and insects undoubtedly arrived via long-distance wind dispersal to the islands,
this research will provide new insights into the origin and diversification of
native groups of organisms in the Hawaiian Islands. In addition, hypotheses
about evolutionary relationships will be generated for several groups of
Hawaiian and non-Hawaiian ferns that will provide a basis for and lead to
future, more detailed evolutionary studies. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will have a significant impact on the development of human resources by
providing training and first-hand experience in evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;biology,
systematics, biogeography, tropical biology, molecular techniques, and data
analysis to graduate students at CU-Boulder and four or more undergraduate
students per year at Carroll College and CU-Boulder. Several programs exist at
the University of Colorado to encourage undergraduate students to become
involved with research projects. PI Ranker regularly works with and mentors such
students, including participants in the Summer Multicultural Access to Research
and Training program. PI Ranker will recruit two or more students per year
through these programs to assist with the proposed research, both in the field
and in the laboratory, as honor's and independent&lt;br/&gt;research students.
Similarly, PI Geiger will recruit two or more students per year to assist with
the proposed research at Carroll College, which is an undergraduate institution.
Students will assist with the proposed research by participating in the honors
thesis program. Students completing honors theses will present a poster display
of their work at the Carroll College Department of Natural Sciences annual
Manion Symposium. Students from Carroll College will also have the opportunity
to participate in this research during the summer months at CU-Boulder working
in PI Ranker's laboratory. Gaining experience at a research university will
broaden students' perspectives and experiences and help prepare them as they
progress toward a professional job or a graduate&lt;br/&gt;education. Students
will be involved with all phases of this work, including the co-authoring of
publications and presenting the results of research at professional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;