* 0344569
* Cortical Circuits for Classical and Extra-Classical Receptive Field Interactions in Visual Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Alessandra Angelucci, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 02/29/2008
* USD 403,204.00

A prominent organizational feature of the visual cerebral cortex of primates is
the existence of multiple areas interconnected by a dense network of feedforward
and feedback connections, and the presence of long horizontal axons linking
distant loci within any given visual cortical area. The long-term goal of the
present research is to disentangle the relative roles of these different systems
of neuronal connections in the generation of specific visual cortex neuron
responses, and ultimately in visual perception. &lt;br/&gt;A basic feature of
neurons at the early stages of visual cortical processing is that they respond
to the presentation of specific visual stimuli within a localized region of
space, called the neuron's receptive field (RF). Presentation of similar stimuli
outside the neuron's RF, typically does not evoke a response from the neuron.
Feedforward connections are thought to underlie the responses of visual cortex
neurons to localized imaged features (such as the specific orientation of line
segments), i.e. to stimuli confined to the neuron's RF.&lt;br/&gt;More recently,
it has been demonstrated that visual cortex neurons respond not only to details
within their RF, but also to the context in which they appear. In other words,
neuronal responses are affected by the perceptual organization of the visual
scene as a whole. For example, the responses of neurons in visual cortical areas
V1 and V2 to stimuli within their RF can be modulated (i.e. facilitated or
suppressed) by stimuli lying outside their RF, i.e. in the RF's surround, even
though stimulation of the surround region alone does not evoke a response from
the cells. Specifically, the response to a bar stimulus presented in the RF at
the orientation preferred by the cell is enhanced by the simultaneous
presentation of similarly oriented and co-aligned bars in the surround. However,
surrounding bars of orthogonal orientation to that in the RF have no effect on
the cell's response. This property of visual cortical neurons (defined as
surround modulation) is thought to represent the neural mechanism by which
fragmented line segments are integrated to form perceptually complete contours.
These phenomena require fast communication between distant parts of the visual
image. Horizontal and/or feedback connections are thought to carry out the long
distance computations underlying the perceptual integration of oriented line
segments into contours, surround modulation of RF responses, and possibly visual
attention.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this application is to disentangle the relative
roles of feedforward, feedback and horizontal connections in the generation of
single neurons' responses within and outside the RF. As an initial step towards
this goal, the present research is designed to investigate how the spatial
extent and organization of the different types of connections within and between
primate areas V1, V2 and V3 relate to the spatial dimensions and organization of
single V1, V2 and V3 cells' RF and RF's surround. Each system of connections
will be visualized using neuroanatomical labeling methods, by making small
injections of a neuroanatomical tracer in macaque V1, V2 or V3. The extent of
the connections in visual space will be determined and compared with the spatial
dimensions of electrophysiologically measured RF and surround field of neurons
at the injected cortical sites.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will provide anatomical
and physiological constrains necessary to rule out potential mechanisms and
substrates for surround modulation and perceptual integration of contours, while
also identifying potential candidates. Additionally, they will identify rules of
connectivity for three different visual cortical areas. Similar rules for
different areas will reveal fundamental principles of organization for these
connectional systems in visual cortex and, possibly, in other sensory cortices,
with important functional and developmental implications. This research will
also provide a wealth of quantitative anatomical and physiological data
essential to the generation of biologically-based theoretical models of
interactions within and beyond the RF of visual cortex neurons. These data will
be disseminated and shared with students and faculty of mathematical biology,
both through weekly discussion meetings, and through active collaborations and
laboratory rotations offered to the students. The P.I. is an adjunct member of
an active IGERT training grant in mathematical biology funded by NSF, whose
central goal is to promote interactions between mathematicians and biologists;
this proposal will thus help strengthen and meet the aims of that grant. It will
also help strengthen Systems Neuroscience, at the University of Utah, by
promoting collaborations between neuroscientists in different departments within
and outside the University of Utah. Finally, the proposal will promote training
and education, and broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, by
funding two graduate students and one post-doctoral fellow belonging to minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;