* 0345112
* Collaborative/RUI: Late-Quaternary Glacial and Paleoclimate History of the Uinta Mountains, Northeastern Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Jeffrey Munroe, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 101,317.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Uinta Mountains contain a well-preserved
record of alpine glacier extents and behavior during the
latest&lt;br/&gt;Pleistocene. Yet, this record has not been studied in detail at
the range-wide scale, and the timing of the Last GlacialMaximum (LGM) and
subsequent deglaciation have not been determined. Documenting the spatial and
temporalextent of late-Quaternary glaciation in the Uinta range is warranted for
several reasons. First, the location of the range - central among well-dated
alpine glacial localities and adjacent to the eastern edge of the Lake
Bonneville basin - provides great potential for examining the regional effect of
Lake Bonneville on paleoclimate and glaciation in northeastern Utah. Second, the
orientation of the Uinta range provides a unique opportunity to study a record
of large glaciers that flowed both north and south within a single mountain
range. Finally, the excellent preservation of moraines and resistant lithology
of erratic boulders provides ideal targets for cosmogenic surface-exposure
dating. We propose to use a combination of conventional and advanced research
methods to study the late-Quaternary glacial and paleoclimate record of the
Uinta Mountains in pursuit of the following goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Determine the extent and timing of glaciation in the Uinta Mountains during and
since the LGM. This&lt;br/&gt;effort will involve (1) detailed field and air
photograph mapping of the surficial geology of the south flank of&lt;br/&gt;the
Uinta Mountains (2) cosmogenic surface-exposure dating of moraines deposited
during the LGM in the&lt;br/&gt;western, central, and eastern Uintas and (3)
retrieval and study of lake sediment cores from lakes dammed by recessional
moraines across the north and south slopes of the range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Reconstruct the latest Pleistocene paleoclimate from glacial records across the
Uinta Mountains. Because&lt;br/&gt;the extents of glaciers are a function of
temperature and precipitation, glacial records are excellent proxies of climate
change. We will use the geomorphic records of latest Pleistocene glaciers to
validate numerical&lt;br/&gt;modeling experiments that simulate glacier growth
based on climate input parameters; this will allow for a&lt;br/&gt;unique
determination of LGM paleoclimate in the Uinta
Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The research outlined
in this proposal will yield benefits beyond pursuit of the core scientific
objectives. First, it will further the ongoing relationship between the Ashley
National Forest (ANF) and UW-Madison. Due to rising public use and more
intensive management of National Forests, supervisors of the ANF have developed
a greater interest in the geologic history of forest land and have supported
graduate student research in the Uinta Mountains for the past 8 years (e.g.,
Douglass, 2000; Munroe, 2001; Carson, 2003) and continue to support current
graduate research (B. Laabs, this study; see letter of support). Second, Ph.D.
student B. Laabs will participate in the new NSF Center for the Integration of
Research Teaching and Learning (CIRTL), an NSF-sponsored program that was
launched at the UW-Madison to prepare the next generation of college science
professors. He will participate in CIRTL courses and workshops focused on the
effective use of research methods to disseminate scientific knowledge in the
college classroom. Laabs will be among the first graduate students to receive a
certificate acknowledging preparation for a career in academia and bring the
fruits of this NSF-UW-Madison partnership into the U.S. higher education system.
Finally, J. Munroe (Middlebury College) has built upon his graduate work in the
Uintas and has begun including undergraduates in his current research on the
late Quaternary history of the area. The proposed research provides the
opportunity for three senior geology majors to pursue undergraduate theses on
facets of the&lt;br/&gt;overall research objectives (see RUI impact statement
for more information).