* 0345373
* Conference Support for 2003 ASME Symposium:    Mechanics of Biological Materials; November 16-21, 2003; Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Gang Bao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 04/30/2004
* USD 5,000.00

0345373 Bao A Special Symposium: Mechanics of Biological Materials is to be
conducted in Washington, DC in conjunction with the November 16-21, 2003
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) International Mechanical
Congress and Exposition. The goals of the symposium are (a) to bring together
researchers in applied mechanics, bioengineering, biophysics, biology, and
biochemistry to facilitate interdisciplinary studies; (b) to discuss the
cutting-edge research in this field and to identify critical issues and
challenges in further developing cellular and molecular biomechanics; (c) to
encourage researchers in applied mechanics to enter the field.

Recent advances in cell and molecular biology, biotechnology and biomechanics,
have introduced the need to study mechanics as related to cellular functions and
molecular mechanisms in biological tissues and materials. Mechanical forces and
deformations play an important role in all these aspects, and in regulating cell
behavior and function, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and death
(apoptosis). Biomechanics should provide a useful tool for modeling and
quantitative analyses of biological responses, especially force-bearing, force-
generating, and force-sensing functions in cells. Results from the symposium
will contribute to a better understanding of the mechanisms of mechanochemical
coupling and how mechanical forces regulate cell behavior and function by
deforming nucleic acids and proteins, influencing the transport of ions and
other molecules, and altering receptor-ligand binding kinetic rates, and
specificity.

The symposium goals are to be attained in four technical sessions: (1) Mechanics
of proteins and nucleic acids, (2) BioMEMS and bionanotechnology, (3) Cellular
and subcellular biomechanics, (4) Biosensors and biomaterial systems. Financial
support is being provided for 4 speakers, unassociated with ASME, who are
leading researchers in the sciences (biophysicists; biochemists (2); materials)
that produce the basic knowledge necessary to reach the goals of the meeting.

The cutting-edge research and critical issues to be discussed during the meeting
constitute the intellectual merit of the project and the multidisciplinary
composition of the speakers and attendees and wide distribution of the
proceedings of the symposium assures a broad impact from the activity.