* 0345885
* Biodiversity and Systematics of the Rhacophorid Anuran Radiation in Sri Lanka
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Christopher Schneider, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 250,001.00

PUBLIC ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;DEB
0345885&lt;br/&gt;Schneider&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sri Lanka is a small island
nation off the southern tip of India. Together with &lt;br/&gt;the Western Ghats
region of southwestern India, Sri Lanka is recognized as one &lt;br/&gt;of the
world's biodiversity hotspots - an area with enormous species diversity
&lt;br/&gt;and endemism, but also a high degree of threat to natural habitats.
Sri Lanka, &lt;br/&gt;like much of the developing world, has experienced
significant loss of it's once &lt;br/&gt;extensive rainforests. In fact, only
about 5% of the islands rainforest &lt;br/&gt;remains, typically in small
isolated fragments. Thus it was surprising that the &lt;br/&gt;remaining
rainforest of Sri Lanka is home to a large number of previously
&lt;br/&gt;unknown frog species. Surveys by the Wildlife Heritage Trust of Sri
Lanka over &lt;br/&gt;the past ten years revealed that there likely are over one
hundred species of &lt;br/&gt;small terrestrial frogs endemic to the island.
These frogs do not require free &lt;br/&gt;standing water in which to rear
tadpoles - instead, they have no tadpoles and &lt;br/&gt;the embryos develop
completely within eggs laid on land and from which fully &lt;br/&gt;formed
froglets emerge. This mode of reproduction is known as &lt;br/&gt;direct-
development and has evolved only about eight times in frogs making the
&lt;br/&gt;Sri Lankan species even more unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this project is to fully document the frog species diversity in
&lt;br/&gt;Sri Lanka as a first step in developing conservation measures to
ensure that &lt;br/&gt;this unique radiation of frogs is not lost to future
generations. We are using &lt;br/&gt;a variety of methods to identify and
describe the new species and to determine &lt;br/&gt;their evolutionary
relationships, including: DNA sequences, call recordings, and
&lt;br/&gt;analyses of morphology and ecology. With funding from NSF we are now
able to &lt;br/&gt;carry out a comprehensive survey of the island's frog fauna
and analyze and &lt;br/&gt;describe in detail the many species that make up the
remarkable radiation of &lt;br/&gt;direct-developing frogs in Sri Lanka. In
close collaboration with the Wildlife &lt;br/&gt;Heritage Trust of Sri Lanka, we
are working to train a new cadre of Sri Lankan &lt;br/&gt;experts who will form
the core of the nation's initiative to catalog and &lt;br/&gt;preserve its
natural heritage. This study not only contributes to basic
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of amphibian diversity in one of the world's
biodiversity &lt;br/&gt;hotspots, but also helps to build the infrastructure to
ensure its preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;