* 0345242
* SGER ACT: Stochastic Shape Analysis for Recognizing and Tracking Objects in Images and Videos
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Eric Klassen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Imaging devices have become ubiquitous tools of surveillance of public areas,
remote locations, areas of restricted access, and other sites where additional
security is needed. The detailed analysis of collected images can provide
invaluable information about people, objects, their characteristics and patterns
of behavior. Thus, combined with other strategies, image analysis can contribute
significantly to the prevention of terrorism and national security. However, the
execution of this task poses challenging problems due to the vast amount of
imagery generated by surveillance devices. To make this task feasible, advanced
automated systems are needed to screen images and route to human operators only
material that is very likely to contain relevant information. The proposed
interdisciplinary research addresses problems on the interface of shape and
digital image analysis, whose solutions will contribute to the implementation of
such intelligent surveillance systems, and will be useful in numerous other
applications. Images contain information about two main attributes of objects:
their shapes and textures. The proposers will develop a novel framework to
represent and analyze planar shapes quantitatively using methods and tools of
differential geometry, differential topology, and statistics. Statistical
texture analysis and synthesis will be combined with the study of shapes to
produce finer models of imaged objects. New algorithms of shape and image
analysis will be developed, implemented, and applied to: (a) the detection and
recognition of objects in noisy images; (b) tracking dynamic shapes possibly
subject to occlusions in video sequences; (c) the organization of large
databases of shapes for efficient retrieval and processing of information.
Current techniques of algorithmic shape analysis are somewhat limited in scope
or performance: some represent shapes using coarse collections of landmarks
whose selection may be difficult to automate, and some involve heavy
computational costs. Computational efficiency issues also limit the use of
existing methods of image analysis; in spite of the remarkable success that
methods based on partial differential equations have had in many applications,
computational costs associated with typical implementations are high and the
performance is not adequate for applications in video surveillance. There is a
pressing need for efficient, robust algorithms that can analyze, process, and
simulate the dynamics of shapes of continuous closed curves. The main idea
proposed here is the use of computational stochastic differential geometry to
study shapes, i.e., the algorithmic analysis of differential geometric
representations of continuous curves in a statistical framework. The proposers
will: (i) analyze closed shapes by representing them as elements of infinite-
dimensional Riemannian manifolds via their angle or curvature functions; (ii)
develop geometry-based tools for statistical inference problems on shape spaces;
(iii) derive techniques for nonlinear filtering and tracking of shapes in
infinite-dimensional shape manifolds; (iv) study completions of contours and
textures with the goal of discovering hidden geometric features that follow an
observable pattern; (v) implement algorithms and apply them to the solution of
problems in shape and image analysis. The key new element in this approach is
the use of the geometry of spaces of curves to study shapes, not only the
geometry of individual curves. Results originating from this research may have
far-reaching implications in shape, image and video analysis. The proposed
algorithmic approach to shapes has the potential to set a new paradigm for the
treatment of curve evolution. The team has expertise in the areas of
differential geometry and topology, statistics, computing, and image analysis.
This grouping reflects the interdisciplinary nature of the proposed
investigation and will further enhance the atmosphere of collaborative research
that exists among the PIs and their graduate students. Moreover, the
applications to be investigated will contribute to the education and involvement
of more students in areas related to national security. The PIs will continue to
develop and offer courses and seminars from the introductory to the advanced
levels targeting a broad audience of science students with the goal of
increasing the overall impact of this line of research. To encourage the
participation of undergraduates and students from underrepresented groups,
motivated students will have full access to the Florida State University
Laboratory of Computational Vision, where a hands-on learning environment will
allow them to explore the area with their own experiments. To disseminate
research results the proposers will continue to publish articles in well-
circulated journals, post results in various electronic preprint archives,
produce multimedia presentations on CD-ROMs, write introductory articles in
magazines or handbooks, and present results at regional, national and
international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly
by the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism
Program in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences supports new
concepts in basic research and workforce development with the potential to
contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;