* 0345162
* WORKSHOP:   Supply Chain Management with Focus on Green Supply Chain Management, Int'l Supply Chain Management, Auctions and Pricing Strategy; Feb. 28-Mar. 2, 2004, Gainesville, FL
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Joseph Geunes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 01/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

We propose organizing a workshop on Supply Chain Management with specific focus
on green supply chain management, international supply chain management, and
auction and pricing strategy at the University of Florida. The objective of this
workshop is to bring together experts from academia and business practice to
engage in a discussion on the state-of-the-art in supply chain management and
the critical problem areas and future directions within this field.
Specifically, the four main goals of this workshop are, through the
participation of academic and industry participants, to: characterize the
problems and challenges facing leading-edge manufacturing and service firms in
the areas of green supply chain management, international supply chain
management and online auctions; define the state-of-the art technological and
decision support capabilities currently available to industry; identify the new
technological and decision support solution capabilities needed for both meeting
newly arising challenges faced by industry and for driving new sources of
strategic and competitive advantage; and identify and define academic research
opportunities and challenges for developing new technological and decision
support solution capabilities sought by industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in information technology and the growth of electronic commerce
activity over the Internet have reduced barriers to globalization, and as a
result, competency in on-line procurement and international supply chain
management are becoming critical success factors. At the same time,
organizations have found that the benefits of green supply chain management
extend far beyond simply meeting regulatory requirements and can lead to
improved sources of efficiency and cost reduction. We propose to focus on these
three important emerging trends in supply chain management practice during this
workshop. In particular, we will discuss innovative solution approaches to
overcome the significant complexities within these areas.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
our workshop is to bring together leading-edge researchers and practitioners in
order to define the critical research problems within the three focus areas for
the next decade. We plan to solicit papers from both academic and industry
participants and publish workshop proceedings. The proceedings should contain a
set of papers written by presenters that both captures the content of the
presentation and summarizes the major points made during the
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;