* 0345255
* Collaborative Research: A Proposal for the Cosmic-Ray prOduced NUclide Systematics on Earth (CRONUS-Earth) Project
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Janet Sisterson, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2010
* USD 144,665.00

Terrestrial- in situ- cosmogenic nuclide (TCN) methods for surface exposure
dating and other&lt;br/&gt;earth-science applications were first demonstrated in
1986. During the subsequent 17 years these methods have developed into versatile
and indispensable tools in many fields of modern Earth Sciences, including
paleoclimatology, geomorphology, tectonics, hydrology, and volcanology. The TCN
that have been demonstrated to be widely applicable are 3H, 10Be, 14C, 21Ne,
26Al, and 36Cl. This rapid development has been facilitated by methodological
progress, including improvements in sampling strategies, sample preparation
procedures and analyses of cosmogenic nuclides (by accelerator mass spectrometry
(AMS) and noble gas mass spectrometry). In order to remain at the cutting edge
of the earth sciences the accuracy of TCN methods must be significantly
improved. However, it is the consensus of practitioners in the field that
further developments are instead moving toward an impasse. This limitation is
imposed, not by methodological considerations, but rather by incomplete
understanding of the fundamental physical processes, and by lack of rigorous
intercomparability between different investigators and methods. The global
distribution of cosmogenic nuclide production depends on a number of
interrelated factors, and these&lt;br/&gt;factors must be simultaneously
controlled in order to arrive at the equations and parameters that accurately
define production rates at all points, and over geological time. This task is
far beyond the capability of any individual
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve this next, necessary,
step the CRONUS-Earth Project is proposed. The project&lt;br/&gt;has the
following goals: (i) to establish a rigorous basis for intercomparison between
measurement of different nuclides and by different investigators, (ii) to
provide a firm linkage between cosmic-ray physics and the systematics of the TCN
produced by the cosmic rays, and (iii) to produce generally-accepted
formulations and parameters for calculation of TCN production. The ultimate goal
is to advance the precision and accuracy of all TCN methods from its current
range of ~10% to 20% toward a 5% level. This project is envisioned as an
international, collaborative effort. CRONUS-Earth consists of six major
components: (i) A methodological intercomparison, including sample preparation
as well as analytical measurement. (ii) Spatial/temporal distribution of cosmic-
ray fluxes, through "mining" existing neutron monitor datasets, modeling of
neutron monitor responses, and measurement of saturated in situ 14C
altitude/latitude profiles. (iii) Emplacement of artificial targets for 3He,
21Ne, 10Be, 32P and 36Cl production, to link contemporary cosmic-ray fluxes to
production rates and scaling factors. (iv) Measurement of production cross-
sections using laboratory neutron beams. (v) A numerical modeling effort to
integrate the observations and to calculate the effects of past geomagnetic and
paleoclimatic changes on cosmogenic&lt;br/&gt;nuclide production. (vi)
Geological calibration of nuclide production rates, based on independently-dated
surfaces worldwide. These will be classified by quality into primary calibration
sites and secondary, or "verification", sites that will be used to test the
overall production-rate model. These six components comprise a synergistic and
coordinated approach to a problem that is clearly beyond the scope of
individuals and small research teams. We propose a consortium approach to
managing the project, involving multiple investigators, annual meetings to
monitor progress, compile data, and exchange with the community, rapid
electronic distribution of results, and integration of the final products
through a project office charged with disseminating the results to the
community. A linked CRONUS-Europe proposal has been submitted to the EU and will
be closely coordinated with CRONUS-Earth. The CRONUS-Earth Project will address
the NSF intellectual merit review criterion through establishing an improved,
quantitative, physically-based, understanding of TCN production and accumulation
that can be applied to solve a wide variety of problems in the earth sciences.
The Project will address the broader impacts criterion by providing
formulations, parameters, and computer codes that will constitute an
intellectual infrastructure enabling more consistent, accurate, and widespread
application of TCN methods in the earth sciences. Furthermore, the Project will
provide a basis for a more formal and organized future approach to promoting
consistency in application of TCN methods, such as committees
to&lt;br/&gt;provide recommended values for parameters. Finally, it will include
a component to directly involve&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates, and especially
minority students, in research in aspects of earth science related
to&lt;br/&gt;CRONUS.