* 0345375
* Upgrading of  Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) System to Allow Simultaneous Laser Induced Fluorescence (LIF)
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Peter Friedman, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2005
* USD 33,000.00

0345375&lt;br/&gt;Friedman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under appropriate conditions the
interaction between volcanic magma and surface water is explosive; however,
volcanologists lack a fundamental understanding about the prerequisite phase
mingling. With support from this grant, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth in
collaboration with volcanologists from the University of Rhode Island will
modify an existing particle image velocimetry (PIV) system to simultaneously
capture laser induced fluorescence (LIF) images. Mingling mechanisms will be
determined by superposing phase boundaries (from LIF) with velocity fields (from
PIV) under varying flow conditions and geometries. LIF and PIV images are
captured on separate cameras focused on a single image plane with the aid of a
beam splitter and optical filters.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental upgrade has the
potential to answer a broad range of additional questions of interest to NSF and
Earth Sciences. For example, dispersion of particles injected into the upper
atmosphere is dependent on the settling velocity. Research has shown that
turbulent flow can either enhance or suppress the average settling rate. By
using small reflective particles to map the flow structure and larger
fluorescent particles to simulate impurities, the apparatus could be used to
study the effect of turbulence on mean settling velocity. University of
Massachusetts Dartmouth is a small university with a young but promising
graduate education program serving the ethnically diverse communities of Fall
River and New Bedford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;