* 0345251
* Roles of the Arabidopsis AKIP RNA-Binding-Proteins in Guard Cell Function
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Philip Bevilacqua, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2010
* USD 680,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants as well as in animals, the genetic code is
contained within the organism's DNA. Every cell in a multicellular organism has
exactly the same DNA, and it is the regulation of which genes within that DNA
are used, or "expressed", that makes one cell different from another. This
regulation occurs at many levels. DNA is transcribed (transcription) into
another type of nucleic acid, RNA, which is further processed (cut, spliced,
modified) before its translation into protein. Thus, regulation of gene
expression can occur at the level of transcription, at the level of mRNA
processing and stability, and at the level of translation. The plant hormone,
abscisic acid (ABA), plays an integral role in the ability of plants to
acclimate to environmental stresses such as drought, cold, and salinity, which
seriously compromise crop productivity both in the U.S. and world-wide. It has
been known for some time that ABA plays an important role in the regulation of
gene transcription. Results from a few laboratories are now beginning to show
that ABA also plays an important role in RNA metabolism. In the present
research, the roles of 3 RNA binding proteins, "AtAKIPs" in the regulation of
ABA sensitivity, RNA metabolism, and drought tolerance will be investigated.
Experiments will be conducted in the model organism, Arabidopsis thaliana. ABA
sensitivity, drought tolerance, and RNA stability will be assessed in
Arabidopsis transgenic plants that have altered amounts of each of these 3
proteins. AtAKIP RNA targets also will be identified, and computational and
experimental approaches will be applied to identify consensus motifs within
these RNAs that are necessary and sufficient for the RNA to bind to the AtAKIP.
Once such motifs are identified, their presence will be assessed on a genome-
wide basis both in Arabidopsis and in other organisms, to further scientific
insight into the mechanisms of hormonally-mediated effects on RNA metabolism.
The investigators are actively involved in outreach education to elementary
schools. Dr. Assmann has developed teaching modules to introduce plant biology
to kindergartners and has developed a video about plant gravity sensing. Dr.
Bevilacqua is involved in career-site activities for "take your child to work"
day and has created chemistry demonstrations for local elementary schools. The
investigators will use information obtained from the present research in the
development of new laboratories for an honors undergraduate biology course, and
to expand the biological aspects of the curriculum of a graduate Nucleic Acids
physical chemistry class.&lt;br/&gt;