* 0345604
* DMUU: Science Policy Assessment and Research on Climate (SPARC) for Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Daniel Sarewitz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2011
* USD 2,691,567.00

Science policy decisions shape the conduct and output of climate research and
therefore help determine the knowledge and tools available to support climate
policy decisions. Both science policy and climate policy decisions are made
under conditions of ongoing uncertainty, but the uncertainties associated with
science policy decisions have received little if any attention. To begin to
address this neglect, Science Policy Assessment and Research on Climate (SPARC)
will investigate the relationship between science policy and climate policy
decisions from two perspectives. First, SPARC will explore how climate research
agendas are developed and implemented, with a particular focus on understanding
how the organization of climate research ("supply") relates to the information
needs of climate policy decision makers ("demand"). Second, SPARC will
investigate the relative magnitude of various sources of global environmental
change in order to better understand the relation between the causes of global
change and the priorities of the U.S. climate science portfolio. Key cross-
cutting themes in each of these efforts will include the role and behavior of
science policy institutions and the influence of ethics and values on science
policy decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society's strategy for responding to and
preparing for climate change in the face of ongoing uncertainty hinges upon
scientific knowledge. But are scientists generating the knowledge that decision
makers need to confront this challenge? SPARC will be a first step toward
developing the methods, knowledge, and tools that can help science policy
decision makers answer this question and help them make decisions that can
ensure the maximum social value of the Nation's investment in climate science.
SPARC research will combine novel approaches to advance fundamental
understanding of the social value of research with the development of practical
decision tools for science policy. SPARC will closely involve stakeholders and
practitioners in science policy to ensure that its results are available to and
understood by those who can benefit from them and to improve mutual
understanding among science policy makers, scientists, and those who can benefit
from climate science information. This award was supported as part of the Fiscal
Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority area special competition on
Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).