* 0345207
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Methane Hydrate Hypothesis for the Aftermath of Severe Neoproterzoic Ice Ages
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Martin Kennedy, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 229,283.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the geologic record suggest that
episodic methane release from destabilization of gas hydrates may act as an
important factor in climate change and marine chemistry. Because methane
hydrates exist in delicate pressure-temperature equilibrium, and constitute the
largest pool of exchangeable carbon at the Earth's surface, the possibility
exists that subtle changes in ocean temperature or sea level could result in a
runaway destabilization with dramatic consequences for the biosphere. These
events are mostt likely during times of rapid global-scale warming and/or
sealevel change. By virtue of the extent of cold climate during Neoproterozoic
ice ages (from ~850 Ma to 600 Ma), the aftermath of such events is arguably
amongst the best intervals in Earth history for investigating this phenomenon.
Evidence for such events includes the presence of enigmatic capping carbonate
deposits that overlie almost all Neoproterozoic glaciogenic and a strong carbon
isotopic anomaly of similar nagmitude and duration to that anticipated for such
a global methane-release event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most compelling
criticism of this methane hydrate destabilization hypothesis is the apparent
lack of extreme carbon isotopic variation in cap carbonates inferred locally to
be associated with methane seeps. Carbonate precipitated in modern seeps and in
at least some ancient ones is typically associated with 13C values ranging from
less than -25%. Other observations that are common in modern and ancient seeps
include sulfur isotopic anomalies, and biomarker evidence for methane-consuming
microbes. Preliminary data from a Neoporterozoic cap carbonate formation in
southern China (the Doushantuo Formation) indicate that elements of these
missing lines of evidence are, indeed, present locally in an exceptionally well
preserved example of seep-like facies. This study will provide a window into
ancient seep-related processes by studying the Chinese cap carbonates in detail.
The broader objective of the proposed research is to test the proposition that
these seeps are representative of seep like fabrics in more diagentically
altered cap carbonates globally, and taht cap carbonates and post glacial carbon
isotopic excursions provide a record of catastrophic global methane release
coincident with global warming following Neoproterozoic snowball Earth ice ages.