* 0345284
* EDC's USP Technical Support Project
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Judith Sandler, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 12/31/2006
* USD 741,109.00

This proposal was submitted to request support to provide Technical Assistance
(TA) for urban districts that comprised the remaining portfolio. Recognizing the
importance of reform at all levels of a district, the Education Development
Center (EDC), will focus on efforts that directly impact classroom instruction.
The aim is to sustain accomplishments and advance the knowledge based at the
level where it is most vulnerable. Thus, for a period of two years, (beginning
January 2004 through January 2006), EDC will provide activities and events aimed
at improving teaching and learning for all students in science and mathematics.
TA will be provided through the use of face-to-face training structures, online
approaches, and localized consultation that enhances the impact by combining
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TA will focus on the following three
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Supporting and sustaining the teacher leader
model in science and mathematics, K-12;&lt;br/&gt;2. Sustaining students'
engagement in high school science and mathematics while advancing their
enrollment in rigorous courses; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Ensuring science is on the
"front burner" in classrooms, schools, and districts, K-12.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
research findings, EDC plans to provide specific activities and organize
conferences aimed at improving teacher quality and building leadership for
change. Several strategies will be used to help districts bring about that
change. First, teacher leaders will be targeted to help sustain and advance
their work in classrooms throughout the SI districts. Second, EDC will focus its
efforts on help the USPs' continuing struggle to bring about change at the high
school level. Third, an effort will be made to include science more centrally in
local district reform efforts. Finally, EDC will attempt to gain a better
understanding of how to organize and implement TA such that the lessons-learned
might contribute to future large-scale reform
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The utility of
the multi-tiered design will increase the number of people who will have access
to lessons-learned and better ensure widespread use of best practices. The
products, resources, and advances in knowledge in science and mathematics will
help the SI and well as other districts meet other national and state
requirements such as No Child Left Behind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;