* 0345226
* Infrastructure Upgrades for the University of Georgia Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Wendy Zomlefer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 318,899.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. W. Zomlefer at the University of Georgia to fund
the following urgently needed improvements to the University of Georgia
Herbarium [GA]: (1) upgrading the heavily used and aging compactor system; (2)
acquiring herbarium cabinets for proper archival specimen storage; (3) mounting
and accessioning backlog specimens to help attain projected growth for the next
15 years; (4) reorganizing the main collection folders for easier access; and
(5) completing data entry for the Georgia Atlas pilot project and posting this
database on the Web. GA Herbarium is a highly used facility with 230,000
accessioned vascular plant specimens (including over 250 types) and is
nationally and internationally recognized for collections from Georgia and North
America (especially the southeastern United States). Researchers at the
University of Georgia and neighboring institutions, students, and personnel from
various governmental agencies extensively utilize the collection, and GA
Herbarium is also host to public tours and scores of visiting scientists who
visit to examine specimens each year. Proper care of this valuable collection is
imminently threatened by an aging and dangerous compactor system requiring
constant repair, coupled with cabinets unsuitable for archival storage. Upgraded
electronics and addition of standard herbarium cabinets will have the immediate
and long-term impact of providing reliable safe storage and efficient entry to
the GA Herbarium collection. Successful conclusion of the proposed project will
also allow access to the complete Georgia Atlas of Vascular Plants database, and
data from the currently unmounted backlog will be available to the scientific
community as accessioned specimens.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts (beyond scientific
community use). Tangible benefits to society include conservation of an
important element of Georgia's irreplaceable state heritage with improved
storage and access of vouchered plant specimens. Lack of vouchers undermines the
legitimacy of historical surveys and other studies, and these specimens are
properly preserved only in well-supported herbaria. Completion of the Georgia
Atlas database has many practical applications for society at large, such as
defining under-collected areas, ranges of endangered or poisonous species, and
locations of plant communities requiring management. This project will promote
learning via direct incorporation of herbarium improvements into several
University of Georgia museum technique courses, exposing undergraduate and
graduate interns to one-on-one training with specimen preparation and care. The
upgraded system would also allow storage of a larger plant archive for teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;