* 0345822
* Acquisition of an Excimer Laser System for Syracuse University Noble Gas Isotope Research Laboratory (SUNGIRL)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Suzanne Baldwin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2007
* USD 77,340.00

EAR-0345822&lt;br/&gt;Baldwin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding
for acquisition of an excimer laser system for the Syracuse University Noble Gas
Isotope Research Laboratory (SUNGIRL). SUNGIRL currently consists of: 1) a
Micromass 5400 noble gas mass spectrometer and automated extraction line, and 2)
a quadrupole mass spectrometer and automated extraction line for He analysis in
conjunction with (U-Th)/He dating of accessory phases. Each extraction line
utilizes its own double-vacuum resistance furnace for out-gassing rocks and
minerals. A shared CO2 laser system can also be used for out-gassing mineral
grains (including flux monitors) in conjunction with (U-Th)/He and 40Ar/39Ar
thermochronology. The focus of the thermochronology research group at Syracuse
University is on determining the pressure-temperature-time-deformation (P-T-t-D)
evolution of crustal terranes and quantifying rates of geologic processes. The
excimer laser system will enhance graduate and undergraduate student education
and training through the use of cutting-edge technology for in situ analysis.
Data obtained using the proposed laser system will: 1) be highlighted in two
graduate and upper-level undergraduate courses (Thermochronology and
Microstructural Analysis) taught by the PIs, 2) be presented at national and
international meetings, and 3) be published in the Earth Science literature.
SUNGIRL employs undergraduate students through NSF REU grants and is a showcase
laboratory at Syracuse University for technology in the Earth Sciences, and for
women in science and technology. The laser system will be used by Syracuse
University faculty, researchers, post-doctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students, and visiting researchers. Syracuse University will
contribute 30% towards the cost of the laser system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;