* 0346973
* CAREER:  Efficient Algorithms for Computational Problems in Bioinformatics Via Combinatorial and Geometric Techniques
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2010
* Bhaskar DasGupta, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2010
* USD 400,001.00

This project applies combinatorial and geometric optimization techniques to
design efficient algorithms for three important research areas in
bioinformatics: (1) substructure similarity identification; (2) inverse protein
folding; and (3) test set problems. Efficient algorithms are designed by using
combinatorial methods such as the information content heuristic approach, local-
ratio and multi-phase techniques, slice-and-dice methods, and a linear
programming approach via primal-dual schema. Judicious combinations of existing
and novel combinatorial techniques coupled with collaborations with other
computational biologists and effective interactions with and feedback from the
biologists and bioengineers makes the designed algorithms practical and
biologically relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical impact of this work
will be in designing efficient algorithms for computationally challenging
problems in the abovementioned areas via combinatorial/geometric techniques.
This will provide the biologists with better algorithms and software for several
applications such as recognizing remote evolutionary relationships at the level
of protein fragments via discovering similar substructures from different
proteins and efficiently detecting unknown pathogens via string barcoding. The
broader impacts of this proposal will be integrating research and teaching,
effective dissemination via publications, web and other means, and improving
diversity in research and education.&lt;br/&gt;