* 0346874
* CAREER: Improving analog/digital interfaces to CMOS signal processing systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Michael Flynn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/2010
* USD 399,999.00

This program targets the growing gap between the advancement of CMOS technology
and the introduction of analog-to-digital converters in new technologies. Using
deep sub-micron digital CMOS processes, engineers can put hundreds of millions
of transistors on an integrated circuit. This makes System-on-a-Chip (SOC)
integration a real possibility, promising new applications such as ubiquitous
broadband wireless communications, and pervasive computing. The science of
digital design has delivered the concepts and the tools to build huge digital
systems. However, the problem is that all SOCs require some analog functions and
in particular analog-to-digital conversion circuits (ADCs). The challenge is to
implement analog-to-digital conversion on the same die and in the same CMOS
technology as the digital processing. This research involves the development of
new to analog-to-digital conversion techniques that take advantage of the
capabilities of the deep sub-micron CMOS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives are to identify and to utilize the strengths of sub-micron digital
CMOS.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study methods, architectures and concepts that
take advantage of the shrinking size and increasing speed of MOS devices, the
increasing capability of interconnect, and the growing digital processing
capability. Fast, simple circuits, aided by redundancy, parallelism, and digital
processing are explored. The limitations of these new approaches are analyzed.
In contrast, the current paradigm seeks to extend the life of old design
techniques though specialized process options and clever design. A simpler
approach to mixed-signal design makes it easier for new engineers and
researchers to become productive. The impact of this work is enhanced through
the introduction of new undergraduate and graduate courses in mixed-signal and
analog design, though outreach to under-represented groups, and through
continuing education.&lt;br/&gt;