* 0346638
* CAREER:     A Systematic Study of Cholesterol (Nano)Domains in Model Lipid Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Steven Wrenn, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2009
* USD 447,123.00

Wrenn, Steven P. - Drexel University

"CAREER: A Systematic Study of Cholesterol (Nano) Domains in Model Lipid
Membranes"

This project is a systematic study of cholesterol domain formation that is
undertaken to identify the regions in temperature-composition space in which
structured domains form. The project would also identify the sensitivity of
domain formation to physical parameters such as vesicle curvature and bilayer
fluidity and to chemical parameters such as phospholipid chain length, degree of
saturation, as well as the head group size and charge, and the kinetics and
mechanisms of domain growth. The study of cholesterol domain formation in well
controlled, model lipid membrane systems lays a foundation for understanding how
cholesterol domains contribute to cholesterol nucleation from biological
colloids. The research aims to provide a rigorous characterization of the
recently discovered cholesterol domains. Specifically, this project consists of
an exhaustive phase behavior study to identify regions in temperature-
composition space in which cholesterol domains form. These complementary studies
provide measurements of domain sizes using a combination of Forster resonance
energy transfer and atomic force microscopy. Additional research assess whether
domain size is sensitive to membrane curvature. Mathematical models and
simulations are included to validate or refute experimental findings. Broader
Impacts Cholesterol crystals in the body can be deadly. There are few
fundamental studies describing how cholesterol crystallizes from colloidal
particles such as vesicles or lipoproteins. The formation of cholesterol crystal
may be the reason for a heart attack due to the sudden rupture of an
atherosclerosic plaque. Cholesterol crystals may also explain the formation of
gallstones. In both cases, the results from this research may prove to be useful
in preventing cholesterol crystallization in the body.

In terms of social and educational impact, a new mentorship program will target
inner city students from Philadelphia, taking advantage of Drexel's close
proximity, and will be called Philadelphia Inner City Education via Mentorship
for the Under-Privileged (PIC-EM-UP). In particular, a dozen students will be
selected from Philadelphia high schools and will be grouped into four teams of
three students each. Each team will work alongside a faculty mentor on a mini-
project relating to the faculty mentor's research area for one week. The
research on cholesterol domains proposed herein will constitute one of the
projects entitled "Cholesterol: The Good, the Bad, and the Nuclei." Each week,
the teams will switch faculty mentors, working with a total of four mentors and
four projects over a four-week period. A high school teacher will participate as
a chaperone and will circulate among all teams to help students feel more
comfortable in their new research environment.

