* 0346911
* CAREER: A microfabricated sorting cytometer for screening complex phenotypes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Joel Voldman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Johnetta Lee
* 02/28/2005
* USD 0.00

Joel Voldman BES-0346911

The objective of this proposed research is to develop microtechnology that
enables the acquisition of novel types of biological data to help understand how
cells work. Specifically, a sorting cytometer will be developed that will enable
facile screening of cells based upon visual information. Such screens are
limited by the technology available to observe and then isolate cells.
Microfabrication technology will be used to generate large arrays of single-cell
traps that use electric fields to hold, observe, and then selectively release
individual cells, enabling the cytometer. A new trap geometry that permits
scaling to biologically relevant cell numbers will be developed and verified,
along with the support systems needed for performing multi-hour assays. Finally,
assays will be performed to assess the impact of the cytometer on cell health,
including viability, long-term cell growth, and induction of the stress
response. The research plan will culminate in a functional system ready for real
screens. This will have the broader impact of enabling the understanding of
biological systems, which directly impacts human health. The educational plan
aims to introduce biotechnology, microtechnology, and nanotechnology to high
school students. This will be undertaken by creating lectures with portable
demos, a lab tour with demos, and bringing students into the lab for multi-week
research experiences. These will be broadcast first to a diverse set of programs
at MIT, in Cambridge, and in Boston. These modules can then be repeated, for
different groups of high school students, either at MIT or at the local high-
school community.