* 0346178
* Collaborative Research:  Role of Eddies in the Midlatitude Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Igor Kamenkovich, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2007
* USD 362,452.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0346178&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport of momentum,
heat and salt by mesoscale eddies is an important component of the large-scale
ocean circulation. General circulation models often do not resolve eddies
directly but have to rely on turbulence closure parameterizations. One
particular weakness of common parameterizations is that they do not allow up-
gradient fluxes, where eddy fluxes feed into the large-scale gradients rather
than erode them. This study will explore a novel approach to circumvent this
limitation by representing the non-resolved eddy effects in terms of random
forces. First, solutions of a hierarchy of ocean models of increasing complexity
and realism will be analyzed. Here, a new dynamical decomposition of the oceanic
turbulence into the eddy- and large-scale components will be applied. The large-
scale/eddy interactions, that is, components of the eddy fluxes and their
divergences, will be systematically analyzed. Second, the performance of the
random model of the eddy forces will be systematically evaluated and compared
against several existing parameterization schemes. The broader impacts of the
proposed work is that it will aid in the general circulation and climate system
modeling, in the interpretation of observational data sets, and in the planning
of future observational strategies aimed at estimating the key eddy fluxes.
Also, the ideas pursued are likely to have an impact on other areas of
turbulence, where modeling subgrid-scale processes is an important
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;