* 0346712
* Collaborative Research: Caterpillars and Parasitoids in the Eastern Andes of Ecuador
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* James Whitfield, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 82,000.00

ABSTRACT Parasitoids, which are an important component of most terrestrial
ecosystems, are parasitic animals (mostly wasps, flies, and nematodes) that kill
their hosts as part of their normal life cycle. Plants, their insect herbivores,
and the parasitoids that attack those herbivores represent more than half of all
described organisms in the world. "Caterpillars and parasitoids in the Eastern
Andes of Ecuador" consists of an intensive plant, caterpillar, and parasitoid
inventory at the Yanayacu Biological Station (YBS) in the Ecuadorian Andes. The
primary objectives are to: 1) Collect and catalog the diverse community of
caterpillars and associated parasitoids at this site and to provide specimens
for systematics (classification of organisms and their evolutionary
relationships). 2) Disseminate this information with a searchable database
accessible to scientists and the public throughout the world. 3) Collect
baseline natural history information such as specialized associations between
plants, herbivores, and parasitoids; development rates; and other life cycle
information for both known and undescribed species. 4) Provide the foundation
for an identification key to the caterpillars of the Ecuadorian Andes.
Caterpillar collecting and rearing will take place in a cloud forest on the
eastern slope of the Andes in Napo province, Ecuador, centered around the YBS.
Collecting will be conducted by carefully inspecting selected plant species
along transects and also by opportunistically collecting all caterpillars
observed in the collecting area. Caterpillars and parasitoids will be reared to
adults. Adult butterflies, moths, and parasitoids will be distributed to a
network of collaborating specialists for identification and for descriptions of
new species, revisions, and evolutionary studies. The intellectual merit of the
proposed activity includes significant advances in insect classification by
providing specimens to experts as well as providing a critical inventory that
can be used in the conservation of biodiversity. Forests of the equatorial Andes
are recognized as a global hotspot of biodiversity that is being destroyed at an
alarming rate, but conservation efforts are improving. The current survey will
make an important contribution towards documenting and describing the
caterpillars and parasitoids of this threatened area, and will increase the
local value of the Andean forests by providing scientific and economic
incentives for their conservation. The ecology and systematics that are a part
of this study will also be used to address a variety of basic and applied
questions in ecology and evolutionary biology, ranging from the evolution of
unique plant-insect interactions to the conservation and management of
biodiversity. The broader impacts of this project include direct involvement of
4 local field assistants, 3 Ecuadorian students, 3 Ecuadorian senior scientists,
1 postdoctoral researcher, at least 12 collaborating insect specialists, and
various graduate and undergraduate students. Therefore the project strengthens
international scientific dialogue and relationships. The overall project will
include enhancements in science education and research experience programs for
minorities. Finally, the research will enhance training in systematics to help
stem the decline in expertise that is currently having a negative impact on all
disciplines in biology.