* 0346783
* Travel Support for Developing Country and Young Scholar Participation in the 2003 Open Meeting of the Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change Research Community, Canada
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Marc Levy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

International scholarly meetings provide excellent forums for scientists from
the United States and other nations to meet, review the latest research results,
share ideas regarding future research directions and plans, and develop new
networks to facilitate collaborative research and other forms of capacity
building. Since 1995, the biennial Open Meeting of the Human Dimensions of
Global Change Research Community has emerged as the leading venue for social
scientists and scientists in related fields to address issues associated with
human activity and behavior with respect to global environmental topics. This
award provides funds to support the participation of scientists from developing
nations as well as young scientists from the United States in the fifth HDGC
open meeting, which will take place in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, in October
2003. These funds will complement contributions made from the Asia Pacific
Network on Global Change Research, the Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research, the German Research Ministry, and the International Human
Dimensions Programme.

Based on previous experiences, HDGC open meetings have generated a number of
positive outcomes, including enhancement of regional collaborations, capacity-
building activities to strengthen transnational networks capable of conducting
problem-oriented, cross-disciplinary research relevant to global change,
showcasing the scientific contribution of participating countries and research
programs, increasing awareness of the value of HDGC research for policy making,
strengthening of links between social scientists and other global change
research programs, and stimulation of the highest quality research. The 2003
meeting in Montreal is expected to result in comparable benefits. Through this
award, a broader range of scientists from the U.S. will be able to participate,
and they will have more increased opportunities to meet with and develop working
relationships with counterparts from developing nations.