* 0346428
* ACT-SGER:      Charge Exchange and Chemical Structure at Protein-Semiconductor Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Leonard Brillson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,995.00

This project addresses electronic properties of semiconductor interfaces with
biological molecules with an aim toward improved sensors. Biological molecules
exhibit charge transfer at semiconductor interfaces that change as the adsorbed
molecules link to other biological species. Understanding and control of the
bio/semiconductor interface along with its electronic, chemical, and biological
activity may enable advances in biosensors for monitoring biological functions
in vivo, detecting pathogens and other biologically active species. The goal of
this project is to understand, optimize, and control these bioelectronic
phenomena. Surface science, electronic, and biological techniques will be used
to characterize protein-semiconductor interfaces on an atomic scale. Materials
science and ultrahigh vacuum processing techniques will be used to control
chemical activity and morphology of the surface and the resultant interface.
Along with study of chemical and morphological conditions, research on
preparation and deposition conditions of model biomolecules to obtain a range of
charge transfer with the semiconductor and with biomolecules bound to its
surface is included. It is anticipated that basic science understanding of
biomolecular-semiconductor interfaces could catalyze a new avenue of research
into studies of biological species interfaced to electronic materials. For
example, an understanding of the systematics between the biomolecule's native
charge state during deposition, the resultant charge exchange with silicon and
its native oxide, and its subsequent change with further conjugation could
provide design rules for creating biosensors with high biological specificity.
Similarly, the understanding and control of charge transfer at biological
material interfaces extends to electrical signal generation and propagation by
nerve cells on artificial scaffolds, self-organization of proteins coating
patterned substrates, and in-vivo immunoassay of specific biological material.
Key specific goals of the project are correlation of charge exchange measured at
the Si/SiO2 interface with the known charge properties of conjugated
biomolecules or proteins, with the morphology of the Si/SiO2 surface layer, and
with the protein's strength of bonding with this layer. This knowledge may have
significant technological impact on the design of biological sensors if the use
of an established technology-semiconductor transistors-can be extended with the
design of biologically active and specific charge transfer sites. Success in
this project is expected to lead to the implementation of this approach in
devices of high commercial and security value. With high sensitivity and
selectivity, such devices could advance the use of surface chemical and
morphologic modification in venues such as in-vivo biomedical sensors, sensors
for pathogenic organisms, environmental gas sensors, and for monitoring and
protecting the nation's food supply. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues associated with electronic/photonic and
biological materials having technological relevance. An important feature of the
project is the strong emphasis on education, with emphasis on integration of
research and education. Students will be trained in a variety of modern
electronic, processing, and surface science techniques, as well as in
biomolecular engineering and characterization. The interdisciplinary training
afforded by this project will help build a skilled workforce in rapidly
developing bioengineering fields. This award is supported jointly by the NSF and
the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism (ACT) Program in
the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new concepts in
basic research and workforce development with the potential to contribute to
national security.&lt;br/&gt;