* 0346328
* Collaborative Research: Interactive Effects of Stress and Nutrition on Reproduction in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 05/31/2008
* USD 437,027.00

Collaborative Research: Interactive Effects of Stress and Nutrition on
Reproduction in Birds&lt;br/&gt;Stephan J. Schoech &amp; Reed
Bowman&lt;br/&gt;University of Memphis &amp; Archbold Biological
Station&lt;br/&gt;Correctly timing breeding is essential for animals to maximize
their fitness. To produce young when conditions favor their survival, most
organisms rely on a variety of environmental cues. The PIs have used a
combination of observational and experimental studies to demonstrate that food
quantity and quality influence timing of breeding. Florida Scrub-Jays
(Aphelocoma coerulescens) in suburban habitats with access to ad libitum human-
provided food always breed earlier than jays in wildland habitat at nearby
Archbold Biological Station (ABS). In wildlands, supplementation with diets that
differ in fat and protein content confirm that these nutrients act in synergy to
advance breeding. Birds given high fat/high protein (HFHP) diets lay earlier
than controls and jays supplemented with high fat/low protein diet, increase
maternal allocation to eggs, and increase survival of offspring. Additionally,
the PIs found a strong trend for increased over-winter survival of HFHP-
supplemented adults relative to controls (even though birds are only
supplemented from Jan-Mar). Importantly, both suburban and HFHP wildland jays
also had lower levels of corticosterone (CORT), the avian stress hormone, than
wildland controls. Because CORT can negatively affect the reproductive axis, the
link between CORT and nutrition suggests a unique mechanism underlying the
initiation of reproduction.&lt;br/&gt; The PIs have developed a novel model
demonstrating how resources influence stress (CORT), which in turn influences
timing of breeding. Unlike other models, this predicts both advanced timing of
breeding and reduced between-year variation - consistent with empirical
observations. Very early in the breeding season, birds may be stressed by
reduced food availability. Although they may be "reproductively primed" by other
cues, such as photoperiod, high levels of CORT inhibit reproduction. But as food
become more predictable or of better quality, stress levels are reduced,
releasing the inhibition, allowing breeding to occur. Field and captive studies
will be used to test the hypothesis that stress associated with resource quality
and/or predictability is the physiological mechanism by which environmental cues
are translated into reproductive decisions. Suburban and HFHP-supplemented jays
will be implanted with CORT to determine if it delays reproduction in females
with access to ad libitum food. To learn whether the removal of CORT results in
earlier activation of the reproductive axis and advanced laying, CORT will be
blocked in unsupplemented jays at ABS. The PIs also will evaluate the ultimate
effects of resource availability by examining the interactive effects of diet,
stress, and time of breeding on egg size, offspring development, and short- and
long-term survival.&lt;br/&gt; Using captive studies on Blue Jays, the PIs will
examine further the interactions between diet and stress and reproduction. These
studies allow serial sampling of endocrine responses to food treatments. The PIs
will compare reproductive and stress hormones in jays that differ in the
predictability in which food is provided. In addition, nocturnal light exposure
in the suburbs may be stimulatory to the reproductive axis. This will be tested
by comparing a suite of physiological parameters in jays that are exposed to low
levels of light during the dark phase of the daily cycle with birds that are
not.&lt;br/&gt; The interactions between stress, environmental resources, and
reproduction have not been thoroughly investigated in free-living species and
may be critical in how birds time reproduction. The suburban component
underscores how rapid environmental change associated with global patterns of
urbanization can influence naturally-selected systems, and illustrates the
potential consequences. Florida Scrub-Jays are a declining species and may serve
as an important model for an increasing number of other species from many taxa
that are or will face similar challenges due to continued loss of habitat in the
face of increasing human usage.&lt;br/&gt;This project will have benefits at
multiple levels. First, Florida Scrub-Jays are a threatened species and this
research may provide ways in which the decline in numbers may be slowed. Second,
techniques and information gleaned may be used to ameliorate declines in other
species. Third, stress has profound negative impacts upon many aspects of an
organism's (humans included!) health, and this research (and associated
projects) will consider links between stress, nutrition, reproduction, immune
function, and survivorship: all of which have important cross-species
implications.&lt;br/&gt;