* 0346782
* CAREER: Fluorescence Cumulant Analysis: A New Tool for Probing Protein-protein Interactions in Intact Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Joachim Mueller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2009
* USD 500,000.00

The scientific component of this project focuses on the development and
utilization of advanced fluorescence techniques to study protein association in
intact cells. In this work fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy (FFS) will be
combined with a new statistical analysis technique based on fluorescence
intensity cumulants. Two-photon FFS offers a unique and powerful approach for
probing biological systems in cells. The technique is noninvasive, provides
single molecule detection sensitivity, delivers submicron spatial resolution,
and determines kinetics by exploiting equilibrium fluctuations. Cumulants are
related to moments and capture information from higher-order statistics of the
photon counts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the project
contains three parts, each strengthening the training of undergraduate and
graduate students in advanced biophysical topics. (1) The proposed research
provides graduate and postgraduate students with a solid and advanced education
in the interdisciplinary area between physics, statistics and biology, an area
where more trained scientists will be needed in the near future. (2) A course on
molecular biophysics that incorporates the latest biophysical techniques, such
as fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, single molecule detection, and optical
tweezers, will be developed as well. (3) The focus of the educational component
is an interdisciplinary, hands-on workshop on fluorescence techniques for
biology students. The workshop will have a strong laboratory component, where
students practice what they have learned. The experiments will range from
standard cuvette-based measurements to advanced two-photon microscopy in intact
cells. The combination of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and
applications will provide each student with a solid foundation in fluorescence
spectroscopy together with practical knowledge useful for their further
career.&lt;br/&gt;