* 0346497
* ACT/SGER:     "ON-THE-FLY" Materials Modification During Laser Direct-Write Deposition of Micro Power Sources
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Craig Arnold, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 110,996.00

This project entitled "ON-THE-FLY" MATERIALS MODIFICATION DURING LASER DIRECT-
WRITE DEPOSITION OF MICROPOWER SOURCES addresses innovative approachs to the
rapid processing and optimization of materials for micropower sources. A
recognized need for miniaturized power sources exists in national security
applications to provide integrated energy for low observable and small
autonomous devices that cannot be powered by commercially available batteries or
fuel cells. However, the techniques currently available to produce such small
power sources require secondary processing such as high temperatures or
pressures that can be detrimental to the sensitive materials used in many
microdevices. In this project, a laser interacts with the microbattery material
as it flies toward the substrate thus modifying its properties and reducing the
need for secondary processing. The fundamental material response is studied in
order to understand and control the structural and electrochemical properties.
This study not only enhances the basic understanding of laser-material
interactions, but also may revolutionize the use of laser processing for small
electrochemical devices. Students with diverse interests and backgrounds in
chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science will all be involved and
educated through this truly interdisciplinary laser-based technique. The results
obtained will be disseminated to provide researchers in a variety of disciplines
with important new opportunities and techniques for microdevice
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative approaches
to the processing and optimization of materials for micropower sources is of
high interest for device fabrication for applications such as remote weather
sensing, implantable microdevices, or bio-analytical microdevices. Laser direct-
write methods are being developed and used to deposit patterns of microbattery
and micro-ultracapacitor materials on various substrates under ambient
conditions. The influence of the incident laser as well as secondary laser
irradiation is studied and exploited in order to modify the material "on the
fly" (OTF) during deposition. For example, in this project, hydrous ruthenium
oxide ink will be transferred with varying incident laser energy and duration as
well as secondary laser irradiation. The fundamental issues of laser
interactions with the moving droplets of multiphase material are probed through
structural and electrochemical characterization on the deposited films. By
removing the need for pre- and post- processing, the substrates remain at
ambient temperatures thereby enabling the use of novel low-temperature
substrates such as flexible plastics or biological platforms for device
development. OTF processing has the potential to rapidly prototype unique
structures and chemistries that can transform the field of micropower and micro-
sensor development. The interdisciplinary nature of this study involves
chemistry, physics, engineering, and materials science and educates students
with diverse interests and backgrounds in this new laser-based technique. The
results obtained will be disseminated to provide researchers in a variety of
disciplines with important new opportunities and techniques for microdevice
development. This project is supported jointly by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Materials Research, Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;