* 0346977
* CAREER:      Exploring the Complexity Limits of Joint Data Detection and Channel Estimation: Exact, Polynomial-Complexity Solutions and Ultra-Fast Approximations
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Achilleas Anastasopoulos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 01/31/2010
* USD 412,000.00

Future communication systems will be required to operate very close
to&lt;br/&gt;their theoretical limits and achieve high performance with
limited&lt;br/&gt;resources (e.g., bandwidth, energy, complexity). In order to
realize&lt;br/&gt;these goals, the receiver of a communication system should be
able to&lt;br/&gt;decode the digital data in the presence of channel uncertainty
(e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;unknown channel quality, interference, etc.). The current state
of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge regarding the complexity of these receivers is that
their&lt;br/&gt;complexity grows exponentially with the sequence length. This
is&lt;br/&gt;unacceptable when practical implementation of these algorithms is
of&lt;br/&gt;interest. A number of fundamental questions thus arise: (i)
How&lt;br/&gt;accurate is the conventional wisdom that complexity
grows&lt;br/&gt;exponentially with the sequence length? (ii) What is the impact
of&lt;br/&gt;the above question on the design of near-optimal,
approximate&lt;br/&gt;algorithms suited for ultra-fast integrated circuit
implementation?&lt;br/&gt;(iii) How can the complexity/performance tradeoff of
these approximate&lt;br/&gt;algorithms be analyzed, and how can it be
improved?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the aforementioned
fundamental questions&lt;br/&gt;using a novel approach in looking at the problem
of joint data&lt;br/&gt;detection and channel estimation, consisting of two main
thrusts: (a)&lt;br/&gt;On the theoretical front, the current state of knowledge
is challenged,&lt;br/&gt;by investigating a broad class of communication
scenarios for which&lt;br/&gt;the exact solution can be obtained with only
polynomial complexity.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Utilizing the constructive proofs of the
aforementioned statements,&lt;br/&gt;a family of novel receivers is investigated
with near-optimal&lt;br/&gt;performance, linear complexity, and moreover,
algorithmic structure&lt;br/&gt;that is suitable for high-speed hardware
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;