* 0346906
* CAREER: Development and Evaluation of Active, Cooperative, Disability-Sensitive Pedagogies for Chemistry
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Maria Oliver-Hoyo, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/2011
* USD 552,900.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal outlines an innovative approach to
introductory chemistry instruction. The overarching goal is to develop and
assess an interactive, hands-on environment that seamlessly integrates classroom
and laboratory instruction, producing stimulating and effective instruction for
all students, including those with visual impairments. The proposed activities
include modifying and expanding an interactive instructional environment at N.C.
State University, designing and implementing experiments for visually impaired
students, and developing and testing interactive modules for chemistry
instruction.

The instructional methodology includes active and cooperative learning
techniques and is founded on the premise that actively engaged students stand a
better chance to discover and understand chemical principles, be fascinated by
chemical phenomena, and be better prepared to succeed in their career of choice.
The research portion of the program will involve assessing and evaluating the
impact on learning and retention of the instructional materials and methods
developed in the educational part, using a variety of quantitative control
studies and qualitative research methods. The three components of the proposed
project each rest on a solid foundation of theory and empirical classroom
research. The active, cooperative, and hands-on features of the SCALE-UP
classroom environment have been exhaustively validated in the literatures of
cognitive science and education, and by the PI s prior experience with adapting
the environment to introductory chemistry instruction. Broader Impact: The
instructional materials produced in this project will affect the way chemistry
is taught by instructors and the way it is perceived by students. Special
student populations such as minorities and visually impaired students will
benefit in a unique way as NCSU will serve as a model for other institutions in
how to develop, implement, and modify the instructional methods and materials
generated in the study. Collaborations with different organizations that attend
to the needs of the visually impaired will help promote our findings and test
the materials with this particular student population. The PI has successfully
demonstrated the feasibility of replacing chemistry experiments that normally
require visual acuity with alternatives that make use of other senses, and in
her Ph.D. dissertation research demonstrated the potential of interactive
instructional tutorials to promote learning. Close collaborations with faculty
at a peer minority university, the University of Puerto Rico, will provide the
PI with the means to test and analyze the impact of an integrated format of
instruction with significant numbers of minority students. The program
assessment will make use of controlled quantitative learning measurements as
well as survey and focus group research. Awareness of the products of this
proposal will be promoted aggressively through participation at scientific and
educational conferences, peer-reviewed articles, and websites. In addition,
materials tailored for the visually impaired and their instructors will be
disseminated with the help of the ACS Committee on Chemists with Disabilities.
Alternative formats for the current model of integrated instruction will also be
studied and the results made available by the same means described above.
Education Plan: The educational plan emphasizes the education of prospective
instructors, including professors, graduate, and undergraduate students in these
pedagogies so that a progressively increasing cohort of instructors can pass
along to their students and peers the benefits of active, cooperative,
disability sensitive pedagogies.