* 0346399
* CAREER:  Computational Investigation of Structural and Dynamical Mechanisms of Protein Regulation by Post-Translational Phosphorylation
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Matthew Jacobson, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2010
* USD 519,205.00

The objective of this project is to develop a physics-based theory for
predicting protein conformational change caused by phosphorylation. Protein
post-translational phosphorylation is a ubiquitous mechanism for cellular
regulation that plays a central role in such diverse processes as signal
transduction, transport, and metabolism. The central hypothesis is that the
diverse responses to phosphorylation can be better understood and systematized
by viewing the introduction of the phosphate charge as a perturbation to the
protein energy landscape. The computational methods employed range from quantum
mechanics to molecular mechanics with implicit salvation models. From a
practical perspective, this research will result in a computer program that is
capable of predicting atomic-level response to phosphorylation for many proteins
with known phosphorylation sites but no experimentally determined structure in
the phosphorylated form.

This CAREER award will support research and teaching activities that lie at the
intersection of physics, computational science, and biology. The PI is
developing a new interdisciplinary graduate-level course and practicum centered
on the application of physical and computational chemistry to biology. The
practicum will permit hands-on experience with many modeling methods, including
software developed under this grant and prior NSF support. All examples from the
practicum, generated by the instructor and students, will be made available on-
line, creating a broadly available resource. The research component also
involves the direct participation of scientists from the underrepresented
groups, as well as a collaboration involving undergraduate students at the Stern
College for Women, Yeshiva University. Finally, all algorithms developed by the
PI will be encapsulated in an easy-to-use software package, which is available
free-of-charge for all academic purposes.