* 0346302
* SGER:  Rotating Magnetic Fields in Semiconductor Crystal Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* John Walker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 12/31/2005
* USD 76,911.00

Linear stability analyses will be developed for two crystal growth processes
with rotating magnetic fields (RMF). The two processes are the Vertical Bridgman
process, which is used to grow crystals of compound semiconductors, such as
gallium-arsenide and indium-phosphide, and the Vertical Zone Melting process,
which is used to grow alloyed crystals, such as various mixtures of germanium
and silicon. In both processes, hydrodynamic instabilities in the buoyant
convection can lead to periodic, nonaxisymmetric flows in the molten
semiconductor, and such flows produce many defects in the crystal. An RMF can
stabilize the buoyant convection so that the flow is steady and axisymmetric,
leading to much better crystals. However, the RMF can also lead to a
hydrodynamic instability. The object of the modeling is to optimize the benefits
of the RMF for each crystal growth process while avoiding the undesirable RMF
instability. The results of the linear stability analyses will be validated by
comparison to experimental measurements of the transitions from steady
axisymmetric flows to periodic nonaxisymmetric flows. The results will define
the strength and frequency of the RMF which will lead to much better
semiconductor crystals for each process. Improvements in crystal quality are
needed for future advances in wireless communications and optoelectronics.

