* 0346069
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Amino Acid Radicals in Electron Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Michele McGuirl, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2010
* USD 561,339.00

Amino acid radicals are vital to the catalytic mechanisms of many fundamental
biological processes, including nucleic acid metabolism, DNA repair,
photosynthesis, and aerobic respiration. Amino acid radicals may serve as
"sinks" for positive charges during oxidation, to facilitate very long-range
(&gt;25 angstrom) electron transfer in proteins via multi-step tunneling. Yet
despite the significance of amino acid radicals in biology, their
electrochemical and electron transfer properties are not well defined. In this
project, these properties will be measured directly using the beta-sheet protein
azurin and the 4-helix bundle protein cytochrome c' as model systems. To
investigate the effects of electrochemical potentials on electron transfer
mechanisms, non-natural Trp and Tyr amino acids will be incorporated at specific
sites of the polypeptide chains. This extends the range of electrochemical
potentials ~ +/- 0.4 V compared with the natural amino acids. Moreover, several
Tyr analogs have pKa values within the biological pH range. These offer a unique
opportunity to kinetically separate electron transfer from the accompanying
proton transfer step that is obligatory in biological electron transfer. The
analogs also provide distinctive spectroscopic handles for defining local amino
acid environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Coupled with the
proposed research is the development of a research-oriented upper level
biochemistry course that integrates lectures into laboratory time. The goals of
the course are to expose more undergraduates to scientific research and
encourage them to pursue careers in science. Guidelines for course evaluation
and outcomes assessment are also included. The course also provides a graduate
student or postdoctoral scholar with the resources needed to explore innovative
ways of teaching and presenting course material. Special efforts are made to
recruit native American undergraduate and graduate students to work on the
project. This is greatly facilitated by existing contacts with tribal colleges
in Montana.