* 0346160
* DDIG:  Public Land and the American Political Imagination: An Ethnographic Study of Governance and Democracy in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Miriam Kahn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,901.00

Conflict over the use of public lands administered by the Bureau of Land
Management in the American Intermountain West threaten both the health of
fragile ecosystems on public lands and the social and economic well-being of
adjacent rural communities. These conflicts are underlain by different
perceptions of the landscape as well as by different understandings of the
meaning of "public." This research by a student in Sociocultural Anthropology
provides a detailed ethnographic analysis of the politics of the conflict over
the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument in southern Utah, a site where
conflict has been intense and persistent since the creation of the Monument in
1996. The study will examine the political dynamics of the conflict from the
intra-community to the local, state, and national levels using a combination of
participant observation, formal and informal interviews, archival research, and
document analysis. The project will analyze the conflict over time in order to
illuminate the process by which citizens relate to the federal, multi-level,
democratic government of the United States and the political ideals that inform
this process. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study has practical significance
for those seeking to understand and ameliorate natural resource conflicts in the
United States. An improved understanding of the political dynamics of the
conflict over the management of the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument
can be used to help mitigate conflicts over the use of public land and to inform
public land management policy. The study also has theoretical significance for
those seeking a better understanding of American political ideals and the
American political system in order to identify loci of democratic change, to
analyze the institutional realignment that is occurring in society as the role
of government narrows, and to evaluate assumptions about the wholesale export of
this system to other countries. The study will also contribute to the education
of a doctoral student in Anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;