* 0346458
* Montana Infrastructure via Science and Technology Enhanced Partnerships - INSTEP
* O/D,EPS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Mark Young, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* John H. Hall, Jr.
* 12/31/2007
* USD 9,000,000.00

The Montana EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement award will build national
competitiveness through research infrastructure improvements in four areas. The
Center for Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics at the University of Montana(UM)
will be established to study the molecular mechanisms for biologically and
medically important processes and the molecular rearrangements that accompany
these processes. A new Chemical and Biological Engineering Department will be
created at Montana State University (MSU) to be the focus for bioengineering
research, acting synergistically with existing research groups in bioinspired
nanotechnology, thermal biology and biofilms. The multidisciplinary Center for
Bioinspired Nanomaterials will be established at MSU and will focus on viral and
other protein cage structures for the synthesis of novel nanomaterials with
catalytic, magnetic and imaging applications. UM and MSU also will develop a
joint Ph.D program in Neuroscience and use the ACCESS Grid Node for intercampus
instruction. Fundamental to Montana's infrastructure improvement is the
expansion of interdisciplinary collaborations among Montana institutions and
with universities outside the state. Montana Tech and six Tribal Colleges will
also participate in collaborative activities with the state universities.
&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure support will include a variety of focused and
integrated human development, education and outreach programs. Strong emphasis
will be placed on programs to increase the participation of Native Americans in
science and education, unique K-12 initiatives, significant support for
undergraduate experiences in research, outreach to middle school teachers and
their students, a Science Exploratorium to serve rural communities, diversity
programs in undergraduate research as well as a partnership with the state Small
Business Innovation Research program to advance economic development. These
programs endeavor to broaden education and human resources capacity and expand
the involvement of the broader university community in S&amp;T
issues.&lt;br/&gt;