* 0346903
* CAREER:  Test-Driven Development of Secure and Reliable Software Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2011
* Laurie Williams, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2011
* USD 413,764.00

ABSTRACT 0346903 Laurie Williams North Carolina State University CAREER: The
Test-Driven Development of Secure and Reliable Software Applications

Our nation's critical infrastructure demands that our current and future IT
professionals have the knowledge, tools, and techniques to produce reliable and
trustworthy software. The objective of this research is to extend, validate, and
disseminate a software development practice to aid in the prevention of
computer-related disasters. The practice is based upon test-driven development
(TDD), a software development technique with tight verification and validation
feedback loops. The proposed work extends the TDD practice and provides a
supportive open-source tool for explicitly situating security as a primary
attribute considered in these tight feedback loops. Additionally, the research
examines the composition of TDD and pair programming/pair testing as a security-
and reliability-enhancing tuple of development practices. The study will also
examine the potential of pair programming/pair testing for improving the
success/retention of socially-oriented women, men, and minorities in the IT
workforce. The intellectual merits of this proposal include an enhanced TDD-
based software development practice to mitigate security concerns and a catalog
of security testing patterns disseminated via the Internet. The broad impacts of
the proposal include an interuniversity student competition to build excitement
about developing secure and reliable software applications and a revised
undergraduate software engineering textbook integrating security and reliability
topics.