* 0346589
* CAREER: Factors Regulating Dendritic Arborization in the Xenopus Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2011
* Barbara Lom, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 04/30/2011
* USD 605,477.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The architecture of a neuron's dendritic arbor profoundly
influences its ability to receive and transmit synaptic information and
determine a neuron's role within synaptic circuitry. Elucidating the mechanisms
that control dendritic development is therefore fundamental to understanding how
individual neurons wire themselves into intricate networks. In the context of
the present CAREER award Dr. Lom will use the developing Xenopus laevis
retinotectal projection to investigate how both local retinal signals and
target-derived tectal signals shape the early morphogenesis of Xenopus retinal
ganglion-cell (RGC) dendritic arbors in vivo and in vitro. Dr. Lom will examine
how three important dendritic differentiation cues (BDNF, activity, and FGF)
transmit arborization signals to developing RGCs. To this end, Dr. Lom will
alter local and/or target environments at the onset of dendritic development and
visualize RGC dendritic arbors in vivo by retrograde fluorescence labeling and
in vitro by immunostaining. Dr. Lom will establish a vibrant developmental
neurobiology research and training program at Davidson College. All experimental
questions and methods will be fully integrated in an undergraduate research-
training program to provide new opportunities for undergraduates to engage in
original research. Recognizing that students learn best when they invest
themselves in the practice of doing real science, the research delineated in
this proposal will provide opportunities for students to conduct extended
independent research projects on questions of dendritic development through
three programs: full-time summer employment, enrollment in Independent Research
course credit, and enrollment in Developmental Neurobiology, a unique research-
intensive group-investigation course. Because the benefits of active engagement
in scientific research are equally important in the high-school science
curriculum, local high-school biology teachers will also be employed in Dr.
Lom's laboratory as summer research assistants. By experiencing research first-
hand, high-school teachers will be better skilled to incorporate inquiry-based
experimentation in their classrooms. The nature of the proposed research
encourages teachers to place their data directly into the hands of their
students. High-school students will analyze dendritic-arbor morphologies and
thereby experience important aspects of the research process. Thus, by
establishing a research-training program at Davidson College, both
undergraduates and high-school teachers will directly experience the practice of
science as they contribute to our understanding factors that shape the
development of dendritic arbors.&lt;br/&gt;