* 0346203
* Collaborative Research:  The Cenozoic history of the western US - a data integration strategy for Earthscope
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Alan Levander, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 04/30/2008
* USD 59,049.00

A variety of seismic data is available to image the structure associated with
&lt;br/&gt;the western U.S.&lt;br/&gt;Because each data type is sensitive to
different aspects of Earth structure, &lt;br/&gt;they tend to
produce&lt;br/&gt;different images. The investigators in this study are
inverting all available &lt;br/&gt;seismic data to&lt;br/&gt;create a single
image that satisfies the combined data set. This best-possible &lt;br/&gt;image
is being&lt;br/&gt;used to understand (1) how previous geologic events -
especially the Rocky &lt;br/&gt;Mountain event - continue&lt;br/&gt;to influence
western U.S. tectonic activity, and (2) where there is a critical
&lt;br/&gt;need for additional&lt;br/&gt;seismic data. This second point is
timely as the seismology community embarks &lt;br/&gt;on a major effort
to&lt;br/&gt;improve the quality of seismic imaging under the U.S. with the
USArray component &lt;br/&gt;of EarthScope.&lt;br/&gt;As USArray data become
available, these data will be included to provide an &lt;br/&gt;improved quality
of&lt;br/&gt;seismic image. Software being developed by these investigators to
integrate &lt;br/&gt;different types of&lt;br/&gt;seismic data is to be made
available to the community, as are the images that &lt;br/&gt;they
create.&lt;br/&gt;