* 0346673
* CAREER:     Modeling Watershed Flooding and Adaptive Flood Management:    An Integrative Plan for Research, Teaching, and Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2011
* Samuel Brody, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2011
* USD 521,384.00

As population growth and urban development continue to expand in the coastal
margin, flooding poses a&lt;br/&gt;major threat to human safety and the
integrity of the natural environment. To mitigate the adverse&lt;br/&gt;impacts
of coastal flooding, decision makers are increasingly advocating watershed or
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;approaches to management. While it is argued that some of
the most serious flood hazards are the result&lt;br/&gt;of a failure to
understand the regional ecological context, little empirical research has been
done on how&lt;br/&gt;growth and development patterns increase the threat of
floods at the watershed level and how&lt;br/&gt;communities respond over time to
repetitive flooding events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;My career plan will address
this need by implementing an interactive research and educational
program&lt;br/&gt;on flood mitigation, sustainable watershed management, and
policy learning. It will develop a framework&lt;br/&gt;for adaptive decision
making for coastal flood hazards by integrating research, education, and
information&lt;br/&gt;dissemination. The research component will focus on the
impacts of wetland development on coastal&lt;br/&gt;watershed flooding and
policy learning at the community level to mitigate the adverse impacts of
flood&lt;br/&gt;damage to the human and natural environment. A two-phase
longitudinal research design will employ&lt;br/&gt;both quantitative and
qualitative analyses to investigate flooding problems in Texas and Florida.
Phase&lt;br/&gt;one will use Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to examine the
spatial pattern of wetland&lt;br/&gt;development over a ten-year period and
correlate this development with coastal watershed flooding.&lt;br/&gt;Phase two
will identify thresholds of policy learning by examining how communities adjust
and adapt to&lt;br/&gt;repetitive flooding. Both research phases will use
multivariate analysis to measure the effects of wetland&lt;br/&gt;development on
flooding and the effects of flooding on policy adjustment while controlling
for&lt;br/&gt;socioeconomic, biophysical, and other contextual factors. The
education component of the career plan&lt;br/&gt;will develop place-based
learning modules on coastal watershed management and flood mitigation.
A&lt;br/&gt;series of interdisciplinary, problem-based seminars will provide an
authentic learning experience to&lt;br/&gt;prepare future scientists, teachers,
and policy makers to address ecosystem-level hazards
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed Plan &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the research is based on advancing knowledge of the causes
of coastal watershed&lt;br/&gt;flooding and showing how to adapt policy
mechanisms to mitigate floods. Results will contribute to a&lt;br/&gt;decision-
making framework for flood mitigation by increasing understanding of the
specific type, size,&lt;br/&gt;and location of wetlands that mitigate flooding
and provide guidance to watershed planners for managing&lt;br/&gt;adaptively
over time. This understanding is critical given the continued development of
coastal areas and&lt;br/&gt;the increasing vulnerability of human populations to
coastal flooding. One of the unique features of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research
will be the utilization of data sources that have been underutilized in the
analysis of&lt;br/&gt;wetland loss. The national wetland permit and USGS flood
gauge databases offer important opportunities&lt;br/&gt;to conduct an empirical
study on watershed flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed
Plan &lt;br/&gt;While the project will contribute to scientific understanding
and management capabilities, it will also&lt;br/&gt;promote teaching and
learning on system-wide ecological problems. By building on participation in
the&lt;br/&gt;University.s NSF sponsored Informational Technology and Science
Program and Sustainable Coastal&lt;br/&gt;Margins Program, the project will
integrate research on watershed management and flood mitigation
with&lt;br/&gt;education and training to solve these issues. Interdisciplinary,
place-based learning modules will train&lt;br/&gt;students and teachers to
understand and act upon complex ecosystem management problems
through&lt;br/&gt;problem solving, field experience, and the development of
watershed case studies and associated&lt;br/&gt;websites. Courses during the
academic year will target graduate students, while summer sessions
will&lt;br/&gt;also include K-12 teachers. Another positive impact of the
project will be recruitment and training of&lt;br/&gt;students from
underrepresented groups. These individuals will play a vital role in both the
research and&lt;br/&gt;educational components of the project. Finally, the
dissemination of results will benefit the academic and&lt;br/&gt;policy making
community. In addition to presenting research results at conferences and
workshops, the&lt;br/&gt;information will be shared with public decision makers.