* 0346448
* SGER: Exploratory Development of Smart Textiles for Chemical Detection.
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2005
* H.James Harmon, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this SGER project is to develop a smart textile prototype that can
detect small amounts (ppm to ppb level) of toxic chemicals within seconds. In
this smart textile, chemical detection sensor components will be integrated into
textiles, such that the fabric will serve as the platform for the sensors to
detect toxic chemicals. This smart textile will be subsequently integrated into
the protective clothing matrix to sense the environment as well as to determine
the integrity of protective clothing depending on the location of the smart
textile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary research applies a well
studied sensing concept, spectral shifts of porphyrins in the presence of
specific chemicals, to a new area and develops a creative concept to integrate
sensor components into textiles. The original and exploratory aspects of this
research include the study of chemical detection capability of colorants when
dyed onto cotton fabric and after laundry and exposure to perspiration and
sunlight, and the exploration of the methods to embed spectral measurement
components into fabric. This research will provide a model to integrate sensor
or other smart components into textiles and enable smart textile development for
a wide range of applications. &lt;br/&gt;The team has collective expertise in
sensor technology, protective clothing, and textile chemistry and dyeing.
Further, the team's prior experience in conducting large-scale research projects
with varied collaborators provides risk mitigation for completing a quality
project and the potential to seek further funding after successful completion of
this SGER project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted by
faculty at Oklahoma State University, an EPSCoR institution. Students in the
departments of physics, and design, housing and merchandising (DHM) will
participate in this multi-disciplinary research. Because the majority of DHM
students are female and non-science majors, participation in this project may
enhance this underrepresented groups' scientific and technological
understanding. Early alert and protection against toxic chemical can be provided
by this smart textile for first responders, military personnel, and other
specialized groups. This SGER project will contribute to national security in
the event of a chemical attack by terrorists. This research is relevant to MPS'
Materials Research discipline.&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the
NSF and the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program
in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new concepts
in basic research and workforce development with the potential to contribute to
national security.&lt;br/&gt;