* 0346051
* Collaborative Proposal: Map Tools for EarthScope Science and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 01/31/2007
* USD 75,139.00

The collaborative team is developing a powerful suite of interactive, web-based
mapping tools for both research and education. These tools allow near-real-time
access to EarthScope data and products. The project builds on several years of
development of mapping tools, including the Jules Verne Voyager, Global Strain
Rate Map (www.world-strain-map.org), and the EarthScope Voyager tool. These
tools make geologic, geophysical, and geodynamic data and models accessible to a
broad audience. The global strain rate map model and archive is being updated
with each new set of Global Positioning System (GPS) observations that are made
available. A specific high-resolution strain rate and velocity field map is
being developed for western North America. The research team is also working to
develop finite strain animations for both teaching and research. These finite
strain simulations are constrained primarily by the instantaneous strain rate
solutions now defined by EarthScope and other GPS measurements. Simulations take
into account erosion rates, isostatic adjustment of topography, and crustal
thickening and thinning rates. Topography points are tracked through time using
small time steps. Multiple time steps are combined to provide animations that
are excellent for displaying how the plate boundary has evolved, and might
evolve, over time. Curricular resources are also being developed that provide
the background for K-12 and university levels that will enable educators to
utilize the map tools, and the content presented, for instruction. The team is
exploring new inquiry-based, interactive curricular modules that build on
EarthScope scientific results and technical resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;