* 0346341
* SGER ACT: Locating Hidden Groups in Communication Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Malik Magdon-Ismail, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/2005
* USD 57,026.00

It is proposed to develop models and algorithms for identifying groups that
camouflage their functioning in a large communication network. Since the
communications of an aberrant group are often encrypted or unreliable, it is
proposed to develop algorithms that use only communication intensities, and do
not rely communication semantics. The results of this research can also be used
for the early detection and monitoring of aberrant groups that may be
planning/coordinating undesirable activities. Tools will be developed that
provide a first defense against such activities and therefore have wider impact
in national security and defense. The proposed work is distinguished from prior
research in two ways. The first is that the brand-new problem of detecting the
hidden group itself, using only communication data, will be studied. The most
relevant work lies in the social network literature wherein it is assumed that
the members of the aberrant group are already known and one studies, for
example, how certain actions affect properties of the network such as its
stability or communication potential. The second is that in order to accomplish
the task, novel methodologies will be developed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i. The
communications will be modeled as a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). The state space
corresponds to the group structure of the society, where a group is a collection
of individuals with some commonality. The hidden (aberrant) group constitutes
one of the groups that participates in the communications. The model of how the
social groups evolve and communicate can be learned: given the prior
communication behavior of the society, a HMM is calibrated to the prior
behavior. If this HMM does not adequately explain the present behavior, but a
HMM which incorporates a hidden group does, then one can determine the existence
of the hidden group as well as its members.&lt;br/&gt;ii. Combinatorial
algorithms will be used to detect persistent hidden group communication
structures as candidate initial hidden groups. Such structures include simple
cycles, trees, cliques, stars and wheels. The results of such algorithms will be
used as initial candidate hidden groups that can be fine-tuned using the HMM
approach. The algorithms will be designed and tested on simulated test beds, as
well as on real communication data such as newsgroups. While the primary goal is
to develop tools for detecting hidden groups, the tools will also provide a
vehicle for integrating education with the research. Models of evolving
societies and hidden groups will be developed that will allow K-8 through high-
schools to "test" their understanding of societal behavior by attempting to
predict whether there is a hidden group, who the members are, and comparing
their predictions with the automated "computer" predictions and the true answer.
Such a model will be implemented at RPI on a web server and at the Junior Museum
in Troy, NY. The goal of such demonstrations is to improve students'
understanding of the behavior of communication networks and detection of
anomalous behavior. In addition, this research will be incorporated into a
research-oriented, interdisciplinary educational experience for students who
otherwise might never be involved in such research. By conducting cross-
disciplinary research involving mathematical, computer and social sciences, the
pool of eligible research assistants will be broadened, which will significantly
increase the possibility of identifying qualified candidates from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by
the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism
Program in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences supports new
concepts in basic research and workforce development with the potential to
contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;