* 0346036
* Organizational structurefor Rocky Mountain EarthScope: science and education planning
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Richard Aster, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 04/30/2006
* USD 10,774.00

To optimize its scientific and educational legacy, EarthScope needs to incubate
regional integrated efforts among scientists that will go well beyond the scope
of typical individual PI or small group research projects. This proposal is a
joint effort of the University of New Mexico and New Mexico Institute of Mining
and Technology to establish a national organizational structure to focus and
integrate EarthScope science and education activities in the Rocky Mountain
region (northern Rockies to the southwestern U.S.). Under this umbrella, which
includes Sandia and Los Alamos National laboratories, and the New Mexico Bureau
of Geology, the project includes a series of multidisciplinary regional
workshops that will serve as part of a coordinated effort to foster scientific
exchange, help plan future EarthScope activities, integrate existing and yet-to-
be collected geologic and geophysical datasets, and help serve as a web-based
information center for the Rocky Mountain region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A decadal scientific vision for
EarthScope in the Rocky Mountain region is to utilize this unique tectonic and
geodynamic setting to answer fundamental questions about lithospheric evolution
and geodynamic processes. The Rocky Mountains form a complex transition between
the tectonically inactive core of North America and the active plate margin
domain along the west coast. This region thus offers unique potential for
EarthScope to examine lithosphere-asthenosphere interactions at a variety of
scales to answer questions about tectonic processes within continental
interiors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: EarthScope should, where
possible, emphasize ties to societal issues such as geologic hazards (volcanism
and seismicity), water quantity and quality, and education. A decadal
educational vision for Rocky Mountain EarthScope includes improving connections
and communications between diverse groups, while discussing joint strategies for
raising the general appreciation of Earth science in society. Because of the
region's relatively small population and unique association of interested
institutions, Rocky Mountain EarthScope offers an historic opportunity and
rallying point to improve Earth science education. The large Native American and
Hispanic populations of the region provide nationally significant opportunities
for diversifying such efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;