* 0346914
* CAREER:     Efficient Simulation Methods for Colloidal Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Erik Luijten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports computational and theoretical research on colloidal
fluids and aims to bring new concepts to materials science education. The
research component of the program aims to develop new methods that dramatically
accelerate the simulation of thermodynamic and structural properties of
colloidal fluids. Increased simulation efficiency will be exploited to eliminate
a number of simplifications traditionally adopted in modeling colloidal fluids,
including weak size asymmetry between the constituents, spherical particle
shape, and isotropic potentials. This enables new physical insights in colloidal
fluids. Effective interactions will be determined for colloidal systems that are
currently inaccessible to simulation in order to uncover new mechanisms for
colloidal stabilization. The effect of confined geometries and structured
environments will be explored. The educational component of this program will
broaden the materials science and engineering curriculum by introducing
undergraduate students to simulation methods via hands-on computer experiments.
The PI has initiated and developed a new course in which this approach will be
used. The PI will collaborate with Clark Atlanta University (CAU) to enhance
educational opportunities for minority students. The simulation course will also
be taught on-line to students at CAU. One or two students will work with the PI
as summer students, in order to gain research experience. The PI has extensive
experience in high-school education and will develop and teach two interactive
simulation modules, with an aim to introduce talented middle and high-school
students to new areas in science and engineering. Both modules will be an
integral part of yearly summer camps organized by the Women in Engineering
program and the Office of Continuing Engineering Education of the College of
Engineering at the University of Illinois. Intellectual merit: The cluster
methods at the heart of the proposed research have been the goal of intense
investigation over nearly two decades. The associated algorithms will
accelerate, by orders of magnitude, the numerical simulation of broad classes of
soft condensed-matter and biologically relevant systems. Colloidal fluids
constitute an important starting point for developing nanostructured materials;
experimental progress critically depends on understanding effective
interparticle forces and their effect on structure and stability of the fluid.
The research aims to elucidate the role of these effective pair potentials and
involves collaboration with experimentalists. Broader impacts: The PI's
simulation methods will enable the computational study of large classes of
complex fluids, including colloidal suspensions, aqueous solutions, and glass-
forming liquids. The simulation course will effectively integrate research and
education. Current methods will be brought into the classroom, enabling
undergraduate students to independently apply them. Making the course available
to CAU broadens their engineering program, increases opportunities for
underrepresented groups, and helps to create a more diverse graduate population
and work force. The modules for middle- and high-school students aim to generate
interest among female and minority students in new disciplines in science and
engineering. %%% This CAREER award supports computational and theoretical
research on colloidal fluids and aims to bring new concepts to materials science
education. The research component of the program aims to develop new methods
that dramatically accelerate the simulation of thermodynamic and structural
properties of colloidal fluids. Increased simulation efficiency will be
exploited to eliminate a number of simplifications traditionally adopted in
modeling colloidal fluids, including weak size asymmetry between the
constituents, spherical particle shape, and isotropic potentials. This enables
new physical insights in colloidal fluids. Effective interactions will be
determined for colloidal systems that are currently inaccessible to simulation
in order to uncover new mechanisms for colloidal stabilization. The effect of
confined geometries and structured environments will be explored. The
educational component of this program will broaden the materials science and
engineering curriculum by introducing undergraduate students to simulation
methods via hands-on computer experiments. The PI has initiated and developed a
new course in which this approach will be used. The PI will collaborate with
Clark Atlanta University (CAU) to enhance educational opportunities for minority
students. The simulation course will also be taught on-line to students at CAU.
One or two students will work with the PI as summer students, in order to gain
research experience. The PI has extensive experience in high-school education
and will develop and teach two interactive simulation modules, with an aim to
introduce talented middle and high-school students to new areas in science and
engineering. Both modules will be an integral part of yearly summer camps
organized by the Women in Engineering program and the Office of Continuing
Engineering Education of the College of Engineering at the University of
Illinois. Intellectual merit: The cluster methods at the heart of the proposed
research have been the goal of intense investigation over nearly two decades.
The associated algorithms will accelerate, by orders of magnitude, the numerical
simulation of broad classes of soft condensed-matter and biologically relevant
systems. Colloidal fluids constitute an important starting point for developing
nanostructured materials; experimental progress critically depends on
understanding effective interparticle forces and their effect on structure and
stability of the fluid. The research aims to elucidate the role of these
effective pair potentials and involves collaboration with experimentalists.
Broader impacts: The PI's simulation methods will enable the computational study
of large classes of complex fluids, including colloidal suspensions, aqueous
solutions, and glass-forming liquids. The simulation course will effectively
integrate research and education. Current methods will be brought into the
classroom, enabling undergraduate students to independently apply them. Making
the course available to CAU broadens their engineering program, increases
opportunities for underrepresented groups, and helps to create a more diverse
graduate population and work force. The modules for middle- and high-school
students aim to generate interest among female and minority students in new
disciplines in science and engineering. ***



